at the first god make the heaven and the earth . and the earth be waste and without form and it be dark on the face of the deep and the spirit of god be move on the face of the water . and god say let there be light and there be light . and god look on the light saw that it be good and god make a division between the light and the dark name the light day and the dark night . and there be even and there be morning the first day . and god say let there be a solid arch stretch over the water part the water from the water . and god make the arch for a division between the water which be under the arch and those which be over it and it be so . and god give the arch the name of heaven . and there be even and there be morning the second day . and god say let the water under the heaven come together in one place and let the dry land be see and it be so . and god give the dry land the name of earth and the water together in their place be name sea and god saw that it be good . and god say let grass come up on the earth and plant produce seed and fruit tree give fruit in which be their seed after their sort and it be so . and grass come up on the earth and every plant produce seed of it sort and every tree produce fruit in which be it seed of it sort and god saw that it be good . and there be even and there be morning the third day . and god say let there be light in the arch of heaven for a division between the day and the night and let them be for sign and for mark the change of the year and for day and for year and let them be for light in the arch of heaven to give light on the earth and it be so . and god make the two great light the great light to be the ruler of the day and the small light to be the ruler of the night and he make the star . and god put them in the arch of heaven to give light on the earth to have rule over the day and the night and for a division between the light and the dark and god saw that it be good . and there be even and there be morning the fourth day . and god say let the water be full of live thing and let bird be in flight over the earth under the arch of heaven . and god make great sea beast and every sort of living and move thing with which the water be full and every sort of winged bird and god saw that it be good . and god give them his bless say be fertile and have increase make all the water of the sea full and let the bird be increase in the earth . and there be even and there be morning the fifth day . and god say let the earth give birth to all sort of live thing cattle and all thing move on the earth and beast of the earth after their sort and it be so . and god make the beast of the earth after it sort and the cattle after their sort and everything move on the face of the earth after it sort and god saw that it be good . and god say let u make man in our image like u and let him have rule over the fish of the sea and over the bird of the air and over the cattle and over all the earth and over every living thing which go flat on the earth . and god make man in his image in the image of god he make him male and female he make them . and god give them his blessing and say to them be fertile and have increase and make the earth full and be master of it be ruler over the fish of the sea and over the bird of the air and over every living thing move on the earth . and god say see i have give you every plant produce seed on the face of all the earth and every tree which have fruit produce seed they will be for your food and to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the air and every living thing move on the face of the earth i have give every green plant for food and it be so . and god saw everything which he have make and it be very good . and there be even and there be morning the sixth day .and the heaven and the earth and all thing in them be complete . and on the seventh day god come to the end of all his work and on the seventh day he take his rest from all the work which he have do . and god give his blessing to the seventh day and make it holy because on that day he take his rest from all the work which he have make and do . these be the generation of the heaven and the earth when they be make . in the day when the lord god make earth and heaven there be no plant of the field on the earth and no grass have come up for the lord god have not send rain on the earth and there be no man to do work on the land . but a mist go up from the earth water all the face of the land . and the lord god make man from the dust of the earth breathe into him the breath of life and man become a living soul . and the lord god make a garden in the east in eden and there he put the man whom he have make . and out of the earth the lord make every tree to come delight the eye and good for food and in the middle of the garden the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . and a river go out of eden give water to the garden and from there it be part and become four stream . the name of the first be pishon which go round about all the land of havilah where there be gold . and the gold of that land be good there be bdellium and the onyx stone . and the name of the second river be gihon this river go round all the land of cush . and the name of the third river be tigris which go to the east of assyria . and the fourth river be euphrates . and the lord god take the man and put him in the garden of eden to do work in it and take care of it . and the lord god give the man order say you may freely take of the fruit of every tree of the garden but of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you may not take for on the day when you take of it death will certainly come to you . and the lord god say it be not good for the man to be by himself i will make one like himself a a help to him and from the earth the lord god make every beast of the field and every bird of the air and take them to the man to see what name he would give them and whatever name he give to any living thing that be it name . and the man give name to all cattle and to the bird of the air and to every beast of the field but adam have no one like himself a a help . and the lord god send a deep sleep on the man and take one of the bone from his side while he be sleep join up the flesh again in it place and the bone which the lord god have take from the man he make into a woman and take her to the man . and the man say this be now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh let her name be woman because she be take out of man . for this cause will a man go away from his father and his mother and be join to his wife and they will be one flesh . and the man and his wife be without clothing and they have no sense of shame .now the snake be wise than any beast of the field which the lord god have make . and he say to the woman have god truly say that you may not take of the fruit of any tree in the garden ? and the woman say we may take of the fruit of the tree in the garden but of the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden god have say if you take of it or put your hand on it death will come to you . and the snake say death will not certainly come to you for god see that on the day when you take of it fruit your eye will be open and you will be a god have knowledge of good and evil . and when the woman saw that the tree be good for food and a delight to the eye and to be desire to make one wise she take of it fruit and give it to her husband . and their eye be open and they be conscious that they have no clothing and they make themselves coat of leaf stitch together . and there come to them the sound of the lord god walking in the garden in the evening wind and the man and his wife go to a secret place among the tree of the garden away from the eye of the lord god . and the voice of the lord god come to the man say where be you ? and he say hear your voice in the garden i be full of fear because i be without clothing and i keep myself from your eye . and he say who give you the knowledge that you be without clothing ? have you take of the fruit of the tree which i say you be not to take ? and the man say the woman whom you give to be with me she give me the fruit of the tree and i take it . and the lord god say to the woman what have you do ? and the woman say i be trick by the deceit of the snake and i take it . and the lord god say to the snake because you have do this you be curse more than all cattle and every beast of the field you will go flat on the earth and dust will be your food all the day of your life and there will be war between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed by him will your head be crush and by you his foot will be wound . to the woman he say great will be your pain in childbirth in sorrow will your child come to birth still your desire will be for your husband but he will be your master . and to adam he say because you give ear to the voice of your wife and take of the fruit of the tree which i say you be not to take the earth be curse on your account in pain you will get your food from it all your life . thorn and waste plant will come up and the plant of the field will be your food with the hard work of your hand you will get your bread till you go back to the earth from which you be take for dust you be and to the dust you will go back . and the man give his wife the name of eve because she be the mother of all who have life . and the lord god make for adam and for his wife coat of skin for their clothing . and the lord god say now the man have become like one of u have knowledge of good and evil and now if he put out his hand and take of the fruit of the tree of life he will go on living for ever . so the lord god send him out of the garden of eden to be a worker on the earth from which he be take . so he send the man out and at the east of the garden of eden he put wing one and a flaming sword turn every way to keep the way to the tree of life .and the man have connection with eve his wife and she become with child and give birth to cain and say i have get a man from the lord . then again she become with child and give birth to abel his brother . and abel be a keeper of sheep but cain be a farmer . and after a time cain give to the lord an offering of the fruit of the earth . and abel give an offering of the young lamb of his flock and of their fat . and the lord be pleased with abel 's offering but in cain and his offering he have no pleasure . and cain be angry and his face become sad . and the lord say to cain why be you angry ? and why be your face sad ? if you do well will you not have honour ? and if you do wrong sin be wait at the door desire to have you but do not let it be your master . and cain say to his brother let u go into the field and when they be in the field cain make an attack on his brother abel and put him to death . and the lord say to cain where be your brother abel ? and he say i have no idea be i my brother 's keeper ? and he say what have you do ? the voice of your brother 's blood be cry to me from the earth . and now you be curse from the earth whose mouth be open to take your brother 's blood from your hand no longer will the earth give you her fruit a the reward of your work you will be a wanderer in flight over the earth . and cain say my punishment be great than my strength . you have send me out this day from the face of the earth and from before your face i will be a wanderer in flight over the earth and whoever see me will put me to death . and the lord say truly if cain be put to death seven life will be take for his . and the lord put a mark on cain so that no one might put him to death . and cain go away from before the face of the lord and make his living place in the land of nod on the east of eden . and cain have connection with his wife and she become with child and give birth to enoch and he make a town and give the town the name of enoch after his son . and enoch have a son irad and irad become the father of mehujael and mehujael become the father of methushael and methushael become the father of lamech . and lamech have two wife the name of the one be adah and the name of the other zillah . and adah give birth to jabal he be the father of such a be live in tent and keep cattle . and his brother 's name be jubal he be the father of all player on instrument of music . and zillah give birth to tubal cain who be the father of every maker of cut instrument of brass and iron and the sister of tubal cain be naamah . and lamech say to his wife adah and zillah give ear to my voice you wife of lamech give attention to my word for i would put a man to death for a wound and a young man for a blow if seven life be to be take a punishment for cain 's death seventy seven will be take for lamech 's . and adam have connection with his wife again and she give birth to a son to whom she give the name of seth for she say god have give me another seed in place of abel whom cain put to death . and seth have a son and he give him the name of enosh at this time men first make use of the name of the lord in worship .this be the book of the generation of adam . in the day when god make man he make him in the image of god male and female he make them name them man and give them his blessing on the day when they be make . adam have be live for a hundred and thirty year when he have a son like himself after his image and give him the name of seth and after the birth of seth adam go on living for eight hundred year and have son and daughter and all the year of adam 's life be nine hundred and thirty and he come to his end . and seth be a hundred and five year old when he become the father of enosh and he go on living after the birth of enosh for eight hundred and seven year and have son and daughter and all the year of seth 's life be nine hundred and twelve and he come to his end . and enosh be ninety year old when he become the father of kenan and after the birth of kenan enosh go on living for eight hundred and fifteen year and have son and daughter and all the year of enosh be nine hundred and five and he come to his end . and kenan be seventy year old when he become the father of mahalalel and after the birth of mahalalel kenan go on living for eight hundred and forty year and have son and daughter and all the year of kenan 's life be nine hundred and ten and he come to his end . and mahalalel be sixty five year old when he become the father of jared and after the birth of jared mahalalel go on living for eight hundred and thirty year and have son and daughter and all the year of mahalalel 's life be eight hundred and ninety five and he come to his end . and jar be a hundred and sixty two year old when he become the father of enoch and jared go on living after the birth of enoch for eight hundred year and have son and daughter and all the year of jared 's life be nine hundred and sixty two and he come to his end . and enoch be sixty five year old when he become the father of methuselah and after the birth of methuselah enoch go on in god 's way for three hundred year and have son and daughter and all the year of enoch 's life be three hundred and sixty five and enoch go on in god 's way and he be not see again for god take him . and methuselah be a hundred and eighty seven year old when he become the father of lamech and after the birth of lamech methuselah go on living for seven hundred and eighty two year and have son and daughter and all the year of methuselah 's life be nine hundred and sixty nine and he come to his end . and lamech be a hundred and eighty two year old when he have a son and he give him the name of noah say truly he will give u rest from our trouble and the hard work of our hand because of the earth which be curse by god . and after the birth of noah lamech go on living for five hundred and ninety five year and have son and daughter and all the year of lamech 's life be seven hundred and seventy seven and he come to his end . and when noah be five hundred year old he become the father of shem ham and japheth .and after a time when men be increase on the earth and have daughter the son of god saw that the daughter of men be fair and they take wife for themselves from those who be please to them . and the lord say my spirit will not be in man for ever for he be only flesh so the day of his life will be a hundred and twenty year . there be men of great strength and size on the earth in those day and after that when the son of god have connection with the daughter of men they give birth to child these be the great men of old day the men of great name . and the lord saw that the sin of man be great on the earth and that all the thought of his heart be evil . and the lord have sorrow because he have make man on the earth and grief be in his heart . and the lord say i will take away man whom i have make from the face of the earth even man and beast and that which go on the earth and every bird of the air for i have sorrow for have make them . but noah have grace in the eye of god . these be the generation of noah . noah be an upright man and without sin in his generation he go in the way of god . and noah have three son shem ham and japheth . and the earth be evil in god 's eye and full of violent way . and god look on the earth saw that it be evil for the way of all flesh have become evil on the earth . and god say to noah the end of all flesh have come the earth be full of their violent doings and now i will put an end to them with the earth . make for yourself an ark of gopher wood with room in it and make it safe from the water inside and out . and this be the way you be to make it it be to be three hundred cubit long fifty cubit wide and thirty cubit high . you be to put a window in the ark a cubit from the roof and a door in the side of it and you be to make it with a low and second and third floor . for truly i will send a great flow of water over the earth for the destruction from under the heaven of all flesh in which be the breath of life everything on the earth will come to an end . but with you i will make an agreement and you will come into the ark you and your son and your wife and your son ' wife with you . and you will take with you into the ark two of every sort of live thing and keep them safe with you they will be male and female . two of every sort of bird and cattle and of every sort of living thing which go on the earth will you take with you to keep them from destruction . and make a store of every sort of food for yourself and them . and all these thing noah do a god say so he do .and the lord say to noah take all your family and go into the ark for you only in this generation have i see to be upright . of every clean beast you will take seven male and seven female and of the beast which be not clean two the male and his female and of the bird of the air seven male and seven female so that their seed may still be live on the face of the earth . for after seven day i will send rain on the earth for forty day and forty night for the destruction of every living thing which i have make on the face of the earth . and noah do everything which the lord say he be to do . and noah be six hundred year old when the water come flow over all the earth . and noah with his son and his wife and his son ' wife go into the ark because of the flowing of the water . of clean beast and of beast which be not clean and of bird and of everything which go on the earth in twos male and female they go into the ark with noah a god have say . and after the seven day the water come over all the earth . in the six hundredth year of noah 's life in the second month on the seventeenth day of the month all the fountain of the great deep come burst through and the window of heaven be open and rain come down on the earth for forty day and forty night . on the same day noah with shem ham and japheth his son and his wife and his son ' wife go into the ark and with them every sort of beast and cattle and every sort of thing which go on the earth and every sort of bird . they go with noah into the ark two and two of all flesh in which be the breath of life . male and female of all flesh go in a god have say and the ark be shut by the lord . and for forty day the water be over all the earth and the water be increase so that the ark be lift up high over the earth . and the water overcome everything and be increase greatly on the earth and the ark be rest on the face of the water . and the water overcome everything on the earth and all the mountain under heaven be cover . the water go fifteen cubit high till all the mountain be cover . and destruction come on every living thing move on the earth bird and cattle and beast and everything which go on the earth and every man . everything on the dry land in which be the breath of life come to it end . every live thing on the face of all the earth man and cattle and thing move on the face of the earth and bird of the air come to destruction only noah and those who be with him in the ark be keep from death . and the water be over the earth a hundred and fifty day .and god keep noah in mind and all the living thing and the cattle which be with him in the ark and god send a wind over the earth and the water go down . and the fountain of the deep and the window of heaven be shut and the rain from heaven be stop . and the water go slowly back from the earth and at the end of a hundred and fifty day the water be low . and on the seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark come to rest on the mountain of ararat . and still the water go on fall till on the first day of the tenth month the top of the mountain be see . then after forty day through the open window of the ark which he have make noah send out a raven which go this way and that till the water be go from the earth . and he send out a dove to see if the water have go from the face of the earth but the dove saw no rest place for her foot and come back to the ark for the water be still over all the earth and he put out his hand and take her into the ark . and after wait another seven day he send the dove out again and the dove come back at evening and in her mouth be an olive leaf break off so noah be certain that the water have go down on the earth . and after seven day more he send the dove out again but she do not come back to him . and in the six hundred and first year on the first day of the first month the water be dry on the earth and noah take the cover off the ark and saw that the face of the earth be dry . and on the twenty seventh day of the second month the earth be dry . and god say to noah go out of the ark you and your wife and your son and your son ' wife . take out with you every live thing which be with you bird and cattle and everything which go on the earth so that they may have offspring and be fertile and be increase on the earth . and noah go out with his son and his wife and his son ' wife and every beast and bird and every live thing of every sort which go on the earth go out of the ark . and noah make an altar to the lord and from every clean beast and bird he make burn offering on the altar . and when the sweet smell come up to the lord he say in his heart i will not again put a curse on the earth because of man for the thought of man 's heart be evil from his early day never again will i send destruction on all living thing a i have do . while the earth go on seed time and the get in of the grain cold and heat summer and winter day and night will not come to an end .and god give his blessing to noah and his son and say be fertile and have increase and make the earth full . and the fear of you will be strong in every beast of the earth and every bird of the air everything which go on the land and all the fish of the sea be give into your hand . every living and move thing will be food for you i give them all to you a before i give you all green thing . but flesh with the life blood in it you may not take for food . and for your blood which be your life will i take payment from every beast i will take it and from every man will i take payment for the blood of his brother man . whoever take a man 's life by man will his life be take because god make man in his image . and now be fertile and have increase have offspring on the earth and become great in number . and god say to noah and to his son truly i will make my agreement with you and with your seed after you and with every live thing with you all bird and cattle and every beast of the earth which come out of the ark with you . and i will make my agreement with you never again will all flesh be cut off by the water never again will the water come over all the earth for it destruction . and god say this be the sign of the agreement which i make between me and you and every living thing with you for all future generation i will put my bow in the cloud and it will be for a sign of the agreement between me and the earth . and whenever i make a cloud come over the earth the bow will be see in the cloud and i will keep in mind the agreement between me and you and every living thing and never again will there be a great flow of water cause destruction to all flesh . and the bow will be in the cloud and look on it i will keep in mind the eternal agreement between god and every living thing on the earth . and god say to noah this be the sign of the agreement which i have make between me and all flesh on the earth . and the son of noah who go out of the ark be shem ham and japheth and ham be the father of canaan . these three be the son of noah and from them all the earth be people . in those day noah become a farmer and he make a vine garden . and he take of the wine of it and be overcome by drink and he be uncover in his tent . and ham the father of canaan saw his father unclothe and give news of it to his two brother outside . and shem and japheth take a robe and put it on their back go in with their face turn away and put it over their father so that they might not see him unclothed . and awake from his wine noah saw what his young son have do to him and he say cursed be canaan let him be a servant of servant to his brother . and he say praise to the lord the god of shem let canaan be his servant . may god make japheth great and let his live place be in the tent of shem and let canaan be his servant . and noah go on living three hundred and fifty year after the great flow of water all the year of his life be nine hundred and fifty and he come to his end .now these be the generation of the son of noah shem ham and japheth these be the son which they have after the great flow of water the son of japheth gomer and magog and madai and javan and tubal and meshech and tiras . and the son of gomer ashkenaz and riphath and togarmah . and the son of javan elishah and tarshish the kittim and the dodanim . from these come the nation of the sea land with their different family and language . and the son of ham cush and mizraim and put and canaan . and the son of cush seba and havilah and sabtah and raamah and sabteca and the son of raamah sheba and dedan . and cush be the father of nimrod who be the first of the great men of the earth . he be a very great bowman so that there be a say like nimrod a very great bowman . and at the first his kingdom be babel and erech and accad and calneh in the land of shinar . from that land he go out into assyria build nineveh with it wide street and calah and resen between nineveh and calah which be a very great town . and mizraim be the father of the ludim and anamim and lehabim and naphtuhim and pathrusim and casluhim and caphtorim from whom come the philistine . and canaan be the father of zidon who be his old son and heth and the jebusite and the amorite and the girgashite and the hivite and the arkite and the sinite and the arvadite and the zemarite and the hamathite after that the family of the canaanite go far and wide in all direction their country stretch from zidon to gaza in the direction of gerar and to lasha in the direction of sodom and gomorrah and admah and zeboiim . all these with their different family languages land and nation be the offspring of ham . and shem the old brother of japheth the father of the child of eber have other son in addition . these be the son of shem elam and asshur and arpachshad and lud and aram . and the son of aram uz and hul and gether and mash . and arpachshad become the father of shelah and shelah become the father of eber . and eber have two son the name of the one be peleg because in his time the people of the earth become separate and his brother 's name be joktan . and joktan be the father of almodad and sheleph and hazarmaveth and jerah and hadoram and uzal and diklah and obal and abimael and sheba and ophir and havilah and jobab all these be the son of joktan . and their country be from mesha in the direction of sephar the mountain of the east . these with their family and their language and their land and their nation be the offspring of shem . these be the family of the son of noah in the order of their generation and their nation from these come all the nation of the earth after the great flow of water .and all the earth have one language and one tongue . and it come about that in their wandering from the east they come to a stretch of flat country in the land of shinar and there they make their living place . and they say one to another come let u make brick burn them well . and they have brick for stone put them together with sticky earth . and they say come let u make a town and a tower whose top will go up as high a heaven and let u make a great name for ourselves so that we may not be wanderer over the face of the earth . and the lord come down to see the town and the tower which the child of men be build . and the lord say see they be all one people and have all one language and this be only the start of what they may do and now it will not be possible to keep them from any purpose of theirs . come let u go down and take away the sense of their language so that they will not be able to make themselves clear to one another . so the lord god send them away into every part of the earth and they give up build their town . so it be name babel because there the lord take away the sense of all language and from there the lord send them away over all the face of the earth . these be the generation of shem . shem be a hundred year old when he become the father of arpachshad two year after the great flow of water and after the birth of arpachshad shem go on living for five hundred year and have son and daughter and arpachshad be thirty five year old when he become the father of shelah and after the birth of shelah arpachshad go on living for four hundred and three year and have son and daughter and shelah be thirty year old when he become the father of eber and after the birth of eber shelah go on living for four hundred and three year and have son and daughter and eber be thirty four year old when he become the father of peleg and after the birth of peleg eber go on living for four hundred and thirty year and have son and daughter and peleg be thirty year old when he become the father of reu and after the birth of reu peleg go on living for two hundred and nine year and have son and daughter and reu be thirty two year old when he become the father of serug and after the birth of serug reu go on living for two hundred and seven year and have son and daughter and serug be thirty year old when he become the father of nahor and after the birth of nahor serug go on living for two hundred year and have son and daughter and nahor be twenty nine year old when he become the father of terah and after the birth of terah nahor go on living for a hundred and nineteen year and have son and daughter and terah be seventy year old when he become the father of abram nahor and haran . these be the generation of terah terah be the father of abram nahor and haran and haran be the father of lot . and death come to haran when he be with his father terah in the land of his birth ur of the chaldee . and abram and nahor take wife for themselves the name of abram 's wife be sarai and the name of nahor 's wife be milcah the daughter of haran the father of milcah and iscah . and sarai have no child . and terah take abram his son and lot the son of haran and sarai his daughter in law the wife of his son abram and they go out from ur of the chaldee to go to the land of canaan and they come to haran and be there for some time . and all the year of terah 's life be two hundred and five and terah come to his end in haran .now the lord say to abram go out from your country and from your family and from your father 's house into the land to which i will be your guide and i will make of you a great nation blessing you and make your name great and you will be a blessing to them who be good to you will i give blessing and on him who do you wrong will i put my curse and you will become a name of bless to all the family of the earth . so abram go a the lord have say to him and lot go with him abram be seventy five year old when he go away from haran . and abram take sarai his wife and lot his brother 's son and all their good and the servant which they have get in haran and they go out to go to the land of canaan . and abram go through the land till he come to shechem to the holy tree of moreh . at that time the canaanite be still live in the land . and the lord come to abram and say i will give all this land to your seed then abram make an altar there to the lord who have let himself be see by him . and move on from there to the mountain on the east of beth el he put up his tent have beth el on the west and ai on the east and there he make an altar and give worship to the name of the lord . and he go on journeying still to the south . and because there be little food to be have in that land he go down into egypt . now when he come near to egypt he say to sarai his wife truly you be a fair woman and beautiful to the eye and i be certain that when the men of egypt see you they will say this be his wife and they will put me to death and keep you . say then that you be my sister and so it will be well with me because of you and my life will be keep safe on your account . and so it be that when abram come into egypt the men of egypt look on the woman saw that she be fair . and pharaoh 's great men have see her say word in praise of her to pharaoh and she be take into pharaoh 's house . and because of her he be good to abram and he have sheep and ox and ass and men servant and woman servant and camel . and the lord send great trouble on pharaoh 's house because of sarai abram 's wife . then pharaoh sent for abram and say what have you do to me ? why do you not say that she be your wife ? why do you say that she be your sister ? so that i take her for my wife now take your wife and go on your way . and pharaoh give order to his men and they send him on his way with his wife and all he have .and abram go up out of egypt with his wife and all he have and lot with him and they come in to the south . now abram have great wealth of cattle and silver and gold . and travel on from the south he come to beth el to the place where his tent have be before between beth el and ai to the place where he have make his first altar and there abram give worship to the name of the lord . and lot who go with him have flock and herd and tent so that the land be not wide enough for the two of them their property be so great that there be not room for them together . and there be an argument between the keeper of abram 's cattle and the keeper of lot 's cattle at that time the canaanite and perizzites be still live in the land . then abram say to lot let there be no argument between me and you and between my herdmen and your herdmen for we be brother . be not all the land before you ? then let u go our separate way if you go to the left i will go to the right or if you take the right i will go to the left . and lot lift up his eye and look an the valley of jordan saw that it be well water everywhere before the lord have send destruction on sodom and gomorrah it be like the garden of the lord like the land of egypt on the way to zoar . so lot take for himself all the valley of jordan and go to the east and they be part from one another . abram go on living in the land of canaan and lot go to the lowland town move his tent as far a sodom . now the men of sodom be evil and great sinner before the lord . and the lord have say to abram after lot be part from him from this place where you be take a look to the north and to the south to the east and to the west for all the land which you see i will give to you and to your seed for ever . and i will make your child like the dust of the earth so that if the dust of the earth may be number then will your child be number . come go through all the land from one end to the other for i will give it to you . and abram move his tent come and make his living place by the holy tree of mamre which be in hebron and make an altar there to the lord .now in the day of amraphel king of shinar arioch king of ellasar chedorlaomer king of elam and tidal king of goiim they make war with bera king of sodom and with birsha king of gomorrah shinab king of admah and shemeber king of zeboiim and the king of bela which be zoar . all these come together in the valley of siddim which be the salt sea . for twelve year they be under the rule of chedorlaomer but in the thirteenth year they put off his control . and in the fourteenth year chedorlaomer and the king who be on his side overcame the rephaim in ashteroth karnaim and the zuzim in ham and the emim in shaveh kiriathaim and the horites in their mountain seir drive them as far a el paran which be near the waste land . then they come back to en mishpat which be kadesh make waste all the country of the amalekites and of the amorites live in hazazon tamar . and the king of sodom with the king of gomorrah and the king of admah and the king of zeboiim and the king of bela that be zoar go out and put their force in position in the valley of siddim against chedorlaomer king of elam and tidal king of goiim and amraphel king of shinar and arioch king of ellasar four king against the five . now the valley of siddim be full of hole of sticky earth and the king of sodom and gomorrah be put to flight and come to their end there but the rest get away to the mountain . and the four king take all the good and food from sodom and gomorrah and go on their way . and in addition they take lot abram 's brother 's son who be live in sodom and all his good . and one who have get away from the fight come and give word of it to abram the hebrew who be live by the holy tree of mamre the amorite the brother of eshcol and aner who be friend of abram . and abram hearing that his brother 's son have be make a prisoner take a band of his trained men three hundred and eighteen of them son of his house and go after them as far a dan . and separate his force by night he overcome them put them to flight and go after them as far a hobah which be on the north side of damascus . and he get back all the good and lot his brother 's son with his good and the woman and the people . and when he be come back after put to flight chedorlaomer and the other king he have a meeting with the king of sodom in the valley of shaveh that be the king 's valley . and melchizedek king of salem the priest of the most high god take bread and wine and bless him say may the blessing of the most high god maker of heaven and earth be on abram and let the most high god be praise who have give into your hand those who be against you . then abram give him a tenth of all the good he have take . and the king of sodom say to abram give me the prisoner and take the good for yourself . but abram say to the king of sodom i have take an oath to the lord the most high god maker of heaven and earth that i will not take so much a a thread or the cord of a shoe of yours so that you may not say i have give wealth to abram give me nothing but the food which the fight men who go with me have have but let aner and eshcol and mamre have their part of the good .after these thing the word of the lord come to abram in a vision say have no fear abram i will keep you safe and great will be your reward . and abram say what will you give me ? for i have no child and this eliezer of damascus will have all my wealth after me . and abram say you have give me no child and a servant in my house will get the heritage . then say the lord this man will not get the heritage but a son of your body will have your property after you . and he take him out into the open air and say to him let your eye be lift to heaven and see if the star may be number even so will your seed be . and he have faith in the lord and it be put to his account a righteousness . and he say to him i be the lord who take you from ur of the chaldee to give you this land for your heritage . and he say o lord god how may i be certain that it will be mine ? and he say take a young cow of three year old and a she goat of three year old and a sheep of three year old and a dove and a young pigeon . all these he take cut them in two and put one half opposite the other but not cut the bird in two . and evil bird come down on the body but abram send them away . now when the sun be go down a deep sleep come on abram and a dark cloud of fear . and he say to abram truly your seed will be live in a land which be not theirs a servant to a people who will be cruel to them for four hundred year but i will be the judge of that nation whose servant they be and they will come out from among them with great wealth . a for you you will go to your father in peace at the end of a long life you will be put in your last resting place . and in the fourth generation they will come back here for at present the sin of the amorite be not full . then when the sun go down and it be dark he saw a smoking fire and a flaming light which go between the part of the body . in that day the lord make an agreement with abram and say to your seed have i give this land from the river of egypt to the great river the river euphrates the kenite the kenizzite and the kadmonite and the hittite and the perizzite and the rephaim and the amorite and the canaanite and the girgashite and the jebusite .now sarai abram 's wife have give him no child and she have a servant a woman of egypt whose name be hagar . and sarai say to abram see the lord have not let me have child go in to my servant for i may get a family through her . and abram do a sarai say . so after abram have be live for ten year in the land of canaan sarai take hagar her egyptian servant and give her to abram for his wife . and he go in to hagar and she become with child and when she saw that she be with child she no longer have any respect for her master 's wife . and sarai say to abram may my wrong be on you i give you my servant for your wife and when she saw that she be with child she no longer have any respect for me may the lord be judge between you and me . and abram say the woman be in your power do with her whatever seem good to you . and sarai be cruel to her so that she go run away from her . and an angel of the lord come to her by a fountain of water in the waste land by the fountain on the way to shur . and he say hagar sarai 's servant where have you come from and where be you go ? and she say i be run away from sarai my master 's wife . and the angel say to her go back and put yourself under her authority . and the angel of the lord say your seed will be greatly increase so that it may not be number . and the angel of the lord say see you be with child and will give birth to a son to whom you will give the name ishmael because the ear of the lord be open to your sorrow . and he will be like a mountain as among men his hand will be against every man and every man 's hand against him and he will keep his place against all his brother . and to the lord who be talk with her she give this name you be a god who be see for she say have i not even here in the waste land have a vision of god and be still live ? so that fountain be name fountain of life and vision it be between kadesh and bered . and hagar give birth to a child the son of abram to whom abram give the name of ishmael . abram be eighty six year old when hagar give birth to ishmael .when abram be ninety nine year old the lord come to him and say i be god ruler of all go in my way and be upright in all thing and i will make an agreement between you and me and your offspring will be greatly increase . and abram go down on his face on the earth and the lord god go on talk with him and say a for me my agreement be make with you and you will be the father of nation without end . no long will your name be abram but abraham for i have make you the father of a number of nation . i will make you very fertile so that nation will come from you and king will be your offspring . and i will make between me and you and your seed after you through all generation an eternal agreement to be a god to you and to your seed after you . and to you and to your seed after you i will give the land in which you be live all the land of canaan for an eternal heritage and i will be their god . and god say to abraham on your side you be to keep the agreement you and your seed after you through all generation . and this be the agreement which you be to keep with me you and your seed after you every male among you be to undergo circumcision . in the flesh of your private part you be to undergo it a a mark of the agreement between me and you . every male among you from one generation to another be to undergo circumcision when he be eight day old with every servant whose birth take place in your house or for whom you give money to someone of another country and not of your seed . he who come to birth in your house and he who be make yours for a price all be to undergo circumcision so that my agreement may be mark in your flesh an agreement for all time . and any male who do not undergo circumcision will be cut off from his people my agreement have be break by him . and god say a for sarai your wife from now her name will be not sarai but sarah . and i will give her a blessing so that you will have a son by her truly my blessing will be on her and she will be the mother of nation king of people will be her offspring . then abraham go down on his face and laughing say in his heart may a man a hundred year old have a child ? will sarah at ninety year old give birth ? and abraham say to god if only ishmael 's life might be your care ! and god say not so but sarah your wife will have a son and you will give him the name isaac and i will make my agreement with him for ever and with his seed after him . a for ishmael i have give ear to your prayer truly i have give him my blessing and i will make him fertile and give him great increase he will be the father of twelve chief and i will make him a great nation . but my agreement will be with isaac to whom sarah will give birth a year from this time . and have say these word god go up from abraham . and abraham take ishmael his son and all whose birth have take place in his house and all his servant whom he have make his for a price every male of his house and on that very day he give them circumcision in the flesh of their private part a god have say to him . abraham be ninety nine year old when he underwent circumcision . and ishmael his son be thirteen year old when he underwent circumcision . abraham and ishmael his son underwent circumcision on that very day . and all the men of his house those whose birth have take place in the house and those whom he have get for money from men of other land underwent circumcision with him .now the lord come to him by the holy tree of mamre when he be seat in the doorway of his tent in the middle of the day and lift up his eye he saw three men before him and see them he go quickly to them from the door of the tent and go down on his face to the earth and say my lord if now i have grace in your eye do not go away from your servant let me get water for wash your foot and take your rest under the tree and let me get a bit of bread to keep up your strength and after that you may go on your way for this be why you have come to your servant . and they say let it be so . then abraham go quickly into the tent and say to sarah get three measure of meal straight away and make cake . and run to the herd he take a young ox soft and fat and give it to the servant and he quickly make it ready and he take butter and milk and the young ox which he have make ready and put it before them wait by them under the tree while they take food . and they say to him where be sarah your wife ? and he say she be in the tent . and he say i will certainly come back to you in the spring and sarah your wife will have a son . and his word come to the ear of sarah who be at the back of the tent door . now abraham and sarah be very old and sarah be past the time for give birth . and sarah laughing to herself say now that i be use up be i still to have pleasure my husband himself be old ? and the lord say why be sarah laughing and say be it possible for me be old to give birth to a child ? be there any wonder which the lord be not able to do ? at the time i say in the spring i will come back to you and sarah will have a child . then sarah say i be not laugh for she be full of fear . and he say no but you be laugh . and the men go on from there in the direction of sodom and abraham go with them on their way . and the lord say be i to keep back from abraham the knowledge of what i do see that abraham will certainly become a great and strong nation and his name will be use by all the nation of the earth a a blessing ? for i have make him mine so that he may give order to his child and those of his line after him to keep the way of the lord to do what be good and right so that the lord may do to abraham a he have say . and the lord say because the outcry against sodom and gomorrah be very great and their sin be very evil i will go down now and see if their act be as bad a they seem from the outcry which have come to me and if they be not i will see . and the men turn from that place go on to sodom but abraham be still wait before the lord . and abraham come near and say will you let destruction come on the upright with the sinner ? if by chance there be fifty upright men in the town will you give the place to destruction and not have mercy on it because of the fifty upright men ? let such a thing be far from you to put the upright to death with the sinner will not the judge of all the earth do right ? and the lord say if there be fifty upright men in the town i will have mercy on it because of them . and abraham answering say truly i who be only dust have undertake to put my thought before the lord if by chance there be five less than fifty upright men will you give up all the town to destruction because of these five ? and he say i will not give it to destruction if there be forty five . and again he say to him by chance there may be forty there . and he say i will not do it if there be forty . and he say let not the lord be angry with me if i say what if there be thirty there ? and he say i will not do it if there be thirty . and he say see now i have undertake to put my thought before the lord what if there be twenty there ? and he say i will have mercy because of the twenty . and he say o let not the lord be angry and i will say only one word more by chance there may be ten there . and he say i will have mercy because of the ten . and the lord go on his way when his talk with abraham be end and abraham go back to his place .and at nightfall the two angel come to sodom and lot be seat at the way into the town and when he saw them he get up and come before them fall down on his face to the earth . and he say my master come now into your servant 's house and take your rest there for the night and let your foot be wash and early in the morning you may go on your way . and they say not so but we will take our night 's rest in the street . but he make his request more strongly so they go with him into his house and he get food ready for them and make unleavened bread of which they take . but before they have go to bed the men of the town all the men of sodom come round the house young and old from every part of the town and cry out to lot they say where be the men who come to your house this night ? send them out to u so that we may take our pleasure with them . and lot go out to them in the doorway shut the door after him . and he say my brother do not this evil . see now i have two unmarried daughter i will send them out to you so that you may do to them whatever seem good to you only do nothing to these men for this be why they have come under the shade of my roof . and they say give way there . this one man they say come here from a strange country and will he now be our judge ? now we will do bad to you than to them and push violently against lot they come near to get the door break in . but the men put out their hand and take lot into the house to them shut the door again . but the men who be outside the door they make blind all of them small and great so that they be tire out with look for the door . then the men say to lot be there any others of your family here ? son in law or son or daughter take them all out of this place for we be about to send destruction on this place because a great outcry against them have come to the ear of the lord and the lord have send u to put an end to the town . and lot go out and say to his son in law who be marry to his daughter come let u go out of this place for the lord be about to send destruction on the town . but his son in law do not take him seriously . and when morning come the angel do all in their power to make lot go say get up quickly and take your wife and your two daughter who be here and go for fear that you come to destruction in the punishment of the town . but while he be wait the men take him and his wife and his daughter by the hand for the lord have mercy on them and put them outside the town . and when they have put them out he say go for your life without look back or wait in the lowland go quickly to the mountain or you will come to destruction . and lot say to them not so o my lord see now your servant have have grace in your eye and great be your mercy in keep my life from destruction but i be not able to get as far a the mountain before evil overtakes me and death this town now be near and it be a little one o let me go there be it not a little one ? so that my life may be safe . and he say see i have give you your request in this one thing more i will not send destruction on this town . go there quickly for i be not able to do anything till you have come there . for this reason the town be name zoar . the sun be up when lot come to zoar . then the lord send fire and flame smoke rain down from heaven on sodom and gomorrah . and he send destruction on those town with all the lowland and all the people of those town and every green thing in the land . but lot 's wife look back become a pillar of salt . and abraham get up early in the morning and go to the place where he have be talk with the lord and look in the direction of sodom and gomorrah and the lowland he saw the smoke of the land go up like the smoke of an oven . so it come about that when god send destruction on the town of the lowland he keep his word to abraham and send lot safely away when he put an end to the town where he be live . then lot go up out of zoar to the mountain and be live there with his two daughter for fear keep him from living in zoar and he and his daughter make their living place in a hole in the rock . and the old daughter say to her sister our father be old and there be no man to be a husband to u in the natural way come let u give our father much wine and we will go into his bed so that we may have offspring by our father and that night they make their father take much wine and the old daughter go into his bed and he have no knowledge of when she go in or when she go away . and on the day after the old daughter say to the young last night i be with my father let u make him take much wine this night again and do you go to him so that we may have offspring by our father . and that night again they make their father take much wine and the young daughter go into his bed and he have no knowledge of when she go in or when she go away . and so the two daughter of lot be with child by their father . and the old daughter have a son and she give him the name moab he be the father of the moabites to this day . and the young have a son and give him the name ben ammi from him come the child of ammon to this day .and abraham go on his way from there to the land of the south and be live between kadesh and shur in gerar . and abraham say of sarah his wife she be my sister and abimelech king of gerar sent and take sarah . but god come to abimelech in a dream in the night and say to him truly you be a dead man because of the woman whom you have take for she be a man 's wife . now abimelech have not come near her and he say lord will you put to death an upright nation ? do he not say to me himself she be my sister ? and she herself say he be my brother with an upright heart and clean hand have i do this . and god say to him in the dream i see that you have do this with an upright heart and i have keep you from sin against me for this reason i do not let you come near her . so now give the man back his wife for he be a prophet and let him say a prayer for you so your life may be safe but if you do not give her back be certain that death will come to you and all your house . so abimelech get up early in the morning and sent for all his servant and give them word of these thing and they be full of fear . then abimelech sent for abraham and say what have you do to u ? what wrong have i do you that you have put on me and on my kingdom so great a sin ? you have do to me thing which be not to be do . and abimelech say to abraham why do you do this thing ? and abraham say because it seem to me that there be no fear of god in this place and that they might put me to death because of my wife . and in fact she be my sister the daughter of my father but not the daughter of my mother and she become my wife and when god send me wander from my father 's house i say to her let this be the sign of your love for me wherever we go say of me he be my brother . then abimelech give to abraham sheep and oxen and men servant and woman servant and give him back his wife sarah . and abimelech say see all my land be before you take whatever place seem good to you . and he say to sarah see i have give to your brother a thousand bit of silver so that your wrong may be put right now your honour be clear in the eye of all . then abraham make prayer to god and god make abimelech well again and his wife and his woman servant so that they have child . for the lord have keep all the woman of the house of abimelech from have child because of sarah abraham 's wife .and the lord come to sarah a he have say and do to her a he have undertake . and sarah become with child and give abraham a son when he be old at the time name by god . and abraham give to his son to whom sarah have give birth the name isaac . and when his son isaac be eight day old abraham make him undergo circumcision a god have say to him . now abraham be a hundred year old when the birth of isaac take place . and sarah say god have give me cause for laugh and everyone who have news of it will be laugh with me . and she say who would have say to abraham that sarah would have a child at her breast ? for see i have give him a son now when he be old . and when the child be old enough to be take from the breast abraham make a great feast . and sarah saw the son of hagar the egyptian playing with isaac . so she say to abraham send away that woman and her son for the son of that woman be not to have a part in the heritage with my son isaac . and this be a great grief to abraham because of his son . but god say let it not be a grief to you because of the boy and hagar his mother give ear to whatever sarah say to you because it be from isaac that your seed will take it name . and i will make a nation of the son of your servant woman because he be your seed . and early in the morning abraham get up and give hagar some bread and a water skin and put the boy on her back and send her away and she go wander in the waste land of beer sheba . and when all the water in the skin be use up she put the child down under a tree . and she go some distance away about an arrow flight and seat herself on the earth she give way to bitter weep say let me not see the death of my child . and the boy 's cry come to the ear of god and the angel of god say to hagar from heaven hagar why be you weep ? have no fear for the child 's cry have come to the ear of god . come take your child in your arm for i will make of him a great nation . then god make her eye open and she saw a water spring and she get water in the skin and give the boy a drink . and god be with the boy and he become tall and strong and he become a bowman living in the waste land . and while he be in the waste land of paran his mother get him a wife from the land of egypt . now at that time abimelech and phicol the captain of his army say to abraham i see that god be with you in all you do . now then give me your oath in the name of god that you will not be false to me or to my son after me but that a i have be good to you so you will be to me and to this land where you have be live . and abraham say i will give you my oath . but abraham make a protest to abimelech because of a water hole which abimelech 's servant have take by force . but abimelech say i have no idea who have do this thing you never give me word of it and i have no knowledge of it till this day . and abraham take sheep and ox and give them to abimelech and the two of them make an agreement together . and abraham put seven young lamb of the flock on one side by themselves . then abimelech say what be these seven lamb which you have put on one side ? and he say take these seven lamb from me a a witness that i have make this water hole . so he give that place the name beer sheba because there the two of them have give their oath . so they make an agreement at beer sheba and abimelech and phicol the captain of his army go back to the land of the philistine . and abraham after plant a holy tree in beer sheba give worship to the name of the lord the eternal god . and abraham go on living in the land of the philistine a in a strange country .now after these thing god put abraham to the test and say to him abraham and he say here be i. and he say to him take your son your dearly love only son isaac and go to the land of moriah and give him a a burned offering on one of the mountain of which i will give you knowledge . and abraham get up early in the morning and make ready his as and take with him two of his young men and isaac his son and after the wood for the burned offering have be cut he go on his way to the place of which god have give him word . and on the third day abraham lift up his eye saw the place a long way off . then he say to his young men keep here with the as and i and the boy will go on and give worship and come back again to you . and abraham put the wood for the burned offering on his son 's back and he himself take the fire and the knife in his hand and the two of them go on together . then isaac say to abraham my father and he say here be i my son . and he say we have wood and fire here but where be the lamb for the burned offering ? and abraham say god himself will give the lamb for the burned offering so they go on together . and they come to the place of which god have give him knowledge and there abraham make the altar and put the wood in place on it and have make tight the band round isaac his son he put him on the wood on the altar . and stretch out his hand abraham take the knife to put his son to death . but the voice of the angel of the lord come from heaven say abraham abraham and he say here be i. and he say let not your hand be stretch out against the boy to do anything to him for now i be certain that the fear of god be in your heart because you have not keep back your son your only son from me . and lift up his eye abraham saw a sheep fix by it horn in the brushwood and abraham take the sheep and make a burned offering of it in place of his son . and abraham give that place the name yahweh yireh a it be say to this day in the mountain the lord be see . and the voice of the angel of the lord come to abraham a second time from heaven say i have take an oath by my name say the lord because you have do this and have not keep back from me your dearly love only son that i will certainly give you my bless and your seed will be increase like the star of heaven and the sand by the seaside your seed will take the land of those who be against them and your seed will be a blessing to all the nation of the earth because you have do what i give you order to do . then abraham go back to his young men and they go together to beer sheba the place where abraham be live . after these thing abraham have news that milcah the wife of his brother nahor have give birth to child uz the old and buz his brother and kemuel the father of aram and chesed and hazo and pildash and jidlaph and bethuel . bethuel be the father of rebekah these eight be the child of milcah and nahor abraham 's brother . and his servant reumah give birth to tebah and gaham and tahash and maacah .now the year of sarah 's life be a hundred and twenty seven . and sarah 's death take place in kiriath arba that be hebron in the land of canaan and abraham go into his house weeping and sorrow for sarah . and abraham come from his dead and say to the child of heth i be live among you a one from a strange country give me some land here a my property so that i may put my dead to rest . and in answer the child of heth say to abraham my lord truly you be a great chief among u take the best of our resting place for your dead not one of u will keep back from you a place where you may put your dead to rest . and abraham get up and give honour to the child of heth the people of that land . and he say to them if you will let me put my dead to rest here make a request for me to ephron the son of zohar that he will give me the hollow in the rock name machpelah which be his property at the end of his field let him give it to me for it full price a a rest place for my dead among you . now ephron be seat among the child of heth and ephron the hittite give abraham his answer in the hearing of the child of heth and of all those who come into his town say no my lord i will give you the field with the hollow in the rock before all the child of my people will i give it to you for a resting place for your dead . and abraham go down on his face before the people of the land . and abraham say to ephron in the hearing of the people of the land if only you will give ear to me i will give you the price of the field take it and let me put my dead to rest there . so ephron say to abraham my lord give ear to me the value of the land be four hundred shekel what be that between me and you ? so put your dead to rest there . and abraham take note of the price fix by ephron in the hearing of the child of heth and give him four hundred shekel in current money . so ephron 's field at machpelah near mamre with the hollow in the rock and all the tree in the field and round it become the property of abraham before the eye of the child of heth and of all who come into the town . then abraham put sarah his wife to rest in the hollow rock in the field of machpelah near mamre that be hebron in the land of canaan . and the field and the hollow rock be hand over to abraham a his property by the child of heth .now abraham be old and far on in year and the lord have give him everything in full measure . and abraham say to his chief servant the manager of all his property come now put your hand under my leg and take an oath by the lord the god of heaven and the god of the earth that you will not get a wife for my son isaac from the daughter of the canaanite among whom i be live but that you will go into my country and to my relation and get a wife there for my son isaac . and the servant say if by chance the woman will not come with me into this land be i to take your son back again to the land from which you come ? and abraham say take care that you do not let my son go back to that land . the lord god of heaven who take me from my father 's house and from the land of my birth and make an oath to me say to your seed i will give this land he will send his angel before you and give you a wife for my son in that land . and if the woman will not come with you then you be free from this oath only do not take my son back there . and the servant put his hand under abraham 's leg and give him his oath about this thing . and the servant take ten of his master 's camel and all sort of good thing of his master 's and go to mesopotamia to the town of nahor . and he make the camel take their rest outside the town by the water spring in the evening at the time when the woman come to get water . and he say o lord the god of my master abraham let me do well in what i have undertake this day and give your mercy to my master abraham . see i be wait here by the water spring and the daughter of the town be come out to get water now may the girl to whom i say let down your vessel and give me a drink and who say in answer here be a drink for you and let me give water to your camel may she be the one mark out by you for your servant isaac so may i be certain that you have be good to my master abraham . and even before his word be end rebekah the daughter of bethuel the son of milcah who be the wife of nahor abraham 's brother come out with her water vessel on her arm . she be a very beautiful girl a virgin who have never be touch by a man and she go down to the spring to get water in her vessel . and the servant come run to her and say give me a little water from your vessel . and she say take a drink my lord and quickly let down her vessel onto her hand she give him a drink . and have do so she say i will get water for your camel till they have have enough . and after put the water from her vessel into the animal ' drinking place she go quickly back to the spring and get water for all the camel . and the man look at her say nothing wait to see if the lord have give his journey a good outcome . and when the camel have have enough the man take a gold nose ring half a shekel in weight and two ornament for her arm of ten shekel weight of gold and say to her whose daughter be you ? be there room in your father 's house for u ? and she say to him i be the daughter of bethuel the son of milcah nahor 's wife . and she say we have a great store of dry grass and cattle food and there be room for you . and with bent head the man give worship to the lord and say praise be to the lord the god of my master abraham who have give a sign that he be good and true to my master by guide me straight to the house of my master 's family . so the girl go run and take the news of these thing to her mother 's house now rebekah have a brother name laban and he come out quickly to the man at the water spring . and when he saw the nose ring and the ornament on his sister 's hand and when she give him word of what the man have say to her then he go out to the man who be wait with the camel by the water spring . and he say to him come in you on whom be the blessing of the lord why be you wait outside ? for i have make the house ready for you and a place for the camel . then the man come into the house and laban take their cord off the camel and give them dry grass and food and he give to him and the men who be with him water for wash their foot . and meat be put before him but he say i will not take food till i have make my business clear to you . and they say do so . and he say i be abraham 's servant . the lord have give my master every blessing and he have become great he have give him flock and herd and silver and gold and men servant and woman servant and camel and ass . and when sarah my master 's wife be old she give birth to a son to whom he have give all he have . and my master make me take an oath say do not get a wife for my son from the daughter of the canaanite among whom i be live but go to my father 's house and to my relation for a wife for my son . and i say to my master what if the woman will not come with me ? and he say the lord whom i have ever keep before me will send his angel with you who will make it possible for you to get a wife for my son from my relation and my father 's house and you will be free from your oath to me when you come to my people and if they will not give her to you you will be free from your oath . and i come today to the water spring and i say o lord the god of my master abraham if it be your purpose to give a good outcome to my journey let it come about that while i be wait here by the water spring if a girl come to get water and i say to her give me a little water from your vessel and she say take a drink and i will get water for your camel let her be the woman mark out by the lord for my master 's son . and even while i be say this to myself rebekah come out with her vessel on her arm and she go down to the spring to get water and i say to her give me a drink . and straight away she take down her vessel from her arm and say take a drink and i will get water for your camel . and question her i say whose daughter be you ? and she say the daughter of bethuel the son of nahor and milcah his wife . then i put the ring on her nose and the ornament on her hand . and with bent head i give worship and praise to the lord the god of my master abraham by whom i have be guide in the right way to get the daughter of my master 's brother for his son . and now say if you will do what be good and right for my master or not in order that it may be clear to me what i have to do . then laban and bethuel say in answer this be the lord 's do it be not for u to say yes or no to you . see here be rebekah take her and go and let her be your master 's son 's wife a the lord have say . and at these word abraham 's servant go down on his face and give praise to the lord . then he take jewel of silver and jewel of gold and fair robe and give them to rebekah and he give thing of value to her mother and her brother . then he and the men who be with him have food and drink and take their rest there that night and in the morning he get up and say let me now go back to my master . but her brother and her mother say let the girl be with u a week or ten day and then she may go . and he say do not keep me the lord have give a good outcome to my journey let me now go back to my master . and they say we will send for the girl and let her make the decision . and they send for rebekah and say to her be you ready to go with this man ? and she say i be ready . so they send their sister rebekah and her servant with abraham 's servant and his men . and they give rebekah their blessing say o sister may you be the mother of thousand and ten thousand and may your seed overcome all those who make war against them . so rebekah and her servant woman go with the man seat on the camel and so the servant take rebekah and go on his way . now isaac have come through the waste land to beer lahai roi for he be live in the south . and when the evening be near he go wander out into the field and lift up his eye he saw camel come . and when rebekah look up saw isaac she get down from her camel and say to the servant who be that man come to u through the field ? and the servant say it be my master then she take her veil cover her face with it . then the servant give isaac the story of all he have do . and isaac take rebekah into his tent and she become his wife and in his love for her isaac be comfort after his father 's death .and abraham take another wife name keturah . she become the mother of zimran and jokshan and medan and midian and ishbak and shuah . and jokshan become the father of sheba and dedan . and from dedan come the asshurim and letushim and leummim . and from midian come ephah and epher and hanoch and abida and eldaah . all these be the offspring of keturah . now abraham give all his property to isaac but to the son of his other woman he give offering and send them away while he be still live into the east country . now the year of abraham 's life be a hundred and seventy five . and abraham come to his death an old man full of year and he be put to rest with his people . and isaac and ishmael his son put him to rest in the hollow rock of machpelah in the field of ephron the son of zohar the hittite near mamre the same field which abraham get from the child of heth there abraham be put to rest with sarah his wife . now after the death of abraham the blessing of god be with isaac his son . now these be the generation of ishmael the son of abraham whose mother be hagar the egyptian the servant of sarah these be the name of the son of ishmael by their generation ishmael 's first son be nebaioth then kedar and adbeel and mibsam and mishma and dumah and massa hadad and tema jetur naphish and kedemah these be the son of ishmael and these be their name in their town and their tent circle twelve chief with their people . and the year of ishmael 's life be a hundred and thirty seven and he come to his end and be put to rest with his people . and their country be from havilah to shur which be east of egypt they take their place to the east of all their brother . now these be the generation of abraham 's son isaac isaac be forty year old when he take rebekah the daughter of bethuel the aramaean of paddan aram and the sister of laban the aramaean to be his wife . isaac make prayer to the lord for his wife because she have no child and the lord give ear to his prayer and rebekah become with child . and the child be fight together inside her and she say if it be to be so why be i like this ? so she go to put her question to the lord . and the lord say to her two nation be in your body and two people will come to birth from you the one will be strong than the other and the old will be the servant of the younger . and when the time come for her to give birth there be two child in her body . and the first come out red from head to foot like a robe of hair and they give him the name of esau . and after him his brother come out grip esau 's foot and he be name jacob isaac be sixty year old when she give birth to them . and the boy come to full growth and esau become a man of the open country an expert bowman but jacob be a quiet man living in tent . now isaac 's love be for esau because esau 's meat be greatly to his taste but rebekah have more love for jacob . and one day jacob be cook some soup when esau come in from the field in great need of food and esau say to jacob give me a full meal of that red soup for i be overcome with need for food for this reason he be name edom . and jacob say first of all give me your birthright . and esau say truly i be at the point of death what profit be the birthright to me ? and jacob say first of all give me your oath and he give him his oath handing over his birthright to jacob . then jacob give him bread and soup and he take food and drink and go away care little for his birthright .then come a time of great need in the land like that which have be before in the day of abraham . and isaac go to abimelech king of the philistine at gerar . and the lord come to him in a vision and say do not go down to egypt keep in the land of which i will give you knowledge keep in this land and i will be with you and give you my bless for to you and to your seed will i give all these land give effect to the oath which i make to your father abraham i will make your seed like the star of heaven in number and will give them all these land and your seed will be a blessing to all the nation of the earth because abraham give ear to my voice and keep my word my rule my order and my law . so isaac go on living in gerar and when he be question by the men of the place about his wife he say she be my sister fear to say she be my wife for he say the men of the place may put me to death on account of rebekah because she be very beautiful . and when he have be there for some time abimelech king of the philistine look through a window saw isaac play with rebekah his wife . and he say to isaac it be clear that she be your wife why then do you say she be my sister ? and isaac say for fear that i might be put to death because of her . then abimelech say what have you do to u ? one of the people might well have have connection with your wife and the sin would have be ours . and abimelech give order to his people that anyone touch isaac or his wife be to be put to death . now isaac plant seed in that land get in the same year fruit a hundred time a much for the blessing of the lord be on him . and his wealth become very great increase more and more for he have great wealth of flock and herd and great number of servant so that the philistine be full of envy . now all the water hole which his father 's servant have make in the day of abraham have be stop up with earth by the philistine . and abimelech say to isaac go away from u for you be strong than we be . so isaac go away from there and put up his tent in the valley of gerar make his living place there . and he make again the water hole which have be make in the day of abraham his father and which have be stop up by the philistine and he give them the name which his father have give them . now isaac 's servant make hole in the valley and come to a spring of flow water . but the herdmen of gerar have a fight with isaac 's herdmen for they say the spring be ours so he give the spring the name of esek because there be a fight about it . then they make another water hole and there be a fight about that so he give it the name of sitnah . then he go away from there and make another water hole about which there be no fighting so he give it the name of rehoboth for he say now the lord have make room for u and we will have fruit in this land . and from there he go on to beer sheba . that night the lord come to him in a vision and say i be the god of your father abraham have no fear for i be with you bless you and your seed will be increase because of my servant abraham . then he make an altar there and give worship to the name of the lord and he put up his tent there and there his servant make a water hole . and abimelech have come to him from gerar with ahuzzath his friend and phicol the captain of his army . and isaac say to them why have you come to me see that in your hate for me you send me away from you ? and they say we saw clearly that the lord be with you so we say let there be an oath between u and you and let u make an agreement with you that you will do u no damage even a we put no hand on you and do you nothing but good and send you away in peace and now the blessing of the lord be on you . then he make a feast for them and they all have food and drink . and early in the morning they take an oath one to the other then isaac send them away and they go on their way in peace . and that day isaac 's servant come to him and give him word of the water hole which they have make and say to him we have come to water . and he give it the name of shibah so the name of that town be beer sheba to this day . and when esau be forty year old he take a his wife judith the daughter of beeri the hittite and basemath the daughter of elon the hittite and isaac and rebekah have grief of mind because of them .now when isaac be old and his eye have become cloud so that he be not able to see he send for esau his first son and say to him my son and he say here be i. and he say see now i be old and my death may take place at any time so take your arrow and your bow and go out to the field and get meat for me and make me food good to the taste such a be please to me and put it before me so that i may have a meal and give you my bless before death come to me . now isaac 's word to his son be say in rebekah 's hearing . then esau go out to get the meat . and rebekah say to jacob her son your father say to your brother esau in my hearing go and get some roe 's meat and make me a good meal so that i may be full and give you my bless before the lord before my death . now my son do what i say . go to the flock and get me two fat young goat and i will make of them a meal to your father 's taste and you will take it to him so that he may have a good meal and give you his bless before his death . and jacob say to rebekah his mother but esau my brother be cover with hair while i be smooth if by chance my father put his hand on me it will seem to him that i be trick him and he will put a curse on me in place of a blessing . and his mother say let the curse be on me my son only do a i say and go and get them for me . so he go and get them and take them to his mother and she make a meal to his father 's taste . and rebekah take the fair robe of her old son which be with her in the house and put them on jacob her young son and she put the skin of the young goat on his hand and on the smooth part of his neck and she give into the hand of jacob her son the meat and the bread which she have make ready . and he come to his father and say my father and he say here be i who be you my son ? and jacob say i be esau your old son i have do a you say come now be seat and take of my meat so that you may give me a blessing . and isaac say how be it that you have get it so quickly my son ? and he say because the lord your god make it come my way . and isaac say come near so that i may put my hand on you my son and see if you be truly my son esau or not . and jacob go near his father isaac and he put his hand on him and he say the voice be jacob 's voice but the hand be the hand of esau . and he do not make out who he be because his hand be cover with hair like his brother esau 's hand so he give him a blessing . and he say be you truly my son esau ? and he say i be . and he say put it before me and i will take of my son 's meat so that i may give you a blessing . and he put it before him and he take it and he give him wine and he have a drink . and his father isaac say to him come near now my son and give me a kiss . and he come near and give him a kiss and smell the smell of his clothing he give him a blessing and say see the smell of my son be like the smell of a field on which the blessing of the lord have come may god give you the dew of heaven and the good thing of the earth and grain and wine in full measure let people be your servant and nation go down before you be lord over your brother and let your mother 's son go down before you a curse be on everyone by whom you be curse and a blessing on those who give you a blessing . and when isaac have come to the end of bless jacob and jacob have not long go away from isaac his father esau come in from the field . and he make ready a meal good to the taste and take it to his father and say to him let my father get up and take of his son 's meat so that you may give me a blessing . and isaac his father say to him who be you ? and he say i be your old son esau . and in great fear isaac say who then be he who get meat and put it before me and i take it all before you come and give him a blessing and his it will be ? and hear the word of his father esau give a great and bitter cry and say to his father give a blessing to me even to me o my father ! and he say your brother come with deceit and take away your blessing . and he say be it because he be name jacob that he have twice take my place ? for he take away my birthright and now he have take away my blessing . and he say have you not keep a blessing for me ? and isaac answering say but i have make him your master and have give him all his brother for servant i have make him strong with grain and wine what then be i to do for you my son ? and esau say to his father be that the only blessing you have my father ? give a blessing to me even me ! and esau be overcome with weep . then isaac his father make answer and say to him far from the fertile place of the earth and far from the dew of heaven on high will your living place be by your sword will you get your living and you will be your brother 's servant but when your power be increase his yoke will be break from off your neck . so esau be full of hate for jacob because of his father 's blessing and he say in his heart the day of weep for my father be near then i will put my brother jacob to death . then rebekah hear what esau have say send for jacob her young son and say to him it seem that your brother esau be purpose to put you to death . so now my son do what i say go quickly to haran to my brother laban and be there with him for a little time till your brother 's wrath be turn away till the memory of what you have do to him be past and he be no longer angry then i will send word for you to come back be the two of you to be take from me in one day ? then rebekah say to isaac my life be a weariness to me because of the daughter of heth if jacob take a wife from among the daughter of heth such a these the woman of this land of what use will my life be to me ?then isaac sent for jacob and bless him say do not take a wife from among the woman of canaan but go to paddan aram to the house of bethuel your mother 's father and there get yourself a wife from the daughter of laban your mother 's brother . and may god the ruler of all give you his bless give you fruit and increase so that you may become an army of people . and may god give you the blessing of abraham to you and to your seed so that the land of your wandering which god give to abraham may be your heritage . so isaac sent jacob away and he go to paddan aram to laban son of bethuel the aramaean the brother of rebekah the mother of jacob and esau . so when esau saw that isaac have give jacob his blessing and send him away to paddan aram to get a wife for himself there bless him and say to him do not take a wife from among the woman of canaan and that jacob have do a his father and mother say and have go to paddan aram it be clear to esau that his father have no love for the woman of canaan so esau go to ishmael and take mahalath the daughter of abraham 's son ishmael the sister of nebaioth to be his wife in addition to the wife he have . so jacob go out from beer sheba to go to haran . and come to a certain place he make it his rest place for the night for the sun have go down and he take one of the stone which be there and put it under his head he go to sleep in that place . and he have a dream and in his dream he saw step stretch from earth to heaven and the angel of god be go up and down on them . and he saw the lord by his side say i be the lord the god of abraham your father and the god of isaac i will give to you and to your seed this land on which you be sleep . your seed will be like the dust of the earth cover all the land to the west and to the east to the north and to the south you and your seed will be a name of bless to all the family of the earth . and truly i will be with you and will keep you wherever you go guide you back again to this land and i will not give you up till i have do what i have say to you . and jacob awake from his sleep say truly the lord be in this place and i be not conscious of it . and fear come on him and he say this be a holy place this be nothing less than the house of god and the doorway of heaven . and early in the morning jacob take the stone which have be under his head and put it up a a pillar and put oil on it . and he give that place the name of beth el but before that time the town be name luz . then jacob take an oath and say if god will be with me and keep me safe on my journey and give me food and clothing to put on so that i come again to my father 's house in peace then i will take the lord to be my god and this stone which i have put up for a pillar will be god 's house and of all you give me i will give a tenth part to you .then jacob go on his journey till he come to the land of the child of the east . and there he saw a water hole in a field and by the side of it three flock of sheep for there they get water for the sheep and on the mouth of the water hole there be a great stone . and all the flock would come together there and when the stone have be roll away they would give the sheep water and put the stone back again in it place on the mouth of the water hole . then jacob say to the herdmen my brother where do you come from ? and they say from haran . and he say to them have you any knowledge of laban the son of nahor ? and they say we have . and he say to them be he well ? and they say he be well and here be rachel his daughter come with the sheep . then jacob say the sun be still high and it be not time to get the cattle together get water for the sheep and go and give them their food . and they say we be not able to do so till all the flock have come together and the stone have be roll away from the mouth of the water hole then we will get water for the sheep . while he be still talk with them rachel come with her father 's sheep for she take care of them . then when jacob saw rachel the daughter of laban his mother 's brother come with laban 's sheep he come near and roll the stone away from the mouth of the hole he get water for laban 's flock . and weep for joy jacob give rachel a kiss . and rachel hearing from jacob that he be her father 's relation and that he be the son of rebekah go run to give her father news of it . and laban hear news of jacob his sister 's son come run and take jacob in his arm and kiss him make him come into his house . and jacob give him news of everything . and laban say to him truly you be my bone and my flesh . and he keep jacob with him for the space of a month . then laban say to jacob because you be my brother be you to be my servant for nothing ? say now what be your payment to be ? now laban have two daughter the name of the older be leah and the name of the younger be rachel . and leah 's eye be cloud but rachel be fair in face and form . and jacob be in love with rachel and he say i will be your servant seven year for rachel your young daughter . and laban say it be well for you to have her than another man go on living here with me . and jacob do seven year ' work for rachel and because of his love for her it seem to him only a very little time . then jacob say to laban give me my wife so that i may have her for the day be end . and laban get together all the men of the place and give a feast . and in the evening he take leah his daughter and give her to him and he go in to her . and laban give zilpah his servant girl to leah to be her wait woman . and in the morning jacob saw that it be leah and he say to laban what have you do to me ? be i not work for you so that i might have rachel ? why have you be false to me ? and laban say in our country we do not let the young daughter be marry before the old . let the week of the bride feast come to it end and then we will give you the other in addition if you will be my servant for another seven year . and jacob do so and when the week be end laban give him his daughter rachel for his wife . and laban give rachel his servant girl bilhah to be her wait woman . then jacob take rachel a his wife and his love for her be great than his love for leah and he go on work for laban for another seven year . now the lord see that leah be not love give her a child while rachel have no child . and leah be with child and give birth to a son to whom she give the name reuben for she say the lord have see my sorrow now my husband will have love for me . then she become with child again and give birth to a son and say because it have come to the lord 's ear that i be not love he have give me this son in addition and she give him the name simeon . and she be with child again and give birth to a son and say now at last my husband will be unite to me because i have give him three son so he be name levi . and she be with child again and give birth to a son and she say this time i will give praise to the lord so he be name judah after this she have no more child for a time .now rachel because she have no child be full of envy of her sister and she say to jacob if you do not give me child i will not go on living . but jacob be angry with rachel and say be i in the place of god who have keep your body from have fruit ? then she say here be my servant bilhah go in to her so that she may have a child on my knee and i may have a family by her . so she give him her servant bilhah a a wife and jacob go in to her . and bilhah become with child and give birth to a son . then rachel say god have be my judge and have give ear to my voice and have give me a son so he be name dan . and again bilhah rachel 's servant be with child and give birth to a second son . and rachel say i have have a great fight with my sister and i have overcome her and she give the child the name naphtali . when it be clear to leah that she would have no more child for a time she give zilpah her servant to jacob a a wife . and zilpah leah 's servant give birth to a son . and leah say it have go well for me and she give him the name gad . and zilpah leah 's servant give birth to a second son . and leah say happy be i ! and all woman will give witness to my joy and she give him the name asher . now at the time of the grain cut reuben saw some love fruit in the field and take them to his mother leah . and rachel say to her let me have some of your son 's love fruit . but leah say to her be it a small thing that you have take my husband from me ? and now would you take my son 's love fruit ? then rachel say you may have him tonight in exchange for your son 's love fruit . in the evening when jacob come in from the field leah go out to him and say tonight you be to come to me for i have give my son 's love fruit a a price for you . and he go in to her that night . and god give ear to her and she become with child and give jacob a fifth son . then leah say god have make payment to me for give my servant girl to my husband so she give her son the name issachar . and again leah become with child and she give jacob a sixth son . and she say god have give me a good bride price now at last will i have my husband living with me for i have give him six son and she give him the name zebulun . after that she have a daughter to whom she give the name dinah . then god give think to rachel and hear her prayer he make her fertile . and she be with child and give birth to a son and she say god have take away my shame . and she give him the name joseph say may the lord give me another son . now after the birth of joseph jacob say to laban let me go away to my place and my country . give me my wife and my child for whom i have be your servant and let me go for you have knowledge of all the work i have do for you . and laban say if you will let me say so do not go away for i have see by the sign that the lord have be good to me because of you . say then what your payment be to be and i will give it . then jacob say you have see what i have do for you and how your cattle have do well under my care . for before i come you have little and it have be greatly increase and the lord have give you a bless in everything i have do but when be i to do something for my family ? and laban say what be i to give you ? and jacob say do not give me anything but i will again take up the care of your flock if you will only do this for me let me go through all your flock today take out from among them all the sheep which be mark or colour or black and all the mark or colour goat these will be my payment . and so you will be able to put my honour to the test in time to come if you see among my flock any goat which be not mark or colour or any sheep which be not black you may take me for a thief . and laban say let it be a you say . so that day he take all the he goats which be band or colour and all the she goats which be mark or colour or have white mark and all the black sheep and give them into the care of his son and send them three day ' journey away and jacob take care of the rest of laban 's flock . then jacob take young branch of tree cut off the skin so that the white wood be see in band . and he put the banded stick in the drinking place where the flock come to get water and they become with young when they come to the water . and because of this the flock give birth to young which be mark with band of colour . these lambs jacob keep separate and he put his flock in a place by themselves and not with laban 's flock . and whenever the strong one of the flock become with young jacob put the stick in front of them in the drinking place so that they might become with young when they saw the stick . but when the flock be feeble he do not put the stick before them so that the feebler flock be laban 's and the strong be jacob 's . so jacob 's wealth be greatly increase he have great flock and woman servant and men servant and camel and ass .now it come to the ear of jacob that laban 's son be say jacob have take away all our father 's property and in this way he have get all this wealth . and jacob saw that laban 's feeling for him be no long what it have be before . then the lord say to jacob go back to the land of your father and to your relation and i will be with you . and jacob sent for rachel and leah to come to him in the field among his flock . and he say to them it be clear to me that your father 's feeling be no longer what it be to me but the god of my father have be with me and you have see how i have do all in my power for your father but your father have not keep faith with me and ten time he have make change in my payment but god have keep him from do me damage . if he say all those in the flock which have mark be to be yours then all the flock give birth to mark young and if he say all the band one be to be yours then all the flock have band young . so god have take away your father 's cattle and have give them to me . and at the time when the flock be with young i saw in a dream that all the he goats which be join with the she goat be band and mark and colour . and in my dream the angel of the lord say to me jacob and i say here be i. and he say see how all the he goats be band and mark and colour for i have see what laban have do to you . i be the god of beth el where you put oil on the pillar and take an oath to me now then come out of this land and go back to the country of your birth . then rachel and leah say to him in answer what part or heritage be there for u in our father 's house ? be we not a people from a strange country to him ? for he take a price for u and now it be all use up . for the wealth which god have take from him be ours and our child 's so now whatever god have say to you do . then jacob put his wife and his son on camel and send on before him all his cattle and his property which he have get together in paddan aram he make ready to go to isaac his father in the land of canaan . now laban have go to see to the cutting of the wool of his sheep so rachel secretly take the image of the god of her father 's house . and jacob go away secretly without give news of his flight to laban the aramaean . so he go away with all he have and go across the river in the direction of the hill country of gilead . and on the third day laban have news of jacob 's flight . and take the men of his family with him he go after him for seven day and overtake him in the hill country of gilead . then god come to laban in a dream by night and say to him take care that you say nothing good or bad to jacob . now when laban overtake him jacob have put up his tent in the hill country and laban and his brother put up their tent in the hill country of gilead . and laban say to jacob why do you go away secretly take my daughter away like prisoner of war ? why do you make a secret of your flight not give me word of it so that i might have send you away with joy and song with melody and music ? you do not even let me give a kiss to my son and my daughter . this be a foolish thing to do . it be in my power to do you damage but the god of your father come to me this night say take care that you say nothing good or bad to jacob . and now it seem you be go because your heart 's desire be for your father 's house but why have you take my god ? and jacob in answer say to laban my fear be that you might take your daughter from me by force . a for your god if anyone of u have them let him be put to death make search before u all for what be yours and take it . for jacob have no knowledge that rachel have take them . so laban go into jacob 's tent and into leah 's tent and into the tent of the two servant woman but they be not there and he come out of leah 's tent and go into rachel 's . now rachel have take the image and have put them in the camel ' basket and be seat on them . and laban search through all the tent do not come across them . and she say to her father let not my lord be angry because i do not get up before you for i be in the common condition of woman . and with all his search he do not come across the image . then jacob be angry with laban and say what crime or sin have i do that you have come after me with such passion ? now that you have make search through all my good what have you see which be yours ? make it clear now before my people and your people so that they may be judge between u . these twenty year i have be with you your sheep and your goat have have young without loss not one of your he goats have i take for food . anything which be wound by beast i do not take to you but myself make up for the loss of it you make me responsible for whatever be take by thief by day or by night . this be my condition waste by heat in the day and by the bitter cold at night and sleep go from my eye . these twenty year i have be in your house i be your servant for fourteen year because of your daughter and for six year i keep your flock and ten time be my payment change . if the god of my father the god of abraham and the fear of isaac have not be with me you would have send me away with nothing in my hand . but god have see my trouble and the work of my hand and this night he keep you back . then laban answer say these woman be my daughter and these child my child the flock and all you see be mine what now may i do for my daughter and for their child ? come let u make an agreement you and i and let it be for a witness between u . then jacob take a stone and put it up a a pillar . and jacob say to his people get stone together and they do so and they have a meal there by the stone . and the name laban give it be jegar sahadutha but jacob give it the name of galeed . and laban say these stone be a witness between you and me today . for this reason it name be galeed and mizpah for he say may the lord keep watch on u when we be unable to see one another 's doings . if you be cruel to my daughter or if you take other wife in addition to my daughter then though no man be there to see god will be the witness between u . and laban say see these stone and this pillar which i have put between you and me they will be witness that i will not go over these stone to you and you will not go over these stone or this pillar to me for any evil purpose . may the god of abraham and the god of nahor the god of their father be our judge . then jacob take an oath by the fear of his father isaac . and jacob make an offering on the mountain and give order to his people to take food so they have a meal and take their rest that night on the mountain . and early in the morning laban after kiss and bless his daughter go on his way back to his country .and on his way jacob come face to face with the angel of god . and when he saw them he say this be the army of god so he give that place the name of mahanaim . now jacob send servant before him to esau his brother in the land of seir the country of edom and he give them order to say these word to esau your servant jacob say till now i have be live with laban and i have oxen and ass and flock and men servant and woman servant and i have send to give my lord news of these thing so that i may have grace in his eye . when the servant come back they say we have see your brother esau and he be come out to you and four hundred men with him . then jacob be in great fear and trouble of mind and he put all the people and the flock and the herd and the camel into two group and say if esau meet one group make an attack on them the others will get away safely . then jacob say o god of my father abraham the god of my father isaac the lord who say to me go back to your country and your family and i will be good to you i be less than nothing in comparison with all your mercy and your faith to me your servant for with only my stick in my hand i go across jordan and now i have become two army . be my saviour from the hand of esau my brother for my fear be that he will make an attack on me put to death mother and child . and you say truly i will be good to you and make your seed like the sand of the sea which may not be number . then he put up his tent there for the night and from among his good he take a an offering for his brother esau two hundred she goat and twenty he goats two hundred female and twenty male from the sheep thirty camel with their young one forty cow ten oxen twenty ass and ten young ass . these he give to his servant every herd by itself and he say to his servant go on before me and let there be a space between one herd and another . and he give order to the first say when my brother esau come to you and say whose servant be you and where be you go and whose be these herd ? then say to him these be your servant jacob 's they be an offering for my lord for esau and he himself be come after u . and he give the same order to the second and the third and to all those who be with the herd say this be what you be to say to esau when you see him and you be to say further jacob your servant be come after u . for he say to himself i will take away his wrath by the offering which i have send on and then i will come before him it may be that i will have grace in his eye . so the servant with the offering go on in front and he himself take his rest that night in the tent with his people . and in the night he get up and take with him his two wife and the two servant woman and his eleven child he go over the river jabbok . he take them and send them over the stream with all he have . then jacob be by himself and a man be fight with him till dawn . but when the man saw that he be not able to overcome jacob he give him a blow in the hollow part of his leg so that his leg be damage . and he say to him let me go now for the dawn be near . but jacob say i will not let you go till you have give me your blessing . then he say what be your name ? and he say jacob . and he say your name will no longer be jacob but israel for in your fight with god and with men you have overcome . then jacob say what be your name ? and he say what be my name to you ? then he give him a blessing . and jacob give that place the name of peniel say i have see god face to face and still i be live . and while he be go past peniel the sun come up . and he go with unequal step because of his damage leg . for this reason the child of israel even today never take that muscle in the hollow of the leg a food because the hollow of jacob 's leg be touch .then jacob lift up his eye saw esau come with his four hundred men . so he make a division of the child between leah and rachel and the two woman servant . he put the servant and their child in front leah and her child after them and rachel and joseph at the back . and he himself go before them go down on his face to the earth seven time till he come near his brother . then esau come run up to him and fold him in his arm give him a kiss and the two of them be overcome with weep . then esau lift up his eye saw the woman and the child and say who be these with you ? and he say the child whom god in his mercy have give to your servant . then the servant and their child come near and go down on their face . and leah come near with her child and then joseph and rachel and they do the same . and he say what be all those herd which i saw on the way ? and jacob say they be an offering so that i might have grace in my lord 's eye . but esau say i have enough keep what be yours my brother for yourself . and jacob say not so but if i have grace in your eye take them a a sign of my love for i have see your face a one may see the face of god and you have be please with me . take my offering then with my blessing for god have be very good to me and i have enough so at his strong request he take it . and he say let u go on our journey together and i will go in front . but jacob say my lord may see that the child be only small and there be young one in my flock and herd one day 's over driving will be the destruction of all the flock . do you my lord go on before your servant i will come on slowly at the rate at which the cattle and the child be able to go till i come to my lord at seir . and esau say then keep some of my men with you . and he say what need be there for that if my lord be please with me ? so esau turn back that day go on his way to seir . and jacob go on to succoth where he make a house for himself and put up tent for his cattle for this reason the place be name succoth . so jacob come safely from paddan aram to the town of shechem in the land of canaan and put up his tent near the town . and for a hundred bit of money he get from the child of hamor the builder of shechem the field in which he have put up his tent . and there he put up an altar name it el the god of israel .now dinah the daughter whom leah have by jacob go out to see the woman of that country . and when shechem the son of hamor the hivite who be the chief of that land saw her he take her by force and have connection with her . then his heart go out in love to dinah the daughter of jacob and he say comfort word to her . and shechem say to hamor his father get me this girl for my wife . now jacob have word of what shechem have do to his daughter but his son be in the field with the cattle and jacob say nothing till they come . then hamor the father of shechem come out to have a talk with jacob . now the son of jacob come in from the field when they have news of it and they be wound and very angry because of the shame he have do in israel by have connection with jacob 's daughter and they say such a thing be not to be do . but hamor say to them shechem my son be full of desire for your daughter will you then give her to him for a wife ? and let our two people be join together give your daughter to u and take our daughter for yourselves . go on living with u and the country will be open to you do trade and get property there . and shechem say to her father and her brother if you will give ear to my request whatever you say i will give to you . however great you make the bride price and payment i will give it only let me have the girl for my wife . but the son of jacob give a false answer to shechem and hamor his father because of what have be do to dinah their sister . and they say it be not possible for u to give our sister to one who be without circumcision for that would be a cause of shame to u but on this condition only will we come to an agreement with you if every male among you become like u and undergoes circumcision then we will give our daughter to you and take your daughter to u and go on living with you a one people . but if you will not undergo circumcision a we say then we will take our daughter and go . and their word be please to hamor and his son shechem . and without loss of time the young man do a they say because he have delight in jacob 's daughter and he be the noble of his father 's house . then hamor and shechem his son go to the meeting place of their town and say to the men of the town it be the desire of these men to be at peace with u let them then go on living in this country and do trade here for the country be wide open before them let u take their daughter a wife and let u give them our daughter . but these men will make an agreement with u to go on living with u and to become one people only on the condition that every male among u undergoes circumcision a they have do . then will not their cattle and their good and all their beast be ours ? so let u come to an agreement with them so that they may go on living with u . then all the men of the town give ear to the word of hamor and shechem his son and every male in the town underwent circumcision . but on the third day after before the wound be well two of the son of jacob simeon and levi dinah 's brother take their sword and come into the town by surprise and put all the male to death . and hamor and his son they put to death with the sword and they take dinah from shechem 's house and go away . and the son of jacob come on them when they be wound and make waste the town because of what have be do to their sister they take their flock and their herd and their ass and everything in their town and in their field and all their wealth and all their little one and their wife everything in their house they take and make them waste . and jacob say to simeon and levi you have make trouble for me and give me a bad name among the people of this country among the canaanite and the perizzites and because we be small in number they will come together against me and make war on me and it will be the end of me and all my people . but they say be we to let him make use of our sister a a loose woman ?and god say to jacob go up now to beth el and make your live place there and put up an altar there to the god who come to you when you be in flight from your brother esau . then jacob say to all his people put away the strange god which be among you and make yourselves clean and put on a change of clothing and let u go up to beth el and there i will make an altar to god who give me an answer in the day of my trouble and be with me wherever i go . then they give to jacob all the strange god which they have and the ring which be in their ear and jacob put them away under the holy tree at shechem . so they go on their journey and the fear of god be on the town round about so that they make no attack on the son of jacob . and jacob come to luz in the land of canaan which be the same a beth el he and all his people . and there he make an altar name the place el beth el because it be there he have the vision of god when he be in flight from his brother . and deborah the servant who have take care of rebekah from her birth come to her end and be put to rest near beth el under the holy tree and they give it the name of allon bacuth . now when jacob be on his way from paddan aram god come to him again and bless him say jacob be your name but it will be so no longer from now your name will be israel so he be name israel . and god say to him i be god the ruler of all be fertile and have increase a nation truly a group of nation will come from you and king will be your offspring and the land which i give to abraham and isaac i will give to you and to your seed after you i will give the land . then god go up from him in the place where he have be talk with him . and jacob put up a pillar in the place where he have be talk with god and put a drink offering on it and oil . and he give to the place where god have be talk with him the name of beth el . so they go on from beth el and while they be still some distance from ephrath the pain of birth come on rachel and she have a hard time . and when her pain be very great the woman who be help her say have no fear for now you will have another son . and in the hour when her life go from her for death come to her she give the child the name ben oni but his father give him the name of benjamin . so rachel come to her end and be put to rest on the road to ephrath which be beth lehem . and jacob put up a pillar on her resting place which be name the pillar of the rest place of rachel to this day . and israel go journey on and put up his tent on the other side of the tower of the flock . now while they be live in that country reuben have connection with bilhah his father 's servant woman and israel have news of it . now jacob have twelve son the son of leah reuben jacob 's first son and simeon and levi and judah and issachar and zebulun the son of rachel joseph and benjamin the son of bilhah rachel 's servant dan and naphtali the son of zilpah leah 's servant gad and asher these be the son whom jacob have in paddan aram . and jacob come to his father isaac at mamre at kiriath arba that be hebron where abraham and isaac have be live . and isaac be a hundred and eighty year old . then isaac come to his end and be put to rest with his father 's people an old man after a long life and jacob and esau his son put him in his last resting place .now these be the generation of esau that be to say edom . esau 's wife be woman of canaan adah the daughter of elon the hittite and oholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter of zibeon the hivite and basemath ishmael 's daughter the sister of nebaioth . adah have a son eliphaz and basemath be the mother of reuel oholibamah be the mother of jeush jalam and korah these be the son of esau whose birth take place in the land of canaan . esau take his wife and his son and his daughter and all the people of his house and his beast and his cattle and all his good which he have get together in the land of canaan and go into the land of seir away from his brother jacob . for their wealth be so great that the land be not wide enough for the two of them and all their cattle . so esau make his living place in the hill country of seir esau be edom . and these be the generation of esau the father of the edomites in the hill country of seir these be the name of esau 's son eliphaz the son of esau 's wife adah and reuel the son of esau 's wife basemath . the son of eliphaz be teman omar zepho gatam and kenaz . and eliphaz the son of esau have connection with a woman name timna who give birth to amalek all these be the child of esau 's wife adah . and these be the son of reuel nahath zerah shammah and mizzah they be the child of esau 's wife basemath . and these be the son of esau 's wife oholibamah the daughter of anah the daughter of zibeon she be the mother of jeush jalam and korah . these be the chief among the son of esau the son of eliphaz esau 's first son teman omar zepho kenaz korah gatam amalek all these be chief in the land of edom the offspring of eliphaz the seed of adah . and these be the son of esau 's son reuel nahath zerah shammah mizzah these be the chief of reuel in the land of edom the child of esau 's wife basemath . and these be the son of esau 's wife oholibamah jeush jalam and korah these be the chief who come from esau 's wife oholibamah daughter of anah . these be the son of esau that be edom and these be their chief . these be the son of seir the horite who be live in that country lotan shobal zibeon anah dishon ezer and dishan these be the chief of the horites offspring of seir in the land of edom . the child of lotan be hori and hemam lotan 's sister be timna . and these be the child of shobal alvan manahath ebal shepho and onam . and these be the child of zibeon aiah and anah that same anah who make the discovery of the water spring in the waste land when he be look after the ass of his father zibeon . and these be the child of anah dishon and oholibamah his daughter . these be the child of dishon hemdan eshban ithran and keran . these be the child of ezer bilhan zaavan and akan . these be the child of dishan uz and aran . these be the horite chief lotan shobal zibeon anah dishon ezer and dishan . such be the horite chief in their order in the land of seir . and these be the king who be rule in the land of edom before there be any king over the child of israel . bela son of beor be king in edom and the name of his chief town be dinhabah . at his death jobab son of zerah of bozrah become king in his place . and at the death of jobab husham from the country of the temanites become king in his place . and at the death of husham hadad son of bedad who overcome the midianites in the field of moab become king his chief town be name avith . and at the death of hadad samlah of masrekah become king . and at the death of samlah shaul of rehoboth by the river become king in his place . and at the death of shaul baal hanan son of achbor become king . and at the death of baal hanan hadar become king in his place his chief town be name pau and his wife 's name be mehetabel she be the daughter of matred the daughter of me zahab . these be the name of the chief of esau in the order of their family and their place timna alvah jetheth oholibamah elah pinon kenaz teman mibzar magdiel iram these be the edomite chief in their place in their heritage this be esau the father of the edomites .now jacob be live in the land where his father have make a place for himself in the land of canaan . these be the generation of jacob joseph a boy seventeen year old be look after the flock together with his brother the son of bilhah and zilpah his father 's wife and joseph give their father a bad account of them . now the love which israel have for joseph be great than his love for all his other child because he get him when he be an old man and he have a long coat make for him . and because his brother saw that joseph be dearer to his father than all the others they be full of hate for him and would not say a kind word to him . now joseph have a dream and he give his brother an account of it which make their hate great than ever . and he say to them let me give you the story of my dream . we be in the field get the grain stem together and my grain keep upright and yours come round and go down on the earth before mine . and his brother say to him be you to be our king ? will you have authority over u ? and because of his dream and his word their hate for him become great than ever . then he have another dream and give his brother an account of it say i have have another dream the sun and the moon and eleven star give honour to me . and he give word of it to his father and his brother but his father protesting say what sort of a dream be this ? be i and your mother and your brother to go down on our face to the earth before you ? and his brother be full of envy but his father keep his word in mind . now his brother go to keep watch over their father 's flock in shechem . and israel say to joseph be not your brother with the flock in shechem ? come i will send you to them . and he say to him here be i. and he say to him go now and see if your brother be well and how the flock be then come back and give me word . so he send him out of the valley of hebron and he come to shechem . and a man saw him wander in the country and say to him what be you look for ? and he say i be look for my brother please give me word of where they be keep their flock . and the man say they have go away from here for they say in my hearing let u go to dothan . so joseph go after them and come up with them at dothan . but they saw him when he be a long way off and before he come near them they make a secret design against him to put him to death say to one another see here come this dreamer . let u now put him to death and put his body into one of these hole and we will say an evil beast have put him to death then we will see what become of his dream . but reuben hearing these word get him out of their hand say let u not take his life . do not put him to a violent death but let him be place in one of the hole this he say to keep him safe from their hand with the purpose of take him back to his father again . so when joseph come to his brother they take off his long coat which he have on and they take him and put him in the hole now the hole have no water in it . then seat themselves they take their meal and look up they saw a travel band of ishmaelites come from gilead on their way to egypt with spice and perfume on their camel . and judah say to his brother what profit be there in put our brother to death and cover up his blood ? let u give him to these ishmaelites for a price and let u not put violent hand on him for he be our brother our flesh . and his brother give ear to him . and some trader from midian go by so pull joseph up out of the hole they give him to the ishmaelites for twenty bit of silver and they take him to egypt . now when reuben come back to the hole joseph be not there and give sign of grief he go back to his brother and say the child be go what be i to do ? then they take joseph 's coat and put on it some of the blood from a young goat which they have put to death and they take the coat to their father and say we come across this be it your son 's coat or not ? and he saw that it be and say it be my son 's coat an evil beast have put him to death without doubt joseph have come to a cruel end . then jacob give sign of grief put on haircloth and go on weep for his son day after day . and all his son and all his daughter come to give him comfort but he would not be comfort say with weep i will go down to the underworld to my son . so great be his father 's sorrow for him . and in egypt the men of midian give him for a price to potiphar a captain of high position in pharaoh 's house .now at that time judah go away from his brother and become the friend of a man of adullam name hirah . and there he saw the daughter of a certain man of canaan name shua and take her a his wife . and she give birth to a son and he give him the name er . and again she give birth to a son and he give him the name onan . then she have another son to whom she give the name shelah she be at chezib when the birth take place . and judah take a wife for his first son er and her name be tamar . now er judah 's first son do evil in the eye of the lord so that he put him to death . then judah say to onan go in to your brother 's wife and do what it be right for a husband 's brother to do make her your wife and get offspring for your brother . but onan seeing that the offspring would not be his go in to his brother 's wife but let his seed go on to the earth so that he might not get offspring for his brother . and what he do be evil in the eye of the lord so that he put him to death like his brother . then judah say to tamar his daughter in law go back to your father 's house and keep yourself a a widow till my son shelah become a man for he have in his mind the thought that death might come to him a it have come to his brother . so tamar go back to her father 's house . and after a time bath shua judah 's wife come to her end and after judah be comfort for her loss he go to timnah where they be cut the wool of his sheep and his friend hirah of adullam go with him . and when tamar have news that her father in law be go up to timnah to the wool cut she take off her widow 's clothing and cover herself with her veil she take her seat near enaim on the road to timnah for she saw that shelah be now a man but she have not be make his wife . when judah saw her he take her to be a loose woman of the town because her face be cover . and turn to her by the roadside he say to her let me come in to you for he have no idea that she be his daughter in law . and she say what will you give me a my price ? and he say i will give you a young goat from the flock . and she say what will you give me a a sign till you send it ? and he say what would you have ? and she say your ring and it cord and the stick in your hand . so he give them to her and go in to her and she become with child by him . then she get up and go away and take off her veil and put on her widow 's clothing . then judah send his friend hirah with the young goat to get back the thing which he have give a a sign to the woman but she be not there . and he put question to the men of the place say where be the loose woman who be in enaim by the wayside ? and they say there be no such woman there . so he go back to judah and say i have not see her and the men of the place say that there be no such woman there . and judah say let her keep the thing so that we may not be sham i send the young goat but you do not see the woman . now about three month after this word come to judah that tamar his daughter in law have be act like a loose woman and be with child . and judah say take her out and let her be burn . and while she be be take out she send word to her father in law say the man whose property these thing be be the father of my child say then whose be this ring and this cord and this stick ? then judah say openly that they be his and say she be more upright than i be for i do not give her to shelah my son . and he have no more connection with her . and when the time come for her to give birth it be clear that there be two child in her body . and while she be in the act of give birth one of them put out his hand and the woman who be with her put a red thread round his hand say this one come out first . but then he take his hand back again and his brother come first to birth and the woman say what an opening you have make for yourself ! so he be name perez . and then his brother come out with the red thread round his hand and he be name zerah .now joseph be take down to egypt and potiphar the egyptian a captain of high position in pharaoh 's house get him for a price from the ishmaelites who have take him there . and the lord be with joseph and he do well and he be live in the house of his master the egyptian . and his master saw that the lord be with him make everything he do go well . and have a high opinion of joseph a his servant he make him the overseer of his house and give him control over all he have . and from the time when he make him overseer and give him control of all his property the blessing of the lord be with the egyptian because of joseph the blessing of the lord be on all he have in the house and in the field . and he give joseph control of all his property keep no account of anything but only the food which be put before him . now joseph be very beautiful in form and face . and after a time his master 's wife look on joseph with desire say to him be my lover . but he would not and say to her you see that my master keep no account of what i do in his house and have put all his property in my control so that no one have more authority in this house than i have he have keep nothing back from me but you because you be his wife how then may i do this great wrong sin against god ? and day after day she go on request joseph to come to her and be her lover but he would not give ear to her . now one day he go into the house to do his work and not one of the men of the house be inside . and pull at his coat she say come to my bed but slip out of his coat he go run away . and when she saw that he have get away let her keep his coat she send for the men of her house and say to them see he have let a hebrew come here and make sport of u he come to my bed and i give a loud cry and hearing it he go run out without his coat . and she keep his coat by her till his master come back . then she give him the same story say the hebrew servant whom you have take into our house come in to make sport of me and when i give a loud cry he go run out without his coat . and hear his wife 's account of what his servant have do he become very angry . and joseph 's master take him and put him in prison in the place where the king 's prisoner be keep in chain and he be there in the prison house . but the lord be with joseph and be good to him and make the keeper of the prison his friend . and the keeper of the prison put all the prisoner under joseph 's control and he be responsible for whatever be do there . and the keeper of the prison give no attention to anything which be under his care because the lord be with him and the lord make everything he do go well .now after these thing the chief servant who have the care of the wine and the chief bread maker in pharaoh 's house do something against pharaoh 's order and pharaoh be angry with his two servant with the chief wine servant and the chief bread maker and he put them in prison under the care of the captain of the army in the same prison where joseph himself be shut up . and the captain put them in joseph 's care and he do what be need for them and they be keep in prison for some time . and these two have a dream on the same night the chief wine servant and the chief bread maker of the king of egypt who be in prison the two of them have dream with a special sense . and in the morning when joseph come to them he saw that they be look sad . and he say to the servant of pharaoh who be in prison with him why be you look so sad ? then they say to him we have have a dream and no one be able to give u the sense . and joseph say do not the sense of dream come from god ? what be your dream ? then the chief wine servant give joseph an account of his dream and say in my dream i saw a vine before me and on the vine be three branch and it seem a if it put out bud and flower and from them come grape ready for cut . and pharaoh 's cup be in my hand and i take the grape and crush them into pharaoh 's cup give the cup into pharaoh 's hand . then joseph say this be the sense of your dream the three branch be three day after three day pharaoh will give you honour and put you back into your place and you will give him his cup a you do before when you be his wine servant . but keep me in mind when thing go well for you and be good to me and say a good word for me to pharaoh and get me out of this prison for truly i be take by force from the land of the hebrew and i have do nothing for which i might be put in prison . now when the chief bread maker saw that the first dream have a good sense he say to joseph i have a dream and in my dream there be three basket of white bread on my head and in the top basket be all sort of cooked meat for pharaoh and the bird be take them out of the basket on my head . then joseph say this be the sense of your dream the three basket be three day after three day pharaoh will take you out of prison hang you on a tree so that your flesh will be food for bird . now the third day be pharaoh 's birthday and he give a feast for all his servant and he give honour to the chief wine servant and the chief bread maker among the others . and he put the chief wine servant back in his old place and he give the cup into pharaoh 's hand . but the chief bread maker be put to death by hang a joseph have say . but the wine servant do not keep joseph in mind or give a thought to him .now after two year have go by pharaoh have a dream and in his dream he be by the side of the nile and out of the nile come seven cow good look and fat and their food be the river grass . and after them seven other cow come out of the nile poor look and thin and they be by the side of the other cow . and the seven thin cow make a meal of the seven fat cow . then pharaoh come out of his sleep . but he go to sleep again and have a second dream in which he saw seven head of grain full and good all on one stem . and after them come up seven other head thin and waste by the east wind . and the seven thin head make a meal of the good head . and when pharaoh be awake he saw it be a dream . and in the morning his spirit be troubled and he send for all the wise men of egypt and all the holy men and put his dream before them but no one be able to give him the sense of it . then the chief wine servant say to pharaoh the memory of my sin come back to me now pharaoh have be angry with his servant and have put me in prison in the house of the captain of the army together with the chief bread maker and we have a dream on the same night the two of u and the dream have a special sense . and there be with u a young hebrew the captain 's servant and when we put our dream before him he give u the sense of them . and it come about a he say i be put back in my place and the bread maker be put to death by hang . then pharaoh sent for joseph and they take him quickly out of prison and when his hair have be cut and his dress change he come before pharaoh . and pharaoh say to joseph i have have a dream and no one be able to give me the sense of it now it have come to my ear that you be able to give the sense of a dream when it be put before you . then joseph say without god there will be no answer of peace for pharaoh . then pharaoh say in my dream i be by the side of the nile and out of the nile come seven cow fat and good look and their food be the river grass then after them come seven other cow very thin and poor look bad than any i ever saw in the land of egypt and the thin cow make a meal of the seven fat cow who come up first and even with the fat cow inside them they seem as bad a before . and so i come out of my sleep . and again in a dream i saw seven head of grain full and good come up on one stem and then i saw seven other head dry thin and waste by the east wind come up after them and the seven thin head make a meal of the seven good head and i put this dream before the wise men but not one of them be able to give me the sense of it . then joseph say these two dream have the same sense god have make clear to pharaoh what he be about to do . the seven fat cow be seven year and the seven good head of grain be seven year the two have the same sense . the seven thin and poor look cow who come up after them be seven year and the seven head of grain dry and waste by the east wind be seven year when there will be no food . a i say to pharaoh before god have make clear to him what he be about to do . seven year be come in which there will be great wealth of grain in egypt and after that will come seven year when there will not be enough food and the memory of the good year will go from men 's mind and the land will be make waste by the bad year and men will have no memory of the good time because of the need which will come after for it will be very bitter . and this dream come to pharaoh twice because this thing be certain and god will quickly make it come about . and now let pharaoh make search for a man of wisdom and good sense and put him in authority over the land of egypt . let pharaoh do this and let him put overseer over the land of egypt to put in store a fifth part of the produce of the land in the good year . and let them get together all the food in those good year and make a store of grain under pharaoh 's control for the use of the town and let them keep it . and let that food be keep in store for the land till the seven bad year which be to come in egypt so that the land may not come to destruction through need of food . and this seem good to pharaoh and to all his servant . then pharaoh say to his servant where may we get such a man a this a man in whom be the spirit of god ? and pharaoh say to joseph see that god have make all this clear to you there be no other man of such wisdom and good sense a you you then be to be over my house and all my people will be rule by your word only a king will i be great than you . and pharaoh say to joseph see i have put you over all the land of egypt . then pharaoh take off his ring from his hand and put it on joseph 's hand and he have him clothe with the best linen and put a chain of gold round his neck and he make him take his seat in the second of his carriage and they go before him cry make way ! so he make him ruler over all the land of egypt . then pharaoh say to joseph i be pharaoh and without your order no man may do anything in all the land of egypt . and pharaoh give joseph the name of zaphnath paaneah and he give him asenath the daughter of poti phera the priest of on to be his wife . so joseph go through all the land of egypt . now joseph be thirty year old when he come before pharaoh king of egypt . and joseph go out from before the face of pharaoh and go through all the land of egypt . now in the seven good year the earth give fruit in mass . and joseph get together all the food of those seven year and make a store of food in the town the produce of the field round every town be store up in the town . so he get together a store of grain like the sand of the sea so great a store that after a time he give up measure it for it might not be measure . and before the time of need joseph have two son to whom asenath the daughter of poti phera priest of on give birth . and to the first he give the name manasseh for he say god have take away from me all memory of my hard life and of my father 's house . and to the second he give the name ephraim for he say god have give me fruit in the land of my sorrow . and so the seven good year in egypt come to an end . then come the first of the seven year of need a joseph have say and in every other land they be short of food but in the land of egypt there be bread . and when all the land of egypt be in need of food the people come cry to pharaoh for bread and pharaoh say to the people go to joseph and whatever he say to you do it . and everywhere on the earth they be short of food then joseph open all his store house give the people of egypt grain for money so great be the need of food in the land of egypt . and all land send to egypt to joseph to get grain for the need be great over all the earth .now jacob hearing that there be grain in egypt say to his son why be you look at one another ? and he say i have have news that there be grain in egypt go down there and get grain for u so that life and not death may be ours . so joseph 's ten brother go down to get grain from egypt . but jacob do not send benjamin joseph 's brother with them for fear a he say that some evil might come to him . and the son of israel come with all the others to get grain for they be very short of food in the land of canaan . now joseph be ruler over all the land and it be he who give out the grain to all the people of the land and joseph 's brother come before him and go down on their face to the earth . and when joseph saw his brother it be clear to him who they be but he make himself strange to them and talk roughly to them say where do you come from ? and they say from the land of canaan to get food . now though joseph saw that these be his brother they have no idea who he be . then the memory of his dream about them come back to joseph and he say to them you have come secretly to see how poor the land be . and they say to him not so my lord your servant have come with money to get food . we be all one man 's son we be true men we have not come with any secret purpose . and he say to them no but you have come to see how poor the land be . then they say we your servant be twelve brother son of one man in the land of canaan the young of u be now with our father and one be dead . and joseph say it be a i say you have come with some secret purpose but in this way will you be put to the test by the life of pharaoh you will not go away from this place till your young brother come here . send one of your number to get your brother and the rest of you will be keep in prison so that your word may be test to see if you be true if not by the life of pharaoh your purpose be certainly secret . so he put them in prison for three day . and on the third day joseph say to them do this if you would keep your life for i be a god fear man if you be true men let one of you be keep in prison while you go and take grain for the need of your family and come back to me with your young brother so that your word may be see to be true and you will not be put to death . this be what you be to do . and they say to one another truly we do wrong to our brother for we saw his grief of mind and we do not give ear to his prayer that be why this trouble have come on u . and reuben say to them do i not say to you do the child no wrong ? but you give no attention so now punishment have come on u for his blood . they be not conscious that the sense of their word be clear to joseph for he have be talk to them through one who have knowledge of their language . and turn away from them he be overcome with weep then he go on talk to them again and take simeon and put chain on him before their eye . then joseph give order for their bag to be make full of grain and for every man 's money to be put back into his bag and for food to be give them for the journey which be do . then they put the bag of grain on their ass and go away . now at their night 's rest place one of them open his bag to give his as some food saw his money in the mouth of the bag . and he say to his brother my money have be give back it be in my bag then their heart become full of fear and turn to one another they say what be this which god have do to u ? so when they come to jacob their father in the land of canaan they give him an account of all their experience say the man who be the ruler of the country be rough with u and put u in prison say that we have come with a secret evil purpose . and we say to him we be true men we have no evil design we be twelve brother son of our father one be dead and the young be now with our father in the land of canaan . and the ruler of the land say in this way i may be certain that you be true men let one of you be keep here with me while you go and take grain for the need of your family and come back to me with your young brother then i will be certain that you be true men and i will give your brother back to you and let you do trade in the land . and when they take the grain out of their bag it be see that every man 's parcel of money be in his bag and when they and their father saw the money they be full of fear . and jacob their father say to them you have take my child from me joseph be go and simeon be go and now you would take benjamin away all these thing have come on me . and reuben say put my two son to death if i do not come back to you with him let him be in my care and i will give him safely back to you . and he say i will not let my son go down with you for his brother be dead and he be all i have if evil overtake him on the journey then through you will my grey head go down to the underworld in sorrow .now the land be in bitter need of food . and when the grain which they have get in egypt be all use up their father say to them go again and get u a little food . and judah say to him the man say to u with an oath you be not to come before me again without your brother . if you will let our brother go with u we will go down and get food but if you will not send him we will not go down for the man say to u you be not to come before me if your brother be not with you . and israel say why be you so cruel to me a to say to him that you have a brother ? and they say the man put a number of question to u about ourselves and our family say be your father still live ? have you another brother ? and we have to give him answer how be we to have any idea that he would say come back with your brother ? then judah say to israel his father send the boy with me and let u be up and go so that we and you and our little one may not come to destruction . put him into my care and make me responsible for him if i do not give him safely back to you let mine be the sin for ever . truly if we have not let the time go by we might have come back again by now . then their father israel say to them if it have to be so then do this take of the best fruit of the land in your vessel to give the man perfume and honey and spice and nut and take twice as much money with you that be to say take back the money which be put in your bag for it may have be an error and take your brother and go back to the man and may god the ruler of all give you mercy before the man so that he may give you back your other brother and benjamin . if my child be to be take from me there be no help for it . so they take what their father say for the man and twice as much money in their hand and benjamin and go on their journey to egypt and come before joseph . and when joseph saw benjamin he say to his chief servant take these men into my house and make ready a meal for they will take food with me in the middle of the day . and the servant do a joseph say and take the men into joseph 's house . now the men be full of fear because they have be take into joseph 's house and they say it be because of the money which be put back in our bag the first time he be look for something against u so that he may come down on u and take u and our ass for his use . so they go up to joseph 's chief servant at the door of the house and say o my lord we only come down the first time to get food and when we come to our night 's rest place on open our bag we saw that every man 's money be in the mouth of his bag all our money in full weight and we have it with u to give it back as well a more money with which to get food we have no idea who put our money in our bag . then the servant say peace be with you have no fear your god even the god of your father have put wealth in your bag for you i have your money . then he let simeon come out to them . and the servant take them into joseph 's house and give them water for wash their foot and he give their ass food . and they get ready the thing for joseph before he come in the middle of the day for word be give to them that they be to have a meal there . and when joseph come in they give him the thing which they have for him and go down to the earth before him . and he say how be you ? be your father well the old man of whom you be talk to me ? be he still live ? and they say your servant our father be well he be still live . and they go down on their face before him . then lift up his eye he saw benjamin his brother his mother 's son and he say be this your young brother of whom you give me word ? and he say god be good to you my son . then joseph 's heart go out to his brother and he go quickly into his room for he be overcome with weep . then after wash his face he come out and control his feeling say put food before u . and they put a meal ready for him by himself and for them by themselves and for the egyptian who be with him by themselves because the egyptian may not take food with the hebrew for that would make them unclean . and they be all give their seat before him in order of birth from the old to the young so that they be look at one another in wonder . and joseph send food to them from his table but he send five time as much to benjamin a to any of the others . and they take wine freely with him .then he give order to the servant who be over his house say put as much food into the men 's bag a will go into them and put every man 's money in the mouth of his bag and put my cup my silver cup in the young one 's bag with his money . so he do a joseph say . and at dawn the men with their ass be send away . and when they have go only a little way out of the town joseph say to the servant who be over his house go after them and when you overtake them say to them why have you do evil in reward for good ? be not this the cup from which my lord take wine and by which he get knowledge of the future ? truly you have do evil . so he overtake them and say these word to them . and they say to him why do my lord say such word a these ? far be it from your servant to do such a thing see the money which be in the mouth of our bag we give back to you when we come again from canaan how then might we take silver or gold from your lord 's house ? if it come to light that any of your servant have do this let him be put to death and we will be your lord 's servant . and he say let it be a you say he in whose bag it be see will become my servant and you will not be responsible . then every man quickly get his bag down and undid it . and he make a search start with the old and end with the young and the cup be in benjamin 's bag . then in bitter grief they put the bag on the ass again and go back to the town . so judah and his brother come to joseph 's house and he be still there and they go down on their face before him . and joseph say what be this thing which you have do ? have you no think that such a man a i would have power to see what be secret ? and judah say what be we to say to my lord ? how may we put ourselves right in his eye ? god have make clear the sin of your servant now we be in your hand we and the man in whose bag your cup be see . then he say far be it from me to do so but the man who have my cup will be my servant and you may go back to your father in peace . then judah come near him and say let your servant say a word in my lord 's ear and let not your wrath be burn against your servant for you be in the place of pharaoh to u . my lord say to his servant have you a father or a brother ? and we say to my lord we have an old father and a young child whom he have when he be old his brother be dead and he be the only son of his mother and be very dear to his father . and you say to your servant let him come down to me with you so that i may see him . and we say to my lord his father will not let him go for if he go away his father would come to his death . but you say to your servant if your young brother do not come with you you will not see my face again . and when we go back to your servant our father we give him an account of my lord 's word . and our father say go again and get u a little food . and we say only if our young brother go with u will we go down for we may not see the man 's face again if our young brother be not with u . and our father say to u you have knowledge that my wife give me two son the one go away from me and i say truly he have come to a violent death and from that time i have not see him if now you take this one from me and some evil come to him you will make my grey head go down in sorrow to the underworld . if then i go back to your servant my father without the boy because his life and the boy 's life be one when he see that the boy be not with u he will come to his death and our father 's grey head will go down in sorrow to the underworld . for i make myself responsible for the boy to my father say if i do not give him safely back to you let mine be the sin for ever . so now let me be my lord 's servant here in place of the boy and let him go back with his brother . for how may i go back to my father without the boy and see the evil which will come on my father ?then joseph unable to keep back his feeling before those who be with him give order for everyone to be send away and no one be present when he make clear to his brother who he be . and so loud be his weeping that it come to the ear of the egyptian and all pharaoh 's house . and joseph say to his brother i be joseph be my father still live ? but his brother be not able to give him an answer for they be trouble before him . then joseph say to his brother come near to me . and they come near and he say i be joseph your brother whom you send into egypt . now do not be trouble or angry with yourselves for send me away because god send me before you to be the saviour of your life . for these two year have be year of need and there be still five more year to come in which there will be no ploughing or cutting of grain . god send me before you to keep you and yours live on earth so that you might become a great nation . so now it be not you who send me here but god and he have make me a a father to pharaoh and lord of all his house and ruler over all the land of egypt . now go quickly to my father and say to him your son joseph say god have make me ruler over all the land of egypt come down to me straight away the land of goshen will be your live place and you will be near me you and your child and your child 's child and your flock and herd and all you have and there i will take care of you so that you and your family may not be in need for there be still five bad year to come . now truly your eye see and the eye of my brother benjamin see that it be my mouth which say these thing to you . give my father word of all my glory in egypt and of all you have see and come back quickly with my father . then weep he take benjamin in his arm and benjamin himself be weep on joseph 's neck . then he give a kiss to all his brother weep over them and after that his brother have no fear of talk to him . and news of these thing go through pharaoh 's house and it be say that joseph 's brother be come and it seem good to pharaoh and his servant . and pharaoh say to joseph say to your brother put your good on your beast and go back to the land of canaan and get your father and your family and come back to me and i will give you all the good thing of egypt and the fat of the land will be your food . and say to them this you be to do take cart from the land of egypt for your little one and for your wife and get your father and come back . and take no thought for your good for the best of all the land of egypt be yours . and the child of israel do a he say and joseph give them cart a have be order by pharaoh and food for their journey . to every one of them he give three change of clothing but to benjamin he give three hundred bit of silver and five change of clothing . and to his father he send ten ass with good thing from egypt on their back and ten she asses with grain and bread and food for his father on the journey . and he send his brother on their way and say to them see that you have no argument on the road . so they go up from egypt and come to the land of canaan to their father jacob . and they say to him joseph be live and be ruler over all the land of egypt . and at this word jacob be quite overcome for he have no faith in it . and they give him an account of everything joseph have say to them and when he saw the cart which joseph have send for them his spirit come back to him and israel say it be enough joseph my son be still live i will go and see him before my death .and israel go on his journey with all he have and come to beer sheba where he make offering to the god of his father isaac . and god say to israel in a night vision jacob jacob . and he say here be i. and he say i be god the god of your father go down to egypt without fear for i will make a great nation of you there i will go down with you to egypt and i will see that you come back again and at your death joseph will put his hand on your eye . then jacob go on from beer sheba and the son of jacob take their father and their little one and their wife in the cart which pharaoh have send for them . and they take their cattle and all the good which they have get in the land of canaan and come to egypt even jacob and all his seed his son and his son ' son his daughter and his daughter ' son and all his family he take with him into egypt . and these be the name of the child of israel who come into egypt even jacob and all his son reuben jacob 's old son and the son of reuben hanoch and pallu and hezron and carmi and the son of simeon jemuel and jamin and ohad and jachin and zohar and shaul the son of a woman of canaan and the son of levi gershon kohath and merari and the son of judah er and onan and shelah and perez and zerah but er and onan have come to their death in the land of canaan and the son of perez be hezron and hamul . and the son of issachar tola and puah and job and shimron and the son of zebulun sered and elon and jahleel all these together with his daughter dinah be the child of leah whom jacob have by her in paddan aram they be thirty three in number . and the son of gad ziphion and haggi shuni and ezbon eri and arodi and areli and the son of asher jimnah and ishvah and ishvi and beriah and sarah their sister and the son of beriah heber and malchiel . these be the child of zilpah whom laban give to his daughter leah and jacob have these sixteen child by her . the son of jacob 's wife rachel joseph and benjamin . and joseph have manasseh and ephraim in the land of egypt by asenath the daughter of poti phera priest of on . and the son of benjamin be belah and becher and ashbel gera and naaman ehi and rosh muppim and huppim and ard . all these be the child of rachel whom jacob have by her fourteen person . and the son of dan be hushim . and the son of naphtali jahzeel and guni and jezer and shillem . these be the child of bilhah whom laban give to his daughter rachel seven person . all the person who come with jacob into egypt the offspring of his body be sixty six without take into account the wife of jacob 's son . and the son of joseph whom he have in egypt be two . seventy person of the family of jacob come into egypt . now he have send judah before him to goshen to get word from joseph and so they come to the land of goshen . and joseph get his carriage ready and go to goshen for the meeting with his father and when he come before him he put his arm round his neck weeping . and israel say to joseph now that i have see you live again i be ready for death . and joseph say to his brother and to his father 's people i will go and give the news to pharaoh and say to him my brother and my father 's people from the land of canaan have come to me and these men be keeper of sheep and owner of cattle and have with them their flock and their herd and all they have . now when pharaoh send for you and say what be your business ? you be to say your servant have be keeper of cattle from our early day up to now like our father in this way you will be able to have the land of goshen for yourselves because keeper of sheep be unclean in the eye of the egyptian .then joseph go to pharaoh and say my father and my brother with their flock and their herd and all they have be come from canaan and be now in the land of goshen . and he take five of his brother to pharaoh . and pharaoh say to them what be your business ? and they say your servant be keeper of sheep a our father be before u . and they say to pharaoh we have come to make a living in this land because we have no grass for our flock in the land of canaan so now let your servant make a place for themselves in the land of goshen . and pharaoh say to joseph let them have the land of goshen and if there be any able men among them put them over my cattle . and jacob and his son come to joseph in egypt and when word of it come to the ear of pharaoh king of egypt he say to joseph your father and brother have come to you all the land of egypt be before you let your father and your brother have the best of the land for their resting place . then joseph make his father jacob come before pharaoh and jacob give him his blessing . and pharaoh say to him how old be you ? and jacob say the year of my wandering have be a hundred and thirty small in number and full of sorrow have be the year of my life and less than the year of the wandering of my father . and jacob give pharaoh his blessing and go out from before him . and joseph make a place for his father and his brother and give them a heritage in the land of egypt in the best of the land the land of rameses a pharaoh have give order . and joseph take care of his father and his brother and all his father 's people give them food for the need of their family . now there be no food to be have in all the land so that all egypt and canaan be waste from need of food . and all the money in egypt and in the land of canaan which have be give for grain come into the hand of joseph and he put it in pharaoh 's house . and when all the money in egypt and canaan be go the egyptian come to joseph and say give u bread would you have u come to destruction before your eye ? for we have no more money . and joseph say give me your cattle i will give you grain in exchange for your cattle if your money be all go . so they take their cattle to joseph and he give them bread in exchange for their horse and flock and herd and ass so all that year he give them food in exchange for their cattle . and when that year be end they come to him in the second year and say we may not keep it from our lord 's knowledge that all our money be go and all the herd of cattle be my lord 's there be nothing more to give my lord but our body and our land be we to come to destruction before your eye we and our land ? take u and our land and give u bread and we and our land will be servant to pharaoh and give u seed so that we may have life and the land may not become waste . so joseph get all the land in egypt for pharaoh for every egyptian give up his land in exchange for food because of their great need so all the land become pharaoh 's . and a for the people he make servant of them town by town from one end of egypt to the other . only he do not take the land of the priest for the priest have their food give them by pharaoh and have what pharaoh give them they have no need to give up their land . then joseph say to the people i have make you and your land this day the property of pharaoh here be seed for you to put in your field . and when the grain be cut you be to give a fifth part to pharaoh and four part will be yours for seed and food and for your family and your little one . and they say to him truly you have keep u from death may we have grace in your eye and we will be pharaoh 's servant . then joseph make a law which be in force to this day that pharaoh be to have the fifth part only the land of the priest do not become his . and so israel be live among the egyptian in the land of goshen and they get property there and become very great in number and in wealth . and jacob be live in the land of goshen for seventeen year so the year of his life be a hundred and forty seven . and the time of his death come near and he send for his son joseph and say to him if now i be dear to you put your hand under my leg and take an oath that you will not put me to rest in egypt but when i go to my father you be to take me out of egypt and put me to rest in their last resting place . and he say i will do so . and he say take an oath to me and he take an oath to him and israel give worship on the bed 's head .now after these thing word come to joseph that his father be ill and he take with him his son manasseh and ephraim . and when they say to jacob your son joseph be come to see you then israel get all his strength together have himself lift up in his bed . and jacob say to joseph god the ruler of all come to me in a vision at luz in the land of canaan and give me his blessing and say to me truly i will make you fertile and give you increase and will make of you a great family of nation and i will give this land to your seed after you to be their heritage for ever . and now your two son who come to birth in egypt before i come to you here be mine ephraim and manasseh will be mine in the same way a reuben and simeon be . and any other offspring which you have after them will be yours and will be name after their brother in their heritage . and a for me when i come from paddan death overtook rachel on the way when we be still some distance from ephrath and i put her to rest there on the road to ephrath which be beth lehem . then israel look at joseph 's son say who be these ? and joseph say to his father they be my son whom god have give me in this land . and he say let them come near me and i will give them a blessing . now because israel be old his eye be no long clear and he be not able to see . so he make them come near to him and he give them a kiss fold them in his arm . and israel say to joseph i have no hope of see your face again but god in his mercy have let me see you and your child . then joseph take them from between his knee and go down on his face to the earth . then take ephraim with his right hand joseph put him at israel 's left side and with his left hand he put manasseh at israel 's right side place them near him . and israel stretch out his right hand put it on the head of ephraim the young and his left hand on the head of manasseh cross his hand on purpose for manasseh be the old . and he give joseph a blessing say may the god to whom my father abraham and isaac give worship the god who have take care of me all my life till this day the angel who have be my saviour from all evil send his bless on these child and let my name and the name of my father abraham and isaac be give to them and let them become a great nation in the earth . now when joseph saw that his father have put his right hand on the head of ephraim it do not seem right to him and lift his father 's hand he would have put it on the head of manasseh . and joseph say to his father not so my father for this be the old put your right hand on his head . but his father would not say i be do it on purpose my son he will certainly become a nation and a great one but his young brother will be great than he and his seed will become a great family of nation . so he give them his blessing that day say you will be the sign of bless in israel for they will say may god make you like ephraim and manasseh and he put ephraim before manasseh . then israel say to joseph now my death be near but god will be with you guide you back to the land of your father . and i have give you more than your brother even shechem a your heritage which i take from the amorites with my sword and my bow .and jacob sent for his son and say come together all of you so that i may give you news of your fate in future time . come near o son of jacob and give ear to the word of israel your father . reuben you be my old son the first fruit of my strength first in pride and first in power but because you be uncontrolled the first place will not be yours for you go up to your father 's bed even his bride bed and make it unclean . simeon and levi be brother deceit and force be their secret design . take no part in their secret o my soul keep far away o my heart from their meeting for in their wrath they put men to death and for their pleasure even ox be wound . a curse on their passion for it be bitter and on their wrath for it be cruel . i will let their heritage in jacob be break up drive them from their place in israel . to you judah will your brother give praise your hand will be on the neck of your hater your father 's son will go down to the earth before you . judah be a young lion like a lion full of meat you have become great my son now he take his rest like a lion stretch out and like an old lion by whom will his sleep be break ? the rod of authority will not be take from judah and he will not be without a law giver till he come who have the right to it and the people will put themselves under his rule . knot his as 's cord to the vine and his young as to the best vine wash his robe in wine and his clothing in the blood of grape his eye will be dark with wine and his teeth white with milk . the rest place of zebulun will be by the sea and he will be a harbour for ship the edge of his land will be by zidon . issachar be a strong as stretch out among the flock and he saw that rest be good and the land be please so he let them put weight on his back and become a servant . dan will be the judge of his people a one of the tribe of israel . may dan be a snake in the way a horn snake by the road bite the horse 's foot so that the horseman have a fall . i have be wait for your salvation o lord . gad an army will come against him but he will come down on them in their flight . asher 's bread be fat he give delicate food for king . naphtali be a roe let loose give fair young one . joseph be a young ox whose step be turn to the fountain he be trouble by the archer they send out their arrow against him cruelly wound him but their bow be break by a strong one and the cord of their arm be cut by the strength of jacob by the name of the stone of israel even by the god of your father who will be your help and by the ruler of all who will make you full with blessing from heaven on high blessing of the deep stretch out under the earth blessing of the breast and of the fertile body blessing of son old and young to the father blessing of the old mountain and the fruit of the eternal hill let them come on the head of joseph on the crown of him who be separate from his brother . benjamin be a wolf search for meat in the morning he take his food and in the evening he make division of what he have take . these be the twelve tribe of israel and these be the word their father say to them bless them to every one he give his blessing . and he give order to them say put me to rest with my people and with my father in the hollow of the rock in the field of ephron the hittite in the rock in the field of machpelah near mamre in the land of canaan which abraham get from ephron the hittite to be his rest place . there abraham and sarah his wife be put to rest and there they put isaac and rebekah his wife and there i put leah to rest . in the rock in the field which be get for a price from the people of heth . and when jacob have come to the end of these word to his son stretch himself on his bed he give up his spirit and go the way of his people .and joseph put his head down on his father 's face weeping and kiss him . and joseph give order to his servant who have the necessary knowledge to make his father 's body ready fold it in linen with spice and they do so . and the forty day need for make the body ready go by and there be weep for him among the egyptian for seventy day . and when the day of weep for him be past joseph say to the servant of pharaoh if now you have love for me say these word to pharaoh my father make me take an oath say when i be dead put me to rest in the place i have make ready for myself in the land of canaan . so now let me go and put my father in his last resting place and i will come back again . and pharaoh say go up and put your father to rest a you give your oath to him . so joseph go up to put his father in his last resting place and with him go all the servant of pharaoh and the chief men of his house and all the chief of the land of egypt and all the family of joseph and his brother and his father 's people only their little one and their flock and herd they do not take with them from the land of goshen . and carriage go up with him and horsemen a great army . and they come to the grain floor of atad on the other side of jordan and there they give the last honour to jacob with great and bitter sorrow weep for their father for seven day . and when the people of the land the people of canaan at the grain floor of atad saw their grief they say great be the grief of the egyptian so the place be name abel mizraim on the other side of jordan . so his son do a he have give them order to do for they take him into the land of canaan and put him to rest in the hollow rock in the field of machpelah which abraham get with the field for a rest place from ephron the hittite at mamre . and when his father have be put to rest joseph and his brother and all who have go with him go back to egypt . now after the death of their father joseph 's brother say to themselves it may be that joseph 's heart will be turn against u and he will give u punishment for all the evil which we do to him . so they send word to joseph say your father before his death give u order say you be to say to joseph let the wrongdoing of your brother be overlook and the evil they do to you now if it be your pleasure let the sin of the servant of your father 's god have forgiveness . and at these word joseph be overcome with weep . then his brother go and fall at his foot say truly we be your servant . and joseph say have no fear be i in the place of god ? a for you it be in your mind to do me evil but god have give a happy outcome the salvation of number of people a you see today . so now have no fear for i will take care of you and your little one . so he give them comfort with kind word . now joseph and all his father 's family go on living in egypt and the year of joseph 's life be a hundred and ten . and joseph saw ephraim 's child of the third generation and the child of machir the son of manasseh come to birth on joseph 's knee . then joseph say to his brother the time of my death have come but god will keep you in mind and take you out of this land into the land which he give by his oath to abraham and isaac and jacob . then joseph make the child of israel take an oath say god will certainly give effect to his word and you be to take my bone away from here . so joseph come to his death be a hundred and ten year old and they make his body ready and he be put in a chest in egypt .now these be the name of the son of israel who come into egypt every man and his family come with jacob . reuben simeon levi and judah issachar zebulun and benjamin dan and naphtali gad and asher . all the offspring of jacob be seventy person and joseph have come to egypt before them . then joseph come to his end and all his brother and all that generation . and the child of israel be fertile increase very greatly in number and in power and the land be full of them . now a new king come to power in egypt who have no knowledge of joseph . and he say to his people see the people of israel be great in number and in power than we be let u take care for fear that their number may become even great and if there be a war they may be join with those who be against u and make an attack on u and go up out of the land . so they put overseer of forced work over them in order to make their strength le by the weight of their work . and they make store town for pharaoh pithom and raamses . but the more cruel they be to them the more their number increase till all the land be full of them . and the child of israel be hat by the egyptian . and they give the child of israel even hard work to do and make their life bitter with hard work make build material and brick and do all sort of work in the field under the hard condition . and the king of egypt say to the hebrew woman who give help at the time of childbirth the name of the one be shiphrah and the name of the other puah when you be look after the hebrew woman in childbirth if it be a son you be to put him to death but if it be a daughter she may go on living . but the woman have the fear of god and do not do a the king of egypt say but let the male child go on living . and the king of egypt sent for the woman and say to them why have you do this and let the male child go on living ? and they say to pharaoh because the hebrew woman be not like the egyptian woman for they be strong and the birth take place before we come to them . and the blessing of god be on these woman and the people be increase in number and become very strong . and because the woman who take care of the hebrew mother have the fear of god he give them family . and pharaoh give order to all his people say every son who come to birth be to be put into the river but every daughter may go on living .now a man of the house of levi take a his wife a daughter of levi . and she become with child and give birth to a son and when she saw that he be a beautiful child she keep him secretly for three month . and when she be no longer able to keep him secret she make him a basket out of the stem of water plant paste sticky earth over it to keep the water out and place the baby in it she put it among the plant by the edge of the nile . and his sister take her place at a distance to see what would become of him . now pharaoh 's daughter come down to the nile to take a bath while her woman be walk by the riverside and she saw the basket among the river plant and send her servant girl to get it . and open it she saw the child and he be cry . and she have pity on him and say this be one of the hebrew ' child . then his sister say to pharaoh 's daughter may i go and get you one of the hebrew woman to give him the breast ? and pharaoh 's daughter say to her go . and the girl go and get the child 's mother . and pharaoh 's daughter say to her take the child away and give it milk for me and i will give you payment . and the woman take the child and give it milk at her breast . and when the child be old she take him to pharaoh 's daughter and he become her son and she give him the name moses because she say i take him out of the water . now when moses have become a man one day he go out to his people and saw how hard their work be and he saw an egyptian give blow to a hebrew one of his people . and turn this way and that and see no one he put the egyptian to death cover his body with sand . and he go out the day after and saw two of the hebrew fighting and he say to him who be in the wrong why be you fight your brother ? and he say who make you a ruler and a judge over u ? be you go to put me to death a you do the egyptian ? and moses be in fear and say it be clear that the thing have come to light . now when pharaoh have news of this he would have put moses to death . but moses go in flight from pharaoh into the land of midian and he take his seat by a water spring . now the priest of midian have seven daughter and they come to get water for their father 's flock . and the keeper of the sheep come up and be drive them away but moses get up and come to their help water their flock for them . and when they come to reuel their father he say how be it that you have come back so quickly today ? and they say an egyptian come to our help against the keeper of sheep and get water for u and give it to the flock . and he say to his daughter where be he ? why have you let the man go ? make him come in and give him a meal . and moses be happy to go on living with the man and he give his daughter zipporah to moses . and she give birth to a son to whom he give the name gershom for he say i have be live in a strange land . now after a long time the king of egypt come to his end and the child of israel be cry in their grief under the weight of their work and their cry for help come to the ear of god . and at the sound of their weep the agreement which god have make with abraham and isaac and jacob come to his mind . and god 's eye be turn to the child of israel and he give them the knowledge of himself .now moses be look after the flock of jethro his father in law the priest of midian and he take the flock to the back of the waste land and come to horeb the mountain of god . and the angel of the lord be see by him in a flame of fire come out of a thorn tree and he saw that the tree be on fire but it be not burn up . and moses say i will go and see this strange thing why the tree be not burn up and when the lord saw him turn to one side to see god say his name out of the tree cry moses moses . and he say here be i. and he say do not come near take off your shoe from your foot for the place where you be be holy . and he say i be the god of your father the god of abraham the god of isaac and the god of jacob . and moses keep his face cover for fear of look on god . and god say truly i have see the grief of my people in egypt and their cry because of their cruel master have come to my ear for i have knowledge of their sorrow and i have come down to take them out of the hand of the egyptian guide them out of that land into a good land and wide into a land flow with milk and honey into the place of the canaanite and the hittite and the amorite and the perizzite and the hivite and the jebusite . for now truly the cry of the child of israel have come to me and i have see the cruel behaviour of the egyptian to them . come then and i will send you to pharaoh so that you may take my people the child of israel out of egypt . and moses say to god who be i to go to pharaoh and take the child of israel out of egypt ? and he say truly i will be with you and this will be the sign to you that i have send you when you have take the child of israel out of egypt you will give worship to god on this mountain . and moses say to god when i come to the child of israel and say to them the god of your father have send me to you and they say to me what be his name ? what be i to say to them ? and god say to him i be what i be and he say say to the child of israel i be have send me to you . and god go on to say to moses say to the child of israel the lord the god of your father the god of abraham of isaac and of jacob have send me to you this be my name for ever and this be my sign to all generation . go and get together the chief of the child of israel and say to them the lord the god of your father the god of abraham of isaac and of jacob have be see by me and have say truly i have take up your cause because of what be do to you in egypt and i have say i will take you up out of the sorrow of egypt into the land of the canaanite and the hittite and the amorite and the perizzite and the hivite and the jebusite into a land flow with milk and honey . and they will give ear to your voice and you with the chief of israel will go to pharaoh the king of egypt and say to him the lord the god of the hebrew have come to u let u then go three day ' journey into the waste land to make an offering to the lord our god . and i be certain that the king of egypt will not let you go without be force . but i will put out my hand and overcome egypt with all the wonder which i will do among them and after that he will let you go . and i will give this people grace in the eye of the egyptian so that when you go out you will go out with your hand full . for every woman will get from her neighbour and from the woman living in her house ornament of silver and gold and clothing and you will put them on your son and your daughter you will take the best of their good from the egyptian .and moses answer say it be certain that they will not have faith in me or give ear to my voice for they will say you have not see the lord . and the lord say to him what be that in your hand ? and he say a rod . and he say put it down on the earth . and he put it down on the earth and it become a snake and moses go run from it . and the lord say to moses put out your hand and take it by the tail and he put out his hand and take a grip of it and it become a rod in his hand so that they may be certain that the lord the god of their father the god of abraham of isaac and of jacob have be see by you . then the lord say to him again put your hand inside your clothing . and he put his hand inside his robe and when he take it out it be like the hand of a leper as white a snow . and he say put your hand inside your robe again . and he put his hand into his robe again and when he take it out he saw that it have become like his other flesh . and if they do not have faith in you or give ear to the voice of the first sign they will have faith in the second sign . and if they have no faith even in these two sign and will not give ear to your voice then you be to take the water of the nile and put it on the dry land and the water you take out of the river will become blood on the dry land . and moses say to the lord o lord i be not a man of word i have never be so and be not now even after what you have say to your servant for talk be hard for me and i be slow of tongue . and the lord say to him who have make man 's mouth ? who take away a man 's voice or hearing or make him see or blind ? be it not i the lord ? so go now and i will be with your mouth teach you what to say . and he say o lord send if you will by the hand of anyone whom it seem good to you to send . and the lord be angry with moses and say be there not aaron your brother the levite ? to my knowledge he be good at talk . and now he be come out to you and when he see you he will be glad in his heart . let him give ear to your voice and you will put my word in his mouth and i will be with your mouth and with his teach you what you have to do . and he will do the talk for you to the people he will be to you a a mouth and you will be to him a god . and take in your hand this rod with which you will do the sign . and moses go back to jethro his father in law and say to him let me go back now to my relation in egypt and see if they be still live . and jethro say to moses go in peace . and the lord say to moses in midian go back to egypt for all the men be dead who be attempt to take your life . and moses take his wife and his son and put them on an as and go back to the land of egypt and he take the rod of god in his hand . and the lord say to moses when you go back to egypt see that you do before pharaoh all the wonder which i have give you power to do but i will make his heart hard and he will not let the people go . and you be to say to pharaoh the lord say israel be the first of my son and i say to you let my son go so that he may give me worship and you do not let him go so now i will put the first of your son to death . now on the journey at the night 's rest place the lord come in his way and would have put him to death . then zipporah take a sharp stone and cut off the skin of her son 's private part and touch his foot with it she say truly you be a husband of blood to me . so he let him go . then she say you be a husband of blood because of the circumcision . and the lord say to aaron go into the waste land and you will see moses . so he go and come across moses at the mountain of god and give him a kiss . and moses give aaron an account of all the word of the lord which he have send him to say and of all the sign which he have give him order to do . then moses and aaron go and get together all the chief of the child of israel and aaron say to them all the word the lord have say to moses and do the sign before all the people . and the people have faith in them and hear that the lord have take up the cause of the child of israel and have see their trouble with bent head they give him worship .and after that moses and aaron come to pharaoh and say the lord the god of israel say let my people go so that they may keep a feast to me in the waste land . and pharaoh say who be the lord to whose voice i be to give ear and let israel go ? i have no knowledge of the lord and i will not let israel go . and they say the god of the hebrew have come to u let u then go three day ' journey into the waste land to make an offering to the lord our god so that he may not send death on u by disease or the sword . and the king of egypt say to them why do you moses and aaron take the people away from their work ? get back to your work . and pharaoh say truly the people of the land be increase in number and you be keep them back from their work . the same day pharaoh give order to the overseer and those who be responsible for the work say give these men no more dry stem for their brick making a you have be do let them go and get the material for themselves . but see that they make the same number of brick a before and no less for they have no love for work and so they be cry out and say let u go and make an offering to our god . give the men harder work and see that they do it let them not give attention to false word . and the overseer of the people and their responsible men go out and say to the people pharaoh say i will give you no more dry stem . go yourselves and get dry stem wherever you be able for your work be not to be any less . so the people be send in all direction through the land of egypt to get dry grass for stem . and the overseer go on drive them and say do your full day 's work a before when there be dry stem for you . and the responsible men of the child of israel whom pharaoh 's overseer have put over them be give blow and they say to them why have you not do your regular work in make brick a before ? then the responsible men of the child of israel come to pharaoh protesting and say why be you act in this way to your servant ? they give u no dry stem and they say to u make brick and they give your servant blow but it be your people who be in the wrong . but he say you have no love for work that be why you say let u go and make an offering to the lord . go now get back to your work no dry stem will be give to you but you be to make the full number of brick . then the responsible men of the child of israel saw that they be purpose evil when they say the number of brick which you have to make every day will be no less than before . and they come face to face with moses and aaron who be in their way when they come out from pharaoh and they say to them may the lord take note of you and be your judge for you have give pharaoh and his servant a bad opinion of u put a sword in their hand for our destruction . and moses go back to the lord and say lord why have you do evil to this people ? why have you send me ? for from the time when i come to pharaoh to put your word before him he have do evil to this people and you have give them no help .and the lord say to moses now you will see what i be about to do to pharaoh for by a strong hand he will be force to let them go drive them out of his land because of my outstretched arm . and god say to moses i be yahweh i let myself be see by abraham isaac and jacob a god the ruler of all but they have no knowledge of my name yahweh . and i make an agreement with them to give them the land of canaan the land of their wandering . and truly my ear be open to the cry of the child of israel whom the egyptian keep under their yoke and i have keep in mind my agreement . say then to the child of israel i be yahweh and i will take you out from under the yoke of the egyptian and make you safe from their power and will make you free by the strength of my arm after great punishment . and i will take you to be my people and i will be your god and you will be certain that i be the lord your god who take you out from under the yoke of the egyptian . and i will be your guide into the land which i make an oath to give to abraham to isaac and to jacob and i will give it to you for your heritage i be yahweh . and moses say these word to the child of israel but they give no attention to him because of the grief of their spirit and the cruel weight of their work . and the lord say to moses go in and say to pharaoh king of egypt that he be to let the child of israel go out of his land . and moses answer the lord say see the child of israel will not give ear to me how then will pharaoh give ear to me whose lip be unclean ? and the word of the lord come to moses and aaron with order for the child of israel and for pharaoh king of egypt to take the child of israel out of the land of egypt . these be the head of their father ' family the son of reuben the old son of israel hanoch and pallu hezron and carmi these be the family of reuben . and the son of simeon jemuel and jamin and ohad and jachin and zohar and shaul the son of a woman of canaan these be the family of simeon . and these be the name of the son of levi in the order of their generation gershon and kohath and merari and the year of levi 's life be a hundred and thirty seven . the son of gershon libni and shimei in the order of their family . and the son of kohath amram and izhar and hebron and uzziel and the year of kohath 's life be a hundred and thirty three . and the son of merari mahli and mushi these be the family of the levite in the order of their generation . and amram take jochebed his father 's sister a wife and she give birth to aaron and moses and the year of amram 's life be a hundred and thirty seven . and the son of izhar korah and nepheg and zichri . and the son of uzziel mishael and elzaphan and sithri . and aaron take a his wife elisheba the daughter of amminadab the sister of nahshon and she give birth to nadab and abihu eleazar and ithamar . and the son of korah assir and elkanah and abiasaph these be the family of the korahites . and eleazar aaron 's son take a his wife one of the daughter of putiel and she give birth to phinehas . these be the head of the family of the levite in the order of their family . these be the same aaron and moses to whom the lord say take the child of israel out of the land of egypt in their army . these be the men who give order to pharaoh to let the child of israel go out of egypt these be the same moses and aaron . and on the day when the word of the lord come to moses in the land of egypt the lord say to moses i be the lord say to pharaoh king of egypt everything i be say to you . and moses say to the lord my lip be unclean how be it possible that pharaoh will give me a hearing ?and the lord say to moses see i have make you a god to pharaoh and aaron your brother will be your prophet . say whatever i give you order to say and aaron your brother will give word to pharaoh to let the child of israel go out of his land . and i will make pharaoh 's heart hard and my sign and wonder will be increase in the land of egypt . but pharaoh will not give ear to you and i will put my hand on egypt and take my army my people the child of israel out of egypt after great punishment . and the egyptian will see that i be the lord when my hand be stretch out over egypt and i take the child of israel out from among them . and moses and aaron do so a the lord give them order so they do . and moses be eighty year old and aaron eighty three year old when they give the lord 's word to pharaoh . and the lord say to moses and aaron if pharaoh say to you let me see a wonder then say to aaron take your rod and put it down on the earth before pharaoh so that it may become a snake . then moses and aaron go in to pharaoh and they do a the lord have say and aaron put his rod down on the earth before pharaoh and his servant and it become a snake . then pharaoh sent for the wise men and the wonder worker and they the wonder worker of egypt do the same with their secret art . for every one of them put down his rod on the earth and they become snake but aaron 's rod make a meal of their rod . but pharaoh 's heart be make hard and he do not give ear to them a the lord have say . and the lord say to moses and aaron pharaoh 's heart be unchanged he will not let the people go . go to pharaoh in the morning when he go out to the water you will be wait for him by the edge of the nile with the rod which be turn into a snake in your hand and say to him the lord the god of the hebrew have send me to you say let my people go so that they may give me worship in the waste land but up to now you have not give ear to his word . so the lord say by this you may be certain that i be the lord see by the touch of this rod in my hand the water of the nile will be turn to blood and the fish in the nile will come to destruction and the river will send up a bad smell and the egyptian will not be able for disgust to make use of the water of the nile for drinking . and the lord say say to aaron let the rod in your hand be stretch out over the water of egypt and over the river and the stream and the pool and over every stretch of water so that they may be turn to blood and there will be blood through all the land of egypt in vessel of wood and in vessel of stone . and moses and aaron do a the lord have say and when his rod have be lift up and stretch out over the water of the nile before the eye of pharaoh and his servant all the water in the nile be turn to blood and the fish in the nile come to destruction and a bad smell go up from the river and the egyptian be not able to make use of the water of the nile for drinking and there be blood through all the land of egypt . and the wonder worker of egypt do the same with their secret art but pharaoh 's heart be make hard and he would not give ear to them a the lord have say . then pharaoh go into his house and do not take even this to heart . and all the egyptian make hole round about the nile to get drinking water for they be not able to make use of the nile water . and seven day go past after the lord have put his hand on the nile .and this be what the lord say to moses go to pharaoh and say to him the lord say let my people go so that they may give me worship . and if you will not let them go see i will send frog into every part of your land the nile will be full of frog and they will come up into your house and into your bedroom and on your bed and into the house of your servant and your people and into your oven and into your bread basin . the frog will come up over you and your people and all your servant . and the lord say to moses say to aaron let the rod in your hand be stretch out over the stream and the waterway and the pool cause frog to come up on the land of egypt . and when aaron put out his hand over the water of egypt the frog come up and all the land of egypt be cover with them . and the wonder worker do the same with their secret art make frog come up over the land of egypt . then pharaoh sent for moses and aaron and say make prayer to the lord that he will take away these frog from me and my people and i will let the people go and make their offering to the lord . and moses say i will let you have the honour of say when i be to make prayer for you and your servant and your people that the frog may be send away from you and your house and be only in the nile . and he say by tomorrow . and he say let it be a you say so that you may see that there be no other like the lord our god . and the frog will be go from you and from your house and from your servant and from your people and will be only in the nile . then moses and aaron go out from pharaoh and moses make prayer to the lord about the frog which he have send on pharaoh . and the lord do a moses say and there be an end of all the frog in the house and in the open space and in the field . and they put them together in mass and a bad smell go up from the land . but when pharaoh saw that there be peace for a time he make his heart hard and do not give ear to them a the lord have say . and the lord say to moses say to aaron let your rod be stretch out over the dust of the earth so that it may become insect through all the land of egypt . and they do so and aaron stretch out the rod in his hand give a touch to the dust of the earth and insect come on man and on beast all the dust of the earth be change into insect through all the land of egypt . and the wonder worker with their secret art attempt to make insect be unable to do so and there be insect on man and on beast . then the wonder worker say to pharaoh this be the finger of god but pharaoh 's heart be hard and he do not give ear to them a the lord have say . and the lord say to moses get up early in the morning and take your place before pharaoh when he come out to the water and say to him this be what the lord say let my people go to give me worship . for if you do not let my people go see i will send cloud of fly on you and on your servant and on your people and into their house and the house of the egyptian and the land where they be will be full of fly . and at that time i will make a division between your land and the land of goshen where my people be and no fly will be there so that you may see that i be the lord over all the earth . and i will put a division between my people and your people tomorrow this sign will be see . and the lord do so and great cloud of fly come into the house of pharaoh and into his servant ' house and all the land of egypt be make waste because of the fly . and pharaoh sent for moses and aaron and say go and make your offer to your god here in the land . and moses say it be not right to do so for we make our offering of that to which the egyptian give worship and if we do so before their eye certainly we will be stone . but we will go three day ' journey into the waste land and make an offering to the lord our god a he may give u order . then pharaoh say i will let you go to make an offering to the lord your god in the waste land but do not go very far away and make prayer for me . and moses say when i go out from you i will make prayer to the lord that the cloud of fly may go away from pharaoh and from his people and from his servant tomorrow only let pharaoh no long by deceit keep back the people from make their offering to the lord . then moses go out from pharaoh and make prayer to the lord . and the lord do a moses say and take away the cloud of fly from pharaoh and from his servant and from his people not one be to be see . but again pharaoh make his heart hard and do not let the people go .then the lord say to moses go in to pharaoh and say to him this be what the lord the god of the hebrew say let my people go so that they may give me worship . for if you will not let them go but still keep them in your power then the hand of the lord will put on your cattle in the field on the horse and the ass and the camel on the herd and the flock a very evil disease . and the lord will make a division between the cattle of israel and the cattle of egypt there will be no loss of any of the cattle of israel . and the time be fix by the lord and he say tomorrow the lord will do this thing in the land . and on the day after the lord do a he have say cause the death of all the cattle of egypt but there be no loss of any of the cattle of israel . and pharaoh sent and get word that there be no loss of any of the cattle of israel . but the heart of pharaoh be hard and he do not let the people go . and the lord say to moses and to aaron take in your hand a little dust from the fire and let moses send it in a shower up to heaven before the eye of pharaoh . and it will become small dust over all the land of egypt and will be a skin disease burst out in wound on man and beast through all the land of egypt . so they take some dust from the fire and place themselves before pharaoh moses send it out in a shower up to heaven and it become a skin disease burst out on man and on beast . and the wonder worker be not able to take their place before moses because of the disease for the disease be on the wonder worker and on all the egyptian . and the lord make pharaoh 's heart hard and he would not give ear to them a the lord have say . and the lord say to moses get up early in the morning and take your place before pharaoh and say to him this be what the lord the god of the hebrew say let my people go so that they may give me worship . for this time i will send all my punishment on yourself and on your servant and on your people so that you may see that there be no other like me in all the earth . for if i have put the full weight of my hand on you and your people you would have be cut off from the earth but for this very reason i have keep you from destruction to make clear to you my power and so that my name may be honour through all the earth . be you still uplift in pride against my people so that you will not let them go ? truly tomorrow about this time i will send down an ice storm such a never be in egypt from it early day till now . then send quickly and get in your cattle and all you have from the field for if any man or beast in the field have not be put under cover the ice storm will come down on them with destruction . then everyone among the servant of pharaoh who have the fear of the lord make his servant and his cattle come quickly into the house and he who give no attention to the word of the lord keep his servant and his cattle in the field . and the lord say to moses now let your hand be stretch out to heaven so that there may be an ice storm on all the land of egypt on man and on beast and on every plant of the field through all the land of egypt . and moses put out his rod to heaven and the lord send thunder and an ice storm and fire run down on the earth the lord send an ice storm on the land of egypt . so there be an ice storm with fire run through it come down with great force such a never be in all the land of egypt from the time when it become a nation . and through all the land of egypt the ice storm come down on everything which be in the field on man and on beast and every green plant be crush and every tree of the field broken . only in the land of goshen where the child of israel be there be no ice storm . then pharaoh sent for moses and aaron and say to them i have do evil this time the lord be upright and i and my people be sinner . make prayer to the lord for there have be enough of these thunderings of god and this ice storm and i will let you go and will keep you no longer . and moses say when i be go outside the town my hand will be stretch out to the lord the thunder and the ice storm will come to an end so that you may see that the earth be the lord 's . but a for you and your servant i be certain that even now the fear of the lord god will not be in your heart . and the flax and the barley be damage for the barley be almost ready to be cut and the flax be in flower . but the rest of the grain plant be undamaged for they have not come up . so moses go out of the town and stretch out his hand make prayer to god and the thunder and the ice storm come to an end and the fall of rain be stop . but when pharaoh saw that the rain and the ice storm and the thunder be end he go on sinning and make his heart hard he and his servant . and the heart of pharaoh be hard and he do not let the people go a the lord have say by the mouth of moses .and the lord say to moses go in to pharaoh for i have make his heart and the heart of his servant hard so that i may let my sign be see among them and so that you may be able to give to your son and to your son 's son the story of my wonder in egypt and the sign which i have do among them so that you may see that i be the lord . then moses and aaron go in to pharaoh and say to him this be what the lord the god of the hebrew say how long will you be lift up in your pride before me ? let my people go so that they may give me worship . for if you will not let my people go tomorrow i will send locust into your land and the face of the earth will be cover with them so that you will not be able to see the earth and they will be the destruction of everything which up to now have not be damage everything which be not crush by the ice storm and every tree still live in your field . and your house will be full of them and the house of your servant and of all the egyptian it will be bad than anything your father have see or their father from the day when they be live on the earth till this day . and so he go out from pharaoh . and pharaoh 's servant say to him how long be this man to be the cause of evil to u ? let the men go so that they may give worship to the lord their god be you not awake to egypt 's danger ? then moses and aaron come in again before pharaoh and he say to them go and give worship to the lord your god but which of you be go ? and moses say we will go with our young and our old with our son and our daughter with our flock and our herd for we be to keep a feast to the lord . and he say to them may the lord be with you if i will let you and your little one go ! take care for your purpose clearly be evil . not so but let your male go and give worship to the lord a your desire be . this he say drive them out from before him . and the lord say to moses let your hand be stretch out over the land of egypt so that the locust may come up on the land for the destruction of every green plant in the land even everything untouched by the ice storm . and moses ' rod be stretch out over the land of egypt and the lord send an east wind over the land all that day and all the night and in the morning the locust come up with the east wind . and the locust go up over all the land of egypt rest on every part of the land in very great number such an army of locust have never be see before and never will be again . for all the face of the earth be cover with them so that the land be black and every green plant and all the fruit of the tree which be untouched by the ice storm they take for food not one green thing no plant or tree be to be see in all the land of egypt . then pharaoh quickly send for moses and aaron and say i have do evil against the lord your god and against you . let me now have forgiveness for my sin this time only and make prayer to the lord your god that he will take away from me this death only . so he go out from pharaoh and make prayer to the lord . and the lord send a very strong west wind which take up the locust drive them into the red sea not one locust be to be see in any part of egypt . but the lord make pharaoh 's heart hard and he do not let the child of israel go . and the lord say to moses let your hand be stretch out to heaven and all the land of egypt will be dark so that men will be feel their way about in the dark . and when moses ' hand be stretch out dark night come over all the land of egypt for three day they be not able to see one another and no one get up from his place for three day but where the child of israel be live it be light . then pharaoh sent for moses and say go and give worship to the lord only let your flock and your herd be keep here your little one may go with you . but moses say you will have to let u take burn offering to put before the lord our god . so our cattle will have to go with u not one may be keep back for they be need for the worship of the lord our god we have no knowledge what offering we have to give till we come to the place . but the lord make pharaoh 's heart hard and he would not let them go . and pharaoh say to him go away from me take care that you come not again before me for the day when you see my face again will be your last . and moses say you say truly i will not see your face again .and the lord say to moses i will send one more punishment on pharaoh and on egypt after that he will let you go and when he do let you go he will not keep one of you back but will send you out by force . so go now and give order to the people that every man and every woman be to get from his or her neighbour ornament of silver and of gold . and the lord give the people grace in the eye of the egyptian . for the man moses be highly honour in the land of egypt by pharaoh 's servant and the people . and moses say this be what the lord say about the middle of the night i will go out through egypt and death will come to every mother 's first male child in all the land of egypt from the child of pharaoh on his seat of power to the child of the servant girl crush the grain and the first birth of all the cattle . and there will be a great cry through all the land of egypt such a never have be or will be again . but against the child of israel man or beast not so much a the tongue of a dog will be move so that you may see how the lord make a division between israel and the egyptian . and all these your servant will come to me go down on their face before me and say go out and all your people with you and after that i will go out . and he go away from pharaoh burn with wrath . and the lord say to moses pharaoh will not give ear to you so that my wonder may be increase in the land of egypt . all these wonder moses and aaron do before pharaoh but the lord make pharaoh 's heart hard and he do not let the child of israel go out of his land .and the lord say to moses and aaron in the land of egypt let this month be to you the first of month the first month of the year . say to all the child of israel when they be come together in the tenth day of this month every man be to take a lamb by the number of their father ' family a lamb for every family and if the lamb be more than enough for the family let that family and it near neighbour have a lamb between them take into account the number of person and how much food be need for every man . let your lamb be without a mark a male in it first year you may take it from among the sheep or the goat keep it till the fourteenth day of the same month when everyone who be of the child of israel be to put it to death between sundown and dark . then take some of the blood and put it on the two side of the door and over the door of the house where the meal be to be take . and let your food that night be the flesh of the lamb cook with fire in the oven together with unleavened bread and bitter tasting plant . do not take it uncooked or cook with boiling water but let it be cook in the oven it head with it leg and it inside part . do not keep any of it till the morning anything which be not use be to be burn with fire . and take your meal dress a if for a journey with your shoe on your foot and your stick in your hand take it quickly it be the lord 's passover . for on that night i will go through the land of egypt send death on every first male child of man and of beast and judge all the god of egypt i be the lord . and the blood will be a sign on the house where you be when i see the blood i will go over you and no evil will come on you for your destruction when my hand be on the land of egypt . and this day be to be keep in your memory you be to keep it a a feast to the lord through all your generation a an order for ever . for seven day let your food be unleavened bread from the first day no leaven be to be see in your house whoever take bread with leaven in it from the first till the seventh day will be cut off from israel . and on the first day there be to be a holy meeting and on the seventh day a holy meeting no sort of work may be do on those day but only to make ready what be necessary for everyone 's food . so keep the feast of unleavened bread for on this very day i have take your army out of the land of egypt this day then be to be keep through all your generation by an order for ever . in the first month from the evening of the fourteenth day let your food be unleavened bread till the evening of the twenty first day of the month . for seven day no leaven be to be see in your house for whoever take bread which be leaven will be cut off from the people of israel if he be from another country or if he be an israelite by birth . take nothing which have leaven in it wherever you be live let your food be unleavened cake . then moses sent for the chief of israel and say to them see that lamb be mark out for yourselves and your family and let the passover lamb be put to death . and take some hyssop and put it in the blood in the basin touch the two side and the top of the doorway with the blood from the basin and let not one of you go out of his house till the morning . for the lord will go through the land send death on the egyptian and when he see the blood on the two side and the top of the door the lord will go over your door and will not let death come in for your destruction . and you be to keep this a an order to you and to your son for ever . and when you come into the land which the lord will make yours a he give his word you be to keep this act of worship . and when your child say to you what be the reason of this act of worship ? then you will say this be the offering of the lord 's passover for he go over the house of the child of israel in egypt when he send death on the egyptian and keep our family safe . and the people give worship with bent head . and the child of israel go and do so a the lord have give order to moses and aaron so they do . and in the middle of the night the lord send death on every first male child in the land of egypt from the child of pharaoh on his seat of power to the child of the prisoner in the prison and the first birth of all the cattle . then pharaoh get up in the night he and all his servant and all the egyptian and a great cry go up from egypt for there be not a house where someone be not dead . and he send for moses and aaron by night and say get up and go out from among my people you and the child of israel go and give worship to the lord a you have say . and take your flock and your herd a you have say and be go and give me your blessing . and the egyptian be force the people on to get them out of the land quickly for they say we be all dead men . and the people take their bread paste before it be leaven put their basin in their clothing on their back . and the child of israel have do a moses have say and they get from the egyptian ornament of silver and of gold and clothing and the lord have give the people grace in the eye of the egyptian so that they give them whatever be request . so they take away all their good from the egyptian . and the child of israel make the journey from rameses to succoth there be about six hundred thousand men on foot as well a child . and a mixed band of people go with them and flock and herd in great number . and they make unleavened cake from the paste which they have take out of egypt it be not leaven for they have be send out of egypt so quickly that they have no time to make any food ready . now the child of israel have be live in egypt for four hundred and thirty year . and at the end of four hundred and thirty year to the very day all the army of the lord go out of the land of egypt . it be a watch night before the lord who take them out of the land of egypt this same night be a watch night to the lord for all the child of israel through all their generation . and the lord say to moses and aaron this be the law of the passover no man who be not an israelite be to take of it but every man 's servant whom he have get for money may take of it when he have have circumcision . a man from a strange country living among you and a servant working for payment may not take part in it . it be to be take in one house not a bit of the flesh be to be take out of the house and no bone of it may be break . all israel be to keep the feast . and if a man from another country be live with you and have a desire to keep the passover to the lord let all the male of his family undergo circumcision and then let him come near and keep it for he will then be a one of your people but no one without circumcision may keep it . the law be the same for him who be an israelite by birth and for the man from a strange country who be live with you . so the child of israel do a the lord give order to moses and aaron . and on that very day the lord take the child of israel out of the land of egypt by their army .and the lord say to moses let the first male child of every mother among the child of israel be keep holy for me even the first male birth among man or beast for it be mine . and moses say to the people let this day on which you come out of egypt out of your prison house be keep for ever in memory for by the strength of his hand the lord have take you out from this place let no leaven bread be use . on this day in the month abib you be go out . and it will be that when the lord take you into the land of the canaanite and the hittite and the amorite and the hivite and the jebusite the land which he make an oath to your father that he would give you a land flow with milk and honey you will do this act of worship in this month . for seven day let your food be unleavened cake and on the seventh day there be to be a feast to the lord . unleavened cake be to be your food through all the seven day let no leavened bread be see among you or any leaven in any part of your land . and you will say to your son in that day it be because of what the lord do for me when i come out of egypt . and this will be for a sign to you on your hand and for a mark on your brow so that the law of the lord may be in your mouth for with a strong hand the lord take you out of egypt . so let this order be keep at the right time from year to year . and when the lord take you into the land of canaan a he make his oath to you and to your father and give it to you you be to put on one side for the lord every mother 's first male child the first fruit of her body and the first young one of every beast every male be holy to the lord . and for the young of an as you may give a lamb in payment or if you will not make payment for it it neck be to be break but for all the first son among your child let payment be make . and when your son say to you in time to come what be the reason for this ? say to him by the strength of his hand the lord take u out of egypt out of the prison house and when pharaoh make his heart hard and would not let u go the lord send death on all the first son in egypt of man and of beast and so every first male who come to birth be offer to the lord but for all the first of my son i give a price . and this will be for a sign on your hand and for a mark on your brow for by the strength of his hand the lord take u out of egypt . now after pharaoh have let the people go god do not take them through the land of the philistine though that be near for god say if the people see war they may have a change of heart and go back to egypt . but god take the people round by the waste land near the red sea and the child of israel go up in fight order out of the land of egypt . and moses take the bone of joseph with him for joseph have make the child of israel take an oath say god will certainly keep you in mind and you be to take my bone away with you . then they go on their journey from succoth and put up their tent in etham at the edge of the waste land . and the lord go before them by day in a pillar of cloud guide them on their way and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light so that they be able to go on day and night the pillar of cloud go ever before them by day and the pillar of fire by night .and the lord say to moses give order to the child of israel to go back and put up their tent before pi hahiroth between migdol and the sea in front of baal zephon opposite to which you be to put up your tent by the sea . and pharaoh will say of the child of israel they be wander without direction they be shut in by the waste land . and i will make pharaoh 's heart hard and he will come after them and i will be honour over pharaoh and all his army so that the egyptian may see that i be the lord . and they do so . and word come to pharaoh of the flight of the people and the feeling of pharaoh and of his servant about the people be change and they say why have we let israel go so that they will do no more work for u ? so he have his war carriage make ready and take his people with him and he take six hundred carriage all the carriage of egypt and captain over all of them . and the lord make the heart of pharaoh hard and he go after the child of israel for the child of israel have go out without fear . but the egyptian go after them all the horse and carriage of pharaoh and his horseman and his army and overtake them in their tent by the sea by pihahiroth before baal zephon . and when pharaoh come near the child of israel lift up their eye saw the egyptian come after them and be full of fear and their cry go up to god . and they say to moses be there no resting place for the dead in egypt that you have take u away to come to our death in the waste land ? why have you take u out of egypt ? do we not say to you in egypt let u be a we be work for the egyptian ? for it be well to be the servant of the egyptian than to come to our death in the waste land . but moses say keep where you be and have no fear now you will see the salvation of the lord which he will give you today for the egyptian whom you see today you will never see again . the lord will make war for you you have only to keep quiet . and the lord say to moses why be you cry out to me ? give the child of israel the order to go forward . and let your rod be lift up and your hand stretch out over the sea and it will be part in two and the child of israel will go through on dry land . and i will make the heart of the egyptian hard and they will go in after them and i will be honour over pharaoh and over his army his war carriage and his horseman . and the egyptian will see that i be the lord when i get honour over pharaoh and his war carriage and his horseman . then the angel of god who have be before the tent of israel take his place at their back and the pillar of cloud move from before them come to rest at their back and it come between the army of egypt and the army of israel and there be a dark cloud between them and they go on through the night but the one army come no nearer to the other all the night . and when moses ' hand be stretch out over the sea the lord with a strong east wind make the sea go back all night and the water be part in two and the sea become dry land . and the child of israel go through the sea on dry land and the water be a wall on their right side and on their left . then the egyptian go after them into the middle of the sea all pharaoh 's horse and his war carriage and his horseman . and in the morning watch the lord look out on the army of the egyptian from the pillar of fire and cloud send trouble on the army of the egyptian and make the wheel of their war carriage stiff so that they have hard work drive them so the egyptian say let u go in flight from before the face of israel for the lord be fight for them against the egyptian . and the lord say to moses let your hand be stretch out over the sea and the water will come back again on the egyptian and on their war carriage and on their horseman . and when moses ' hand be stretch out over the sea at dawn the sea come flow back meet the egyptian in their flight and the lord send destruction on the egyptian in the middle of the sea . and the water come back cover the war carriage and the horseman and all the army of pharaoh which go after them into the middle of the sea not one of them be to be see . but the child of israel go through the sea walk on dry land and the water be a wall on their right side and on their left . so that day the lord give israel salvation from the hand of the egyptian and israel saw the egyptian dead on the sea 's edge . and israel saw the great work which the lord have do against the egyptian and the fear of the lord come on the people and they have faith in the lord and in his servant moses .then moses and the child of israel make this song to the lord and say i will make a song to the lord for he be lift up in glory the horse and the horseman he have send down into the sea . the lord be my strength and my strong helper he have become my salvation he be my god and i will give him praise my father 's god and i will give him glory . the lord be a man of war the lord be his name . pharaoh 's war carriage and his army he have send down into the sea the best of his captain have go down into the red sea . they be cover by the deep water like a stone they go down under the wave . full of glory o lord be the power of your right hand by your right hand those who come against you be break . when you be lift up in power all those who come against you be crush when you send out your wrath they be burn up like dry grass . by your breath the wave be mass together the flowing water be lift up like a pillar the deep water become solid in the heart of the sea . egypt say i will go after them i will overtake i will make division of their good my desire will have it way with them my sword will be uncovered my hand will send destruction on them . you send your wind and the sea come over them they go down like lead into the great water . who be like you o lord among the god ? who be like you in holy glory to be praise with fear do wonder ? when your right hand be stretch out the mouth of the earth be open for them . in your mercy you go before the people whom you have make yours guide them in your strength to your holy place . hearing of you the people be shake in fear the people of philistia be grip with pain . the chief of edom be trouble in heart the strong men of moab be in the grip of fear all the people of canaan become like water . fear and grief come on them by the strength of your arm they be turn to stone till your people go over o lord till the people go over whom you have make yours . you will take them in plant them in the mountain of your heritage the place o lord where you have make your house the holy place o lord the building of your hand . the lord be king for ever and ever . for the horse of pharaoh with his war carriage and his horseman go into the sea and the lord send the water of the sea back over them but the child of israel go through the sea on dry land . and miriam the woman prophet the sister of aaron take an instrument of music in her hand and all the woman go after her with music and dance . and miriam answering say make a song to the lord for he be lift up in glory the horse and the horseman he have send into the sea . then moses take israel forward from the red sea and they go out into the waste land of shur and for three day they be in the waste land where there be no water . and when they come to marah the water be no good for drinking for the water of marah be bitter which be why it be name marah . and the people cry out against moses say what be we to have for drink ? and in answer to his prayer the lord make him see a tree and when he put it into the water the water be make sweet . there he give them a law and an order test them and he say if with all your heart you will give attention to the voice of the lord your god and do what be right in his eye give ear to his order and keep his law i will not put on you any of the disease which i put on the egyptian for i be the lord your life giver . and they come to elim where there be twelve water spring and seventy palm tree and they put up their tent there by the water .and they go on their way from elim and all the child of israel come into the waste land of sin which be between elim and sinai on the fifteenth day of the second month after they go out of the land of egypt . and all the child of israel be cry out against moses and aaron in the waste land and the child of israel say to them it would have be good for the lord to have put u to death in the land of egypt where we be seat by the flesh pot and have bread enough for our need for you have take u out to this waste of sand to put all this people to death through need of food . then the lord say to moses see i will send down bread from heaven for you and the people will go out every day and get enough for the day 's need so that i may put them to the test to see if they will keep my law or not . and on the sixth day they be to make ready what they get in and it will be twice as much a they get on the other day . and moses and aaron say to all the child of israel this even it will be clear to you that it be the lord who have take you out of the land of egypt and in the morning you will see the glory of the lord for your angry word against the lord have come to his ear and what be we that you be cry out against u ? and moses say the lord will give you meat for your food at evening and in the morning bread in full measure for your outcry against the lord have come to his ear for what be we ? your outcry be not against u but against the lord . and moses say to aaron say to all the people of israel come near before the lord for he have give ear to your outcry . and while aaron be talk to the child of israel their eye be turn in the direction of the waste land and they saw the glory of the lord shin in the cloud . and the lord say to moses the outcry of the child of israel have come to my ear say to them now at nightfall you will have meat for your food and in the morning bread in full measure and you will see that i be the lord your god . and it come about that in the evening little bird come up and the place be cover with them and in the morning there be dew all round about the tent . and when the dew be go on the face of the earth be a small round thing like small drop of ice on the earth . and when the child of israel saw it they say to one another what be it ? for they have no idea what it be . and moses say to them it be the bread which the lord have give you for your food . this be what the lord have say let every man take up as much a he have need of at the rate of one omer for every person let every man take as much a be need for his family . and the child of israel do so and some take more and some less . and when it be measure he who have take up much have nothing over and he who have little have enough every man have take what he be able to make use of . and moses say to them let nothing be keep till the morning . but they give no attention to moses and some of them keep it till the morning and there be worm in it and it have an evil smell and moses be angry with them . and they take it up morning by morning every man a he have need and when the sun be high it be go . and on the sixth day they take up twice as much of the bread two omers for every person and all the ruler of the people give moses word of it . and he say this be what the lord have say tomorrow be a day of rest a holy sabbath to the lord what have to be cook may be cook and what be over put on one side to be keep till the morning . and they keep it till the morning a moses have say and no smell come from it and it have no worm . and moses say make your meal today of what you have for this day be a sabbath to the lord today you will not get any in the field . for six day you will get it but on the seventh day the sabbath there will not be any . but still on the seventh day some of the people go out to get it and there be not any . and the lord say to moses how long will you go against my order and my law ? see because the lord have give you the sabbath he give you on the sixth day bread enough for two day let every man keep where he be let no man go out of his place on the seventh day . so the people take their rest on the seventh day . and this bread be name manna by israel it be white like a grain seed and it taste be like cake make with honey . and moses say this be the order which the lord have give let one omer of it be keep for future generation so that they may see the bread which i give you for your food in the waste land when i take you out from the land of egypt . and moses say to aaron take a pot and put one omer of manna in it and put it away before the lord to be keep for future generation . so aaron put it away in front of the holy chest to be keep a the lord give order to moses . and the child of israel have manna for their food for forty year till they come to a land with people in it till they come to the edge of the land of canaan . now an omer be the tenth part of an ephah .and the child of israel go on from the waste land of sin by stage a the lord give them order and put up their tent in rephidim and there be no drinking water for the people . so the people be angry with moses and say give u water for drinking . and moses say why be you angry with me ? and why do you put god to the test ? and the people be in great need of water and they make an outcry against moses and say why have you take u out of egypt to send death on u and our child and our cattle through need of water ? and moses cry out to the lord say what be i to do to this people ? they be almost ready to put me to death by stone . and the lord say to moses go on before the people and take some of the chief of israel with you and take in your hand the rod which be stretch out over the nile and go . see i will take my place before you on the rock in horeb and when you give the rock a blow water will come out of it and the people will have drink . and moses do so before the eye of the chief of israel . and he give that place the name massah and meribah because the child of israel be angry and because they put the lord to the test say be the lord with u or not ? then amalek come and make war on israel in rephidim . and moses say to joshua get together a band of men for u and go out make war on amalek tomorrow i will take my place on the top of the hill with the rod of god in my hand . so joshua do a moses say to him and go to war with amalek and moses aaron and hur go up to the top of the hill . now while moses ' hand be lift up israel be the strong but when he let his hand go down amalek become the stronger . but moses ' hand become tire so they put a stone under him and he take his seat on it aaron and hur support his hand one on one side and one on the other so his hand be keep up without fall till the sun go down . and joshua overcame amalek and his people with the sword . and the lord say to moses make a record of this in a book so that it may be keep in memory and say it again in the ear of joshua that all memory of amalek be to be completely uprooted from the earth . then moses put up an altar and give it the name of yahweh nissi for he say the lord have take his oath that there will be war with amalek from generation to generation .now news come to jethro the priest of midian moses ' father in law of all god have do for moses and for israel his people and how the lord have take israel out of egypt . and jethro moses ' father in law take zipporah moses ' wife after he have send her away and her two son one of whom be name gershom for he say i have be live in a strange land and the name of the other be eliezer for he say the god of my father be my help and keep me safe from the sword of pharaoh and jethro moses ' father in law come with his son and his wife to where moses have put up his tent in the waste land by the mountain of god . and he say to moses i your father in law have come to you with your wife and your two son . and moses go out to his father in law and go down on his face before him and give him a kiss and they say to one another be you well ? and they come into the tent . and moses give his father in law an account of all the lord have do to pharaoh and to the egyptian because of israel and of all the trouble which have come on them by the way and how the lord have give them salvation . and jethro be glad because the lord have be good to israel free them from the power of the egyptian . and jethro say praise be to the lord who have take you out of the hand of pharaoh and out of the hand of the egyptian free the people from the yoke of the egyptian . now i be certain that the lord be great than all god for he have overcome them in their pride . then jethro moses ' father in law make a burned offering to god and aaron come with the chief of israel and have a meal with moses ' father in law before god . now on the day after moses take his seat to give decision for the people and the people be wait before moses from morning till even . and when moses ' father in law saw all he be do he say what be this you be do for the people ? why be you seat here by yourself with all the people wait before you from morning till even ? and moses say to his father in law because the people come to me to get direction from god and if they have any question between themselves they come to me and i be judge between a man and his neighbour and i give them the order and law of god . and moses ' father in law say to him what you be do be not good . your strength and that of the people will be completely use up this work be more than you be able to do by yourself . give ear now to my suggestion and may god be with you you be to be the people 's representative before god take their cause to him teach them his rule and his law guide them in the way they have to go and make clear to them the work they have to do . but for the rest take from among the people able men such a have the fear of god true men hat profit wrongly make and put such men over them to be captain of thousand captain of hundred and of fifty and of ten and let them be judge in the cause of the people at all time and let them put before you all important question but in small thing let them give decision themselves in this way it will be less hard for you and they will take the weight off you . if you do this and god give approval then you will be able to go on without weariness and all this people will go to their tent in peace . so moses take note of the word of his father in law and do a he have say . and he make selection of able men out of all israel and make them head over the people captain of thousand captain of hundred and of fifty and of ten . and they be judge in the cause of the people at all time the hard question they put before moses but on every small point they give decision themselves . and moses let his father in law go away and he go back to his land .in the third month after the child of israel go out from egypt on the same day they come into the waste land of sinai . and when they have go away from rephidim and have come into the waste land of sinai they put up their tent in the waste land before the mountain there israel put up it tent . and moses go up to god and the voice of the lord come to him from the mountain say say to the family of jacob and give word to the child of israel you have see what i do to the egyptian and how i take you a on eagle ' wing guide you to myself . if now you will truly give ear to my voice and keep my agreement you will be my special property out of all the people for all the earth be mine and you will be a kingdom of priest to me and a holy nation . these be the word which you be to say to the child of israel . and moses come and send for the chief of the people and put before them all these word which the lord have give him order to say . and all the people answer together say whatever the lord have say we will do . and moses take back to the lord the word of the people . and the lord say to moses see i will come to you in a thick cloud so that what i say to you may come to the ear of the people and they may have belief in you for ever . and moses give the lord word of what the people have say . and the lord say to moses go to the people and make them holy today and tomorrow and let their clothing be wash . and by the third day let them be ready for on the third day the lord will come down on mount sinai before the eye of all the people . and let limit be mark out for the people round the mountain and say to them take care not to go up the mountain or near the side of it whoever put his foot on the mountain will certainly come to his death he be not to be touch by a hand but be to be stone or have an arrow put through him man or beast he be to be put to death at the long sounding of a horn they may come up to the mountain . then moses go down from the mountain to the people and make the people holy and their clothing be wash . and he say to the people be ready by the third day do not come near a woman . and when morning come on the third day there be thunder and flame and a thick cloud on the mountain and a horn sound very loud and all the people in the tent be shake with fear . and moses make the people come out of their tent and take their place before god and they come to the foot of the mountain and all the mountain of sinai be smoke for the lord have come down on it in fire and the smoke of it go up like the smoke of a great burning and all the mountain be shake . and when the sound of the horn become louder and louder moses ' word be answer by the voice of god . then the lord come down on to mount sinai to the top of the mountain and the lord send for moses to come up to the top of the mountain and moses go up . and the lord say to moses go down and give the people order to keep back for fear that a great number of them force their way through to see the lord may come to destruction . and let the priest who come near to the lord make themselves holy for fear that the lord may come on them suddenly . and moses say to the lord the people will not be able to come up the mountain for you give u order to put limit round the mountain mark it out and make it holy . and the lord say to him go down and you and aaron may come up but let not the priest and the people make their way through to the lord or he will come on them suddenly . so moses go down to the people and say this to them .and god say all these word i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt out of the prison house . you be to have no other god but me . you be not to make an image or picture of anything in heaven or on the earth or in the water under the earth you may not go down on your face before them or give them worship for i the lord your god be a god who will not give his honour to another and i will send punishment on the child for the wrongdoing of their father to the third and fourth generation of my hater and i will have mercy through a thousand generation on those who have love for me and keep my law . you be not to make use of the name of the lord your god for an evil purpose whoever take the lord 's name on his lip for an evil purpose will be judge a sinner by the lord keep in memory the sabbath and let it be a holy day . on six day do all your work but the seventh day be a sabbath to the lord your god on that day you be to do no work you or your son or your daughter your man servant or your woman servant your cattle or the man from a strange country who be live among you for in six day the lord make heaven and earth and the sea and everything in them and he take his rest on the seventh day for this reason the lord have give his blessing to the seventh day and make it holy . give honour to your father and to your mother so that your life may be long in the land which the lord your god be give you . do not put anyone to death without cause . do not be false to the married relation . do not take the property of another . do not give false witness against your neighbour . let not your desire be turn to your neighbour 's house or his wife or his man servant or his woman servant or his ox or his as or anything which be his . and all the people be watch the thunderings and the flame and the sound of the horn and the mountain smoking and when they saw it they keep far off shake with fear . and they say to moses to your word we will give ear but let not the voice of god come to our ear for fear death may come on u . and moses say to the people have no fear for god have come to put you to the test so that fear him you may be keep from sin . and the people keep their place far off but moses go near to the dark cloud where god be . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel you yourselves have see that my voice have come to you from heaven god of silver and god of gold you be not to make for yourselves . make for me an altar of earth offer on it your burn offering and your peace offering your sheep and your ox in every place where i have put the memory of my name i will come to you and give you my blessing . and if you make me an altar of stone do not make it of cut stone for the touch of an instrument will make it unclean . and do not go up by step to my altar for fear that your body may be see uncovered .now these be the law which you be to put before them . if you get a hebrew servant for money he be to be your servant for six year and in the seventh year you be to let him go free without payment . if he come to you by himself let him go away by himself if he be married let his wife go away with him . if his master give him a wife and he get son or daughter by her the wife and her child will be the property of the master and the servant be to go away by himself . but if the servant say clearly my master and my wife and child be dear to me i have no desire to be free then his master be to take him to the god of the house and at the door or at it framework he be to make a hole in his ear with a sharp pointed instrument and he will be his servant for ever . and if a man give his daughter for a price to be a servant she be not to go away free a the men servant do . if she be not please to her master who have take her for himself let a payment be make for her so that she may go free her master have no power to get a price for her and send her to a strange land because he have be false to her . and if he give her to his son he be to do everything for her a if she be his daughter . and if he take another woman her food and clothing and her married right be not to be less . and if he do not do these three thing for her she have the right to go free without payment . he who give a man a death blow be himself to be put to death . but if he have no evil purpose against him and god give him into his hand i will give you a place to which he may go in flight . but if a man make an attack on his neighbour on purpose to put him to death by deceit you be to take him from my altar and put him to death . any man who give a blow to his father or his mother be certainly to be put to death . any man who get another into his power in order to get a price for him be to be put to death if you take him in the act . any man curse his father or his mother be to be put to death . if in a fight one man give another a blow with a stone or with the shut hand not cause his death but make him keep in bed if he be able to get up again and go about with a stick the other will be let off only he will have to give him payment for the loss of his time and see that he be care for till he be well . if a man give his man servant or his woman servant blow with a rod cause death he be certainly to undergo punishment . but at the same time if the servant go on living for a day or two the master be not to get punishment for the servant be his property . if men while fight do damage to a woman with child cause the loss of the child but no other evil come to her the man will have to make payment up to the amount fix by her husband in agreement with the decision of the judge . but if damage come to her let life be give in payment for life eye for eye tooth for tooth hand for hand foot for foot burning for burn wound for wound blow for blow . if a man give his man servant or his woman servant a blow in the eye cause it destruction he be to let him go free on account of the damage to his eye . or if the loss of a tooth be cause by his blow he will let him go free on account of his tooth . if an ox come to be the cause of death to a man or a woman the ox be to be stone and it flesh may not be use for food but the owner will not be judge responsible . but if the ox have frequently do such damage in the past and the owner have have word of it and have not keep it under control so that it have be the cause of the death of a man or woman not only be the ox to be stone but it owner be to be put to death . if a price be put on his life let him make payment of whatever price be fix . if the death of a son or of a daughter have be cause the punishment be to be in agreement with this rule . if the death of a man servant or of a woman servant be cause by the ox the owner be to give their master thirty shekel of silver and the ox be to be stone . if a man make a hole in the earth without cover it up and an ox or an as drop into it come to it death the owner of the hole be responsible he will have to make payment to their owner but the dead beast will be his . and if one man 's ox do damage to another man 's ox cause it death then the living ox be to be exchange for money and division make of the price of it and of the price of the dead one . but if it be common knowledge that the ox have frequently do such damage in the past and it owner have not keep it under control he will have to give ox for ox and the dead beast will be his .if a man take without right another man 's ox or his sheep and put it to death or get a price for it he be to give five ox for an ox or four sheep for a sheep in payment the thief will have to make payment for what he have take if he have no money he himself will have to be exchange for money so that payment may be make . if a thief be take in the act of force his way into a house and his death be cause by a blow the owner of the house be not responsible for his blood . but if it be after dawn he will be responsible . if he still have what he have take whatever it be ox or as or sheep he be to give twice it value . if a man make a fire in a field or a vine garden and let the fire do damage to another man 's field he be to give of the best produce of his field or his vine garden to make up for it . if there be a fire and the flame get to the thorn at the edge of the field cause destruction of the cut grain or of the living grain or of the field he who make the fire will have to make up for the damage . if a man put money or good in the care of his neighbour to keep for him and it be take from the man 's house if they get the thief he will have to make payment of twice the value . if they do not get the thief let the master of the house come before the judge and take an oath that he have not put his hand on his neighbour 's good . in any question about an ox or an as or a sheep or clothing or about the loss of any property which anyone say be his let the two side put their cause before god and he who be judge to be in the wrong be to make payment to his neighbour of twice the value . if a man put an as or an ox or a sheep or any beast into the keep of his neighbour and it come to death or be damage or be take away without any person see it if he take his oath before the lord that he have not put his hand to his neighbour 's good the owner be to take his word for it and he will not have to make payment for it . but if it be take from him by a thief he be to make up for the loss of it to it owner . but if it have be damage by a beast and he be able to make this clear he will not have to make payment for what be damage . if a man get from his neighbour the use of one of his beast and it be damage or put to death when the owner be not with it he will certainly have to make payment for the loss . if the owner be with it he will not have to make payment if he give money for the use of it the loss be cover by the payment . if a man take a virgin who have not give her word to another man and have connection with her he will have to give a bride price for her to be his wife . if her father will not give her to him on any account he will have to give the regular payment for virgin . any woman use unnatural power or secret art be to be put to death . any man who have sex connection with a beast be to be put to death . complete destruction will come on any man who make offering to any other god but the lord . do no wrong to a man from a strange country and do not be hard on him for you yourselves be live in a strange country in the land of egypt . do no wrong to a widow or to a child whose father be dead . if you be cruel to them in any way and their cry come up to me i will certainly give ear and in the heat of my wrath i will put you to death with the sword so that your wife will be widow and your child without father . if you let any of the poor among my people have the use of your money do not be a hard creditor to him and do not take interest . if ever you take your neighbour 's clothing in exchange for the use of your money let him have it back before the sun go down for it be the only thing he have for cover his skin what be he to go to sleep in ? and when his cry come up to me i will give ear for my mercy be great . you may not say evil of the judge or put a curse on the ruler of your people . do not keep back your offering from the wealth of your grain and your vine . the first of your son you be to give to me . in the same way with your ox and your sheep for seven day let the young one be with it mother on the eighth day give it to me . you be to be holy men to me the flesh of no animal whose death have be cause by the beast of the field may be use for your food it be to be give to the dog .do not let a false statement go far do not make an agreement with evil doer to be a false witness . do not be move to do wrong by the general opinion or give the support of your word to a wrong decision but on the other hand do not be turn from what be right in order to give support to a poor man 's cause . if you come across the ox or the as of one who be no friend to you wander from it way you be to take it back to him . if you see the as of one who have no love for you bend down to the earth under the weight which be put on it you be to come to it help even against your desire . let no wrong decision be give in the poor man 's cause . keep yourselves far from any false business never let the upright or him who have do no wrong be put to death for i will make the evil doer responsible for his sin . take no reward in a cause for reward make blind those who have eye to see and make the decision of the upright false . do not be hard on the man from a strange country who be live among you for you have have experience of the feeling of one who be far from the land of his birth because you yourselves be live in egypt in a strange land . for six year put seed into your field and get in the increase but in the seventh year let the land have a rest and be unplanted so that the poor may have food from it and let the beast of the field take the rest . do the same with your vine garden and your olive tree . for six day do your work and on the seventh day keep the sabbath so that your ox and your as may have rest together with the son of your servant and the man from a strange land living among you . take note of all these thing which i have say to you and let not the name of other god come into your mind or from your lip . three time in the year you be to keep a feast to me . you be to keep the feast of unleavened bread for seven day let your bread be without leaven a i give you order at the regular time in the month abib for in it you come out of egypt and let no one come before me without an offering and the feast of the grain cut the first fruit of your plant field and the feast at the start of the year when you have get in all the fruit from your field . three time in the year let all your male come before the lord god . do not give the blood of my offering with leavened bread and do not let the fat of my feast be keep all night till the morning . the best of the first fruit of your land be to be take into the house of the lord your god . the young goat be not to be cook in it mother 's milk . see i be send an angel before you to keep you on your way and to be your guide into the place which i have make ready for you . give attention to him and give ear to his voice do not go against him for your wrongdoing will not be overlook by him because my name be in him . but if you truly give ear to his voice and do whatever i say then i will be against those who be against you fight those who be fight you . and my angel will go before you guide you into the land of the amorite and the hittite and the perizzite and the canaanite and the hivite and the jebusite and they will be cut off by my hand . do not go down on your face and give worship to their god or do a they do but overcome them completely and let their pillar be break down . and give worship to the lord your god who will send his bless on your bread and on your water and i will take all disease away from among you . all your animal will give birth without loss not one will be without young in all your land i will give you a full measure of life . i will send my fear before you put to flight all the people to whom you come all those who be against you will go in flight turn their back before you . i will send hornet before you drive out the hivite and the canaanite and the hittite before your face . i will not send them all out in one year for fear that their land may become waste and the beast of the field be increase overmuch against you . little by little i will send them away before you till your number be increase and you take up your heritage in the land . i will let the limit of your land be from the red sea to the sea of the philistine and from the waste land to the river euphrates for i will give the people of those land into your power and you will send them out before you . make no agreement with them or with their god . let them not go on living in your land or they will make you do evil against me for if you give worship to their god it will certainly be a cause of sin to you .and he say to moses come up to the lord you and aaron and nadab and abihu and seventy of the chief of israel and give me worship from a distance . and moses only may come near to the lord but the others be not to come near and the people may not come up with them . then moses come and put before the people all the word of the lord and his law and all the people answer with one voice say whatever the lord have say we will do . then moses put down in write all the word of the lord and he get up early in the morning and make an altar at the foot of the mountain with twelve pillar for the twelve tribe of israel . and he send some of the young men of the child of israel to make burned offering and peace offering of ox to the lord . and moses take half the blood and put it in basin drain out half of the blood over the altar . and he take the book of the agreement read it in the hearing of the people and they say everything which the lord have say we will do and we will keep his law . then moses take the blood and let it come on the people and say this blood be the sign of the agreement which the lord have make with you in these word . then moses and aaron nadab and abihu and seventy of the chief of israel go up and they saw the god of israel and under his foot there be a it seem a jewelled floor clear a the heaven . and he put not his hand on the chief of the child of israel they saw god and take food and drink . and the lord say to moses come up to me on the mountain and take your place there and i will give you the stone on which i have put in write the law and the order so that you may give the people knowledge of them . then moses and joshua his servant get up and moses go up into the mountain of god . and he say to the chief keep your place here till we come back to you aaron and hur be with you if anyone have any cause let him go to them . and moses go up into the mountain and it be cover by the cloud . and the glory of the lord be rest on mount sinai and the cloud be over it for six day and on the seventh day he say moses ' name out of the cloud . and the glory of the lord be like a flame on the top of the mountain before the eye of the child of israel . and moses go up the mountain into the cloud and be there for forty day and forty night .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel that they be to make me an offering from every man who have the impulse in his heart take an offering for me . and this be the offering you be to take from them gold and silver and brass and blue and purple and red and the best linen and goat ' hair and sheepskin colour red and leather and hard wood oil for the light spice for the sweet smelling oil sweet perfume for burn beryl and stone of value to be put on the ephod and on the priest 's bag . and let them make me a holy place so that i may be ever present among them . make the house and everything in it from the design which i will give you . and they be to make an ark of hard wood two and a half cubit long and a cubit and a half wide and high . it be to be plat inside and out with the best gold with an edge of gold all round it and make four ring of gold for it to be fix on it four foot two ring on one side of it and two on the other . and make rod of the same wood plat them with gold . and put the rod through the ring at the side of the ark for lift it . the rod be to be keep in the ring and never take out . inside the ark you be to put the record which i will give you . and you be to make a cover of the best gold two and a half cubit long and a cubit and a half wide . and at the two end of the cover you be to make two winged one of hammered gold one at one end and one at the other the winged one be to be part of the cover . and their wing be to be outstretched over the cover and the winged one be to be opposite one another face the cover . and put the cover over the ark and in the ark the record which i will give you . and there between the two wing one on the cover of the ark i will come to you face to face and make clear to you all the order i have to give you for the child of israel . and you be to make a table of the same wood two cubit long a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high plat with the best gold with a gold edge all round it and make a frame all round it as wide a a man 's hand with a gold edge to the frame . and make four gold ring and put them at the four angle on the four foot of the table the ring be to be fix under the frame to take the rod with which the table be to be lift . make rod of the same wood plat with gold for lift the table . and make the table vessels the spoon and the cup and the basin for liquid all of the best gold . and on the table at all time you be to keep my holy bread . and you be to make a support for light of the best gold it base and it pillar be to be of hammered gold it cup it bud and it flower be to be make of the same metal . it be to have six branch come out from it side three branch from one side and three from the other . every branch have three cup make like almond flower every cup with a bud and a flower on all the branch . and on the pillar four cup like almond flower every one with it bud and it flower and under every two branch a bud make with the branch for all the six branch of it . the bud and the branch be to be make of the same metal all together one complete work of hammered gold . then you be to make it seven vessel for the light put them in their place so that they give light in front of it . and the instrument and tray for use with it be all to be of the best gold . a talent of gold will be need for it with all these vessel . and see that you make them from the design which you saw on the mountain .and you be to make a house for me with ten curtain of the best linen blue and purple and red work with design of wing one by a good workman . every curtain be to be twenty eight cubit long and four cubit wide all of the same measure . five curtain be to be join together and the other five be to be join together . and you be to put twist of blue cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group of five and on the edge of the outside curtain of the second group of five fifty twist on one curtain and fifty on the other the twist to be opposite one another . then make fifty gold hook join the curtain together by the hook and in this way the house will be make . and you be to make curtain of goat ' hair for a tent over the house eleven curtain . every curtain be to be thirty cubit long and four cubit wide all of the same measure . five of these curtain be to be join together and the other six be to be join together the sixth be fold over to make a hanging in front of the tent . and you be to put fifty twist of cord on the edge of the outside curtain of one group and fifty twist on the edge of the outside curtain of the other group . then make fifty brass hook and put the hook into the twist join the tent together to make it one . and the folded part which be over of the curtain of the tent the half curtain which be fold back will be hang down over the back of the house . and the cubit which be over of the ten curtain at the side will be hang over the two side of the house a a cover . and then you be to make a cover for the tent of sheepskin colour red and a cover of leather over that . and you be to make upright board of hard wood for the house . every board be to be ten cubits high and a cubit and a half wide . every board be to be join to the one near to it by two tongue and so for every board in the house . these be the board need for the house twenty board for the south side with forty silver base under the twenty board two base under every board to take it tongue . and twenty board for the second side of the house on the north with their forty silver base two under every board . and six board for the back of the house on the west with two board for the angle of the house at the back . the two be to be join together at the base and at the top to one ring form the two angle . so there be to be eight board with their sixteen silver base two base under every board . and make rod of the same wood five for the board on the one side and five for the board on the other side of the house and five for the west side of the house at the back . and the middle rod be to go through the ring of all the board from end to end . and the board be to be plat with gold have gold ring for the rod to go through and the rod be to be plat with gold . and you be to make the house from the design which you saw on the mountain . and you be to make a veil of the best linen blue and purple and red work with design of wing one by a good workman hang it by gold hook from four pillar of wood plat with gold and fix in silver base . and you be to put up the veil under the hook and put inside it the ark of the law the veil be to be a division between the holy place and the most holy . you be to put the cover on the ark of the law inside the most holy place . and outside the veil you be to put the table and the support for the light opposite the table on the south side of the house and the table be to be on the north side . and you be to make a curtain for the doorway of the tent of the best linen with needlework of blue and purple and red . and make five pillar for the curtain of hard wood plat with gold their hook be to be of gold and their base of brassand make an altar of hard wood a square altar five cubit long five cubit wide and three cubit high . put horn at the four angle of it make of the same plating it all with brass . and make all it vessel the basket for take away the dust of the fire the spade and basin and meat hook and fire tray of brass . and make a network of brass with four brass ring at it four angle . and put the network under the shelf round the altar so that the net come half way up the altar . and make rod for the altar of hard wood plat with brass . and put the rod through the ring at the two opposite side of the altar for lift it . the altar be to be hollow board in with wood make it from the design which you saw on the mountain . and let there be an open space round the house with hanging for it south side of the best linen a hundred cubit long . their twenty pillar and their twenty base be to be of brass the hook of the pillar and their band be to be of silver . and on the north side in the same way hanging a hundred cubit long with twenty pillar of brass on base of brass their hook and their band be to be of silver . and for the open space on the west side the hanging be to be fifty cubit wide with ten pillar and ten base and on the east side the space be to be fifty cubit wide . on the one side of the doorway will be hanging fifteen cubit long with three pillar and three base and on the other side hanging fifteen cubit long with three pillar and three base . and across the doorway a veil of twenty cubit of the best linen make of needlework of blue and purple and red with four pillar and four base . all the pillar round the open space be to have silver band with hook of silver and base of brass . the open space be to be a hundred cubit long fifty cubit wide with side five cubit high curtain with the best linen with base of brass . all the instrument for the work of the house and all it nail and the nail of the open space be to be of brass . give order to the child of israel to give you clear olive oil for the light so that a light may be burn there at all time . let aaron and his son put this in order evening and morning before the lord inside the tent of meeting outside the veil which be before the ark this be to be an order for ever from generation to generation to be keep by the child of israel .now let aaron your brother and his son with him come near from among the child of israel so that they may be my priest even aaron and nadab abihu eleazar and ithamar his son . and make holy robe for aaron your brother so that he may be clothe with glory and honour . give order to all the wise hearted workman whom i have make full of the spirit of wisdom to make robe for aaron so that he may be make holy a my priest . this be what they be to make a priest 's bag an ephod and a robe and a coat of coloured needlework a head dress and a linen band they be to make holy robe for aaron your brother and for his son so that they may do the work of priest for me . they be to take the gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen and make the ephod of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen the work of a designer . it be to have two band stitch to it at the top of the arm join it together . and the beautifully work band which go on it be to be of the same work and the same material of gold and blue and purple and red and twisted linen work . you be to take two beryl stone on which the name of the child of israel be to be cut six name on the one stone and six on the other in the order of their birth . with the work of a jeweller like the cutting of a stamp the name of the child of israel be to be cut on them and they be to be fix in twisted frame of gold . and the two stone be to be place on the ephod over the arm hole to be stone of memory for the child of israel aaron will have their name on his arm when he go in before the lord to keep the lord in mind of them . and you be to make twisted frame of gold and two chain of the best gold twist like cord and have the chain fix on to the frame . and make a priest 's bag for give decision design like the ephod make of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen . it be to be square fold in two a hand stretch long and a hand stretch wide . and on it you be to put four line of jewel the first line be to be a cornelian a chrysolite and an emerald the second a ruby a sapphire and an onyx the third a jacinth an agate and an amethyst the fourth a topaz a beryl and a jasper they be to be fix in twisted frame of gold . the jewel be to be twelve in number for the name of the child of israel every jewel have the name of one of the twelve tribes cut on it a on a stamp . and you be to make two chain of gold twist like cord to be fix to the priest 's bag . and put two gold ring on the two end of the bag . put the two gold chain on the two ring at the end of the bag join the other end of the chain to the gold frame and put them on the front of the ephod at the top of the arm . then make two gold ring and put them on the low end of the bag at the edge of it on the inner side near to the ephod . and make two more gold ring and put them on the front of the ephod at the top of the arm at the join over the worked band so that the ring on the bag may be fix to the ring of the ephod by a blue cord and on to the band of the ephod so that the bag may not come loose from the ephod . and so aaron will have the name of the child of israel on the priest 's bag over his heart whenever he go into the holy place to keep the memory of them before the lord . and in the bag you be to put the urim and thummim so that they may be on aaron 's heart whenever he go in before the lord and aaron may have the power of make decision for the child of israel before the lord at all time . the robe which go with the ephod be to be make all of blue with a hole at the top in the middle of it the hole be to be edge with a band to make it strong like the hole in the coat of a fighting man so that it may not be break open . and round the skirt of it put fruit in blue and purple and red with bell of gold between a gold bell and a fruit in turn all round the skirt of the robe . aaron be to put it on for his holy work and the sound of it will be clear when he go into the holy place before the lord and when he come out keep him safe from death . you be to make a plate of the best gold cut on it a on a stamp these word holy to the lord . put a blue cord on it and put it on the front of the twisted head dress and it will be over aaron 's brow so that aaron will be responsible for any error in all the holy offering make by the child of israel it will be on his brow at all time so that their offering may be please to the lord . the coat be to be make of the best linen work in square and you be to make a head dress of linen and a linen band work in needlework . and for aaron 's son you be to make coat and band and head dress so that they may be clothe with glory and honour . these you be to put on aaron your brother and on his son put oil on them separate them and make them holy to do the work of priest to me . and you be to make them linen trouser cover their body from the middle to the knee aaron and his son be to put these on whenever they go into the tent of meeting or come near the altar when they be do the work of the holy place so that they may be free from any sin cause death this be to be an order for him and his seed after him for ever .this be what you be to do to make them holy to do the work of priest to me take one young ox and two male sheep without any mark on them and unleavened bread and unleavened cake mixed with oil and thin unleavened cake on which oil have be put make of the best bread meal put these in a basket and take them with the ox and the two sheep . and let aaron and his son come to the door of the tent of meeting and there let them be wash with water . take the robe and put the coat and the dress and the ephod and the priest 's bag on aaron put the band of needlework round him and let the head dress be place on his head and the holy crown on the head dress . then take the oil and put it on his head . and take his son and put their robe on them and put the linen band round aaron and his son and the head dress on them to make them priest by my order for ever so you be to make aaron and his son holy to me . then let the ox be take in front of the tent of meeting and let aaron and his son put their hand on it head . and you be to put the ox to death before the lord at the door of the tent of meeting . then take some of the blood of the ox and put it on the horn of the altar with your finger drain out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar . and take all the fat cover the inside of the ox and the fat join the liver and the two kidney with the fat round them and let them be burn on the altar but the flesh of the ox and it skin and it waste part be to be burn outside the circle of the tent for it be a sin offering . then take one of the sheep and let aaron and his son put their hand on it head . then let it be put to death so that the side of the altar be mark with it blood . then the sheep be to be cut up into it part and after wash it leg and it inside part you be to put them with the part and the head and let them all be burn on the altar a a burned offering to the lord a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . then take the other sheep and after aaron and his son have put their hand on it head you be to put the sheep to death and take some of it blood and put it on the point of aaron 's right ear and of the right ear of his son and on the thumb of their right hand and the great toe of their right foot drop the rest of the blood on the side of the altar . then take some of the blood on the altar and the oil and put it on aaron and his robe and on his son and on their robe so that he and his robe and his son and their robe may be make holy . then take the fat of the sheep the fat tail the fat cover the inside and the fat join the liver and the two kidney with the fat round them and the right leg for by the offering of this sheep they be to be mark out a priest and take one bit of bread and one cake of oil bread and one thin cake out of the basket of unleavened bread which be before the lord and put them all on the hand of aaron and of his son to be wave for a wave offering before the lord . then take them from their hand and let them be burn on the burn offering on the altar a sweet smell before the lord an offering make by fire to the lord . then take the breast of aaron 's sheep wave it before the lord and it be to be your part of the offering . so you be to make holy the breast of the sheep which be wave and the leg which be lift up on high that be of the sheep which be offer for aaron and his son and it will be their part a a right for ever from the child of israel it be a special offering from the child of israel make from their peace offer a special offering lift up to the lord . and aaron 's holy robe will be use by his son after him they will put them on when they be make priest . for seven day the son who become priest in his place will put them on when he come into the tent of meeting to do the work of the holy place . then take the sheep of the wave offering and let it flesh be cook in water in a holy place . and let aaron and his son make a meal of it with the bread in the basket at the door of the tent of meeting . all those thing which be use a offering to take away sin and to make them holy to be priest they may have for food but no one who be not a priest may have them for they be holy food . and if any of the flesh of the offering or of the bread be over till the morning let it be burn with fire it be not to be use for food for it be holy . all these thing you be to do to aaron and his son a i have give you order for seven day the work of make them priest be to go on . every day an ox be to be offer a a sin offering to take away sin and by this offering on it you will make the altar clean from sin and you be to put oil on it and make it holy . for seven day you be to make offering for the altar and make it holy so that it may become completely holy and anything touch it will become holy . now this be the offering which you be to make on the altar two lamb in their first year every day regularly . one lamb be to be offer in the morning and the other in the evening and with the one lamb a tenth part of an ephah of the best meal mixed with a fourth part of a hin of clear oil and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering . and the other lamb be to be offer in the evening and with it the same meal offering and drink offering for a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . this be to be a regular burn offering make from generation to generation at the door of the tent of meeting before the lord where i will come face to face with you and have talk with you . there i will come face to face with the child of israel and the tent will be make holy by my glory i will make holy the tent of meeting and the altar and aaron and his son i will make holy to be my priest among the child of israel i will make my living place and i will be their god . and they will see that i be the lord their god who take them out of the land of egypt so that i might be ever with them i be the lord their god .and you be to make an altar for the burning of perfume of hard wood let it be make . the altar be to be square a cubit long and a cubit wide and two cubit high and it horn be to be make of the same . it be to be plat with the best gold the top of it and the side and the horn with an edging of gold all round it . under the edge on the two opposite side you be to make two gold ring to take the rod for lift it . and make these rod of the same wood plat them with gold . and let it be place in front of the veil before the ark of the law before the cover which be over the law where i will come face to face with you . and on this altar sweet spice be to be burn by aaron every morning when he see to the light . and every evening when he put the light up in their place the spice be to be burn a sweet smell smoke go up before the lord from generation to generation for ever . no strange perfume no burned offering or meal offering and no drink offering be to be offer on it . and once every year aaron be to make it horn clean with the blood of the sin offering he be to make it clean once every year from generation to generation it be most holy to the lord . and the lord say to moses when you be take the number of the child of israel let every man who be number give to the lord a price for his life so that no disease may come on them when they be number . and this be what they be to give let every man who be number give half a shekel by the scale of the holy place the shekel be value at twenty gerahs this money be an offering to the lord . everyone who be number from twenty year old and over be to give an offering to the lord . the man of wealth be to give no more and the poor man no less than the half shekel of silver when the offering be make to the lord a the price for your life . and you be to take this money from the child of israel to be use for the work of the tent of meeting to keep the memory of the child of israel before the lord and to be the price of your life . and the lord say to moses you be to make a brass wash vessel with a brass base and put it between the tent of meeting and the altar with water in it that it may be use by aaron and his son for wash their hand and foot whenever they go into the tent of meeting they be to be wash with water to keep them from death and whenever they come near to do the work of the altar or to make an offering by fire to the lord their hand and foot be to be wash . so that they may be safe from death this be an order to them for ever to him and his seed from generation to generation . and the lord say to moses take the best spice five hundred shekel ' weight of liquid myrrh and of sweet cinnamon half a much that be two hundred and fifty shekel and two hundred and fifty shekel of sweet calamus and of cassia five hundred shekel ' weight measure by the scale of the holy place and of olive oil a hin and make these into a holy oil a perfume make by the art of the perfume maker it be to be a holy oil . this oil be to be put on the tent of meeting and on the ark of the law and on the table and all it vessel and on the support for the light with it vessel and on the altar for burn spice and on the altar of burn offering with it vessel and on the wash vessel and it base . and you be to make them most holy anything touch them will become holy . and put the oil on aaron and his son make them holy to do the work of priest to me . and say to the child of israel this be to be the lord 's holy oil from generation to generation . it be not to be use for man 's flesh and no other be to be make like it holy it be and you be to keep it holy . whoever make any like it or put it on one who be not a priest will be cut off from his people . and the lord say to moses take sweet spice stacte and onycha and galbanum with the best frankincense in equal weight and make from them a perfume such a be make by the art of the perfume maker mixed with salt and clean and holy . and put some of it crush very small in front of the ark in the tent of meeting where i will come face to face with you it be to be most holy . you be not to make any perfume like it for yourselves it be to be keep holy to the lord . whoever make any like it for it sweet smell will be cut off from his people .and the lord say to moses i have make selection of bezalel the son of uri by name the son of hur of the tribe of judah and i have give him the spirit of god and make him wise and full of knowledge and expert in every sort of handwork to do all sort of delicate work in gold and silver and brass in cut stone for frame and to do every form of woodwork . and i have make selection of oholiab with him the son of ahisamach of the tribe of dan and in the heart of all who be wise i have put the knowledge to make whatever i have give you order to have make the tent of meeting and the ark of the law and the cover which be on it and all the thing for the tent and the table with it vessel and the holy light support with all it vessel and the altar for the burning of spice and the altar of burn offering with all it vessel and the wash vessel with it base and the robe of needlework the holy robe for aaron and for his son for their use when act a priest and the holy oil and the perfume of sweet spice for the holy place they will do whatever i have give you order to have do . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel that they be to keep my sabbath for the sabbath day be a sign between me and you through all your generation so that you may see that i be the lord who make you holy . so you be to keep the sabbath a a holy day and anyone not honour it will certainly be put to death whoever do any work on that day will be cut off from his people . six day may work be do but the seventh day be a sabbath of complete rest holy to the lord whoever do any work on the sabbath day be to be put to death . and the child of israel be to keep the sabbath holy from generation to generation by an eternal agreement . it be a sign between me and the child of israel for ever because in six day the lord make heaven and earth and on the seventh day he take his rest and have pleasure in it . and when his talk with moses on mount sinai be end he give him the two stone of the law two stone on which be the writing make by the finger of god .and when the people saw that moses be a long time come down from the mountain they all come to aaron and say to him come make u a god to go before u a for this moses who take u up out of the land of egypt we have no idea what have become of him . then aaron say to them take off the gold ring which be in the ear of your wife and your son and your daughter and give them to me . and all the people take the gold ring from their ear and give them to aaron . and he take the gold from them and hammer it with an instrument he make it into the metal image of a young ox and they say this be your god o israel who take you out of the land of egypt . and when aaron saw this he make an altar before it and make a public statement say tomorrow there will be a feast to the lord . so early on the day after they get up and make burn offering and peace offering and take their seat at the feast and then give themselves to pleasure . and the lord say to moses go down quickly for your people whom you take out of the land of egypt be turn to evil way even now they be turn away from the rule i give them and have make themselves a metal ox and give worship to it and offering say this be your god o israel who take you up out of the land of egypt . and the lord say to moses i have be watch this people and i see that they be a stiff necked people . now do not get in my way for my wrath be burn against them i will send destruction on them but of you i will make a great nation . but moses make prayer to god say lord why be your wrath burn against your people whom you take out of the land of egypt with great power and with the strength of your hand ? why let the egyptian say he take them out to an evil fate to put them to death on the mountain cut them off from the earth ? let your wrath be turn away from them and send not this evil on your people . have in mind abraham isaac and israel your servant to whom you give your oath say i will make your seed like the star of heaven in number and all this land will i give to your seed a i say to be their heritage for ever . so the lord let himself be turn from his purpose of send punishment on his people . then moses come down the mountain with the two stone of the law in his hand the stone have write on their two side on the front and on the back . the stone be the work of god and the writing be the writing of god cut on the stone . now when the noise and the voice of the people come to the ear of joshua he say to moses there be a noise of war in the tent . and moses say it be not the voice of men who be overcome in the fight or the cry of those who have be overcome it be the sound of song which come to my ear . and when he come near the tent he saw the image of the ox and the people dance and in his wrath moses let the stone go from his hand and they be break at the foot of the mountain . and he take the ox which they have make burn it in the fire and crush it to powder and he put it in the water and make the child of israel take a drink of it . and moses say to aaron what do the people do to you that you let this great sin come on them ? and aaron say let not my lord be angry you have see how the purpose of this people be evil . for they say to me make u a god to go before u a for this moses who take u up out of the land of egypt we have no idea what have come to him . then i say to them whoever have any gold let him take it off so they give it to me and i put it in the fire and this image of an ox come out . and moses saw that the people be out of control for aaron have let them loose to their shame before their hater then moses take his place at the way into the tent and say whoever be on the lord 's side let him come to me . and all the son of levi come together to him . and he say to them this be the word of the lord the god of israel let every man take his sword at his side and go from one end of the tent to the other put to death his brother and his friend and his neighbour . and the son of levi do a moses say and about three thousand of the people be put to death that day . and moses say you have make yourselves priest to the lord this day for every one of you have make the offering of his son and his brother the blessing of the lord be on you this day . and on the day after moses say to the people great have be your sin but i will go up to the lord and see if i may get forgiveness for your sin . then moses go back to the lord and say this people have do a great sin make themselves a god of gold but now if you will give them forgiveness but if not let my name be take out of your book . and the lord say to moses whoever have do evil against me will be take out of my book . but now go take the people into that place of which i have give you word see my angel will go before you but when the time of my judging have come i will send punishment on them for their sin . and the lord send punishment on the people because they give worship to the ox which aaron make .and the lord say to moses go forward from this place you and the people whom you have take up out of the land of egypt to that land about which i make an oath to abraham isaac and jacob say to your seed will i give it . and i will send an angel before you drive out the canaanite and the amorite and the hittite and the perizzite and the hivite and the jebusite go up to that land flow with milk and honey but i will not go up among you for you be a stiff necked people for fear that i send destruction on you while you be on the way . hear this bad news the people be full of grief and no one put on his ornament . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel you be a stiff necked people if i come among you even for a minute i will send destruction on you so take off all your ornament so that i may see what to do with you . so the child of israel take off their ornament at mount horeb and do not put them on again . now it be moses ' way to put up the tent of meeting outside the tent circle at some distance away give it the name of the tent of meeting . and everyone desiring to make his prayer to the lord go to the tent of meeting outside the tent circle . and whenever moses go out to the tent of meet all the people get up and everyone go to the door of his tent look after moses till he go inside the tent . and whenever moses go into the tent the pillar of cloud come down and take it place by the door of the tent as long a the lord be talk with moses . and all the people saw the cloud at the door of the tent and they go down on their face everyone at the door of his tent . and the lord have talk with moses face to face a a man may have talk with his friend . and when moses come back to the tent his servant the young man joshua the son of nun do not come away from the tent . and moses say to the lord see you say to me be this people 's guide on their journey but you have not make clear to me whom you will send with me . but you have say i have knowledge of you by name and you have grace in my eye . if then i have grace in your eye let me see your way so that i may have knowledge of you and be certain of your grace and my prayer be that you will keep in mind that this nation be your people . and he say i myself will go with you and give you rest . and moses say if you yourself be not go with u do not send u on from here . for be not the fact of your go with u the sign that i and this people have grace in your eye so that we that be i and your people be separate from all other people on the face of the earth ? and the lord say to moses i will do a you say for you have grace in my eye and i have knowledge of you by your name . and moses say o lord let me see your glory . and he say i will make all the light of my be come before you and will make clear to you what i be i will be kind to those to whom i will be kind and have mercy on those on whom i will have mercy . but it be not possible for you to see my face for no man may see me and still go on living . and the lord say see there be a place near me and you may take your place on the rock and when my glory go by i will put you in a hole in the rock cover you with my hand till i have go past then i will take away my hand and you will see my back but my face be not to be see .and the lord say to moses make two other stone like the first two and i will put on them the word which be on the first stone which be break by you . and be ready by the morning and come up on mount sinai and come before me there in the morning on the top of the mountain . no one be to come up with you and let no man be see anywhere on the mountain let no flock or herd come near to get their food at it foot . so moses get two stone cut like the first and early in the morning he go up mount sinai a the lord have say with the two stone in his hand . and the lord come down in the cloud and take his place by the side of moses and moses give worship to the name of the lord . and the lord go past before his eye say the lord the lord a god full of pity and grace slow to wrath and great in mercy and faith have mercy on thousand overlook evil and wrongdoing and sin he will not let wrongdoer go free but will send punishment on child for the sin of their father and on their child 's child to the third and fourth generation . then moses quickly go down on his face in worship . and he say if now i have grace in your eye let the lord go among u for this be a stiff necked people and give u forgiveness for our wrongdoing and our sin and take u for your heritage . and the lord say see this be what i will undertake before the eye of your people i will do wonder such a have not be do in all the earth or in any nation and all your people will see the work of the lord for what i be about to do for you be greatly to be fear . take care to do the order which i give you today i will send out from before you the amorite and the canaanite and the hittite and the perizzite and the hivite and the jebusite . but take care and do not make any agreement with the people of the land where you be go for it will be a cause of sin to you . but their altar be to be overturn and their pillar break and their image cut down for you be to be worshipper of no other god for the lord be a god who will not give his honour to another . so see that you make no agreement with the people of the land and do not go after their god or take part in their offering or be guest at their feast or take their daughter for your son for when their daughter give worship before their god they will make your son take part with them . make for yourselves no god of metal . keep the feast of unleavened bread for seven day your food be to be bread without leaven a i give you order at the regular time in the month abib for in that month you come out of egypt . every first male child be mine the first male birth of your cattle the first male of every ox and sheep . a lamb may be give in payment for the young of an as but if you will not make payment for it it neck will have to be break . for all the first of your son you be to make payment . no one be to come before me without an offering . six day let work be do but on the seventh day take your rest at plough time and at the grain cutting you be to have a day for rest . and you be to keep the feast of week when you get in the first fruit of the grain and the feast at the turn of the year when you take in the produce of your field . three time in the year let all your male come before the lord the god of israel . for i will send out the nation before you and make wide the limit of your land and no man will make an attempt to take your land while you go up to give worship to the lord three time in the year . no leaven be to be offer with the blood of my offering and the offering of the passover feast may not be keep till the morning . take the first fruit of your land a an offering to the house of the lord your god . let not the young goat be cook in it mother 's milk and the lord say to moses put all these word in write for on them be base the agreement which i will make with you . and for forty day and forty night moses be there with the lord and in that time he have no food or drink . and he put in write on the stone the word of the agreement the ten rule of the law . now when moses come down from mount sinai with the two stone in his hand he be not conscious that his face be shin because of his talk with god . but when aaron and all the child of israel saw moses and the shining of his face they would not come near him for fear . then moses sent for them and aaron with the chief of the people come to him and moses have talk with them . and later all the child of israel come near and he give them all the order which the lord have give him on mount sinai . and at the end of his talk with them moses put a veil over his face . but whenever moses go in before the lord to have talk with him he take off the veil till he come out . and whenever he come out he say to the child of israel what he have be order to say and the child of israel saw that the face of moses be shin so moses put the veil over his face again till he go to the lord .and moses send for all the child of israel to come together and say to them this be what the lord have say and these be his order . six day let work be do but the seventh day be to be a holy day to you a sabbath of rest to the lord whoever do any work on that day be to be put to death . no fire be to be light in any of your house on the sabbath day . and moses say to all the meeting of the child of israel this be the order which the lord have give take from among you an offering to the lord everyone who have the impulse in his heart let him give his offering to the lord gold and silver and brass and blue and purple and red and the best linen and goat ' hair and sheepskin colour red and leather and hard wood and oil for the light and spice for the holy oil and for the sweet perfume for burning . and beryl and jewel to be cut for the ephod and for the priest 's bag . and let every wise hearted man among you come and make whatever have be order by the lord the house and it tent and it cover it hook and it board it rod and it pillar and it base the ark with it cover and it rod and the veil hang before it the table and it rod and all it vessel and the holy bread and the support for the light with it vessel and it light and the oil for the light and the altar for burn spice with it rod and the holy oil and the sweet perfume and the curtain for the door at the door of the house the altar of burn offering with it network of brass it rod and all it vessel the wash vessel and it base the hanging for the open space it pillar and their base and the curtain for the doorway the nail for the house and the nail for the open space and their cord the robe of needlework for the work of the holy place the holy robe for aaron the priest and the robe for his son when act a priest . and all the child of israel go away from moses . and everyone whose heart be move everyone who be guide by the impulse of his spirit come with his offering for the lord for whatever be need for the tent of meeting and it work and for the holy robe . they come men and woman all who be ready to give and give pin and nose ring and finger ring and neck ornament all of gold everyone give an offering of gold to the lord . and everyone who have blue and purple and red and the best linen and goat ' hair and sheepskin colour red and leather give them . everyone who have silver and brass give an offering of them to the lord and everyone who have hard wood such a be need for the work give it . and all the woman who be expert with their hand make cloth and give the work of their hand blue and purple and red and the best linen . and those woman who have the knowledge make the goat ' hair into cloth . and the ruler give the beryl and the cut jewel for the ephod and the priest 's bag and the spice and the oil for the light and the holy oil and the sweet perfume . the child of israel every man and woman from the impulse of their heart give their offering freely to the lord for the work which the lord have give moses order to have do . and moses say to the child of israel see the lord have make selection of bezalel the son of uri the son of hur of the tribe of judah and he have make him full of the spirit of god in all wisdom and knowledge and art of every sort a an expert designer of beautiful thing work in gold and silver and brass train in the cutting of stone and the ornamenting of wood and in every sort of handwork . and he have give to him and to oholiab the son of ahisamach of the tribe of dan the power of training others . to them he have give knowledge of all the art of the handworker of the designer and the expert workman of the maker of needlework in blue and purple and red and the best linen and of the maker of cloth in all the art of the designer and the trained workman they be expert .so let bezalel and oholiab get to work with every wise hearted man to whom the lord have give wisdom and knowledge to do whatever be necessary for the ordering of the holy place a the lord have give order . then moses sent for bezalel and oholiab and for all the wise hearted men to whom the lord have give wisdom even everyone who be move by the impulse of his heart to come and take part in the work and they take from moses all the offering which the child of israel have give for the building of the holy place . and still they go on give him more free offering every morning . then the wise men who be do all the work of the holy place come from their work and say to moses the people be give much more than be need for the work which the lord have give u order to do . so moses make an order and have it give out through all the tent say let no man or woman make any more offering for the holy place . so the people be keep from give more . for the material they have be enough and more than enough for all the work which have to be do . then all the expert workman among them make the house with it ten curtain of the best linen blue and purple and red they make them with wing one work by expert designer . every curtain be twenty eight cubit long and four cubit wide all of the same measure . and five curtain be join together and the other five curtain be join together . and they put twist of blue cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group and in the same way on the outside curtain of the second group . fifty twist on the one curtain and fifty on the edge of the curtain of the other group the twist be opposite to one another . and they make fifty hook of gold join the curtain one to another with the hook and so the house be make . and they make curtain of goat ' hair for the tent eleven curtain be make . every curtain be thirty cubit long and four cubit wide all of the same measure . five curtain be join together to make one group and six curtain be join together to make the other group . and they put fifty twist of cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group and fifty twist on the edge of the outside curtain of the second group and fifty hook of brass for join them together to make the tent . and they make a cover of sheepskin colour red to go over the tent and a cover of leather over that . and for the upright of the house they make board of hard wood . the board be ten cubit long and one cubit and a half wide . every board have two tongue fix into it all the board be make in this way . they make twenty board for the south side of the house and for these twenty board forty silver base two base under every board to take it tongue . and for the second side of the house on the north they make twenty board with their forty silver base two base for every board . and for the west side of the house at the back they make six board and two board for the angle at the back . these be join together at the base and at the top to one ring so form the two angle . so there be eight board with sixteen base of silver two base under every board . and they make rod of hard wood five for the board on one side of the house and five for the board on the other side of the house and five for the board at the back on the west . the middle rod be make to go right through the ring of all the board from one end to the other . all the board be plat with gold and the ring through which the rod go be of gold and the rod be plat with gold . and he make the veil of the best linen blue and purple and red work with winged one design by expert workman . and they make four pillar for it of hard wood plat with gold they have hook of gold and four silver base . and they make a curtain for the door of the tent of the best linen with needlework of blue and purple and red and five pillar for the curtain with their hook the head of the pillar be of gold and they be circle with band of gold and their five base be of brass .and bezalel make the ark of hard wood two and a half cubit long a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high plat it inside and out with the best gold and put an edge of gold all round it . and he make four gold ring for it four angle two on one side and two on the other and rod of the same wood plat with gold . these rod he put in the ring at the side of the ark for lift it . and he make the cover all of gold two and a half cubit long and a cubit and a half wide . and he make two winged one hammer out of one bit of gold for the two end of the cover place one at one end and one at the other the winged one be part of the cover . and their wing be stretch out over the cover the face of the winged one be opposite one another and face the cover . and he make the table of hard wood two cubit long a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high plat it with the best gold and put a gold edge all round it . and he make a frame all round it about as wide a a man 's hand edge with gold all round . and he make four gold ring and put the ring at the angle of it four foot . the ring be fix under the frame to take the rod with which the table be to be lift . the rod for lift the table he make of hard wood plat with gold . and all the table vessels the plate and spoon and basin and the cup for liquid he make of the best gold . then he make the support for the light all of the best gold it base and it pillar be of hammer gold it cup and bud and flower be all make out of the same metal it have six branch come out from it side three from one side and three from the other every branch have three cup make like almond flower every cup with a bud and a flower on all the branch and on it pillar four cup like almond flower every one with it bud and it flower and under every two branch a bud make with the branch for all six branch of it . the bud and the branch be make of the same metal all together one complete work of the best hammered gold . and he make the seven vessel for the light and all the necessary instrument for it of gold . a talent of the best gold be use for the making of it and it vessel . and he make the altar for the burning of spice use the same hard wood it be square a cubit long and a cubit wide and two cubit high the horn make of the same . the top and the side and the horn be all plat with the best gold and he put an edge of gold all round it . and he make two gold ring place them on the two opposite side under the edge to take the rod for lift it . the rod he make of the same hard wood plat them with gold . and he make the holy oil and the perfume of sweet spice for burning after the art of the perfume maker .the altar of burned offering he make of hard wood a square altar five cubit long five cubit wide and three cubit high and he put horn at it four angle make of the same plating it all with brass and brass be use for all the vessel of the altar the basket and the spade the basin and the meat hook and the fire trays all the vessel he make of brass and he make a network of brass for the altar under the frame round it stretch half way up and four ring for the four angle of this network to take the rod . the rod he make of hard wood plat with brass . he put the rod through the ring at the opposite side of the altar for lift it he make the altar hollow board in with wood . and he make the washing vessel of brass on a brass base use the polished brass look glass give by the woman who do work at the door of the tent of meeting . to make the open space he put hanging on the south side of the best linen a hundred cubit long their twenty pillar and their twenty base be brass and the hook of the pillar and their band be of silver . and for the north side . hang a hundred cubit long on twenty brass pillar in brass base with silver hook and band . and on the west side hanging fifty cubit long on ten pillar in ten base with silver band . and on the east side the open space be fifty cubit long . the hanging on one side of the doorway be fifteen cubit long on three pillar with their three base and the same on the other side of the doorway on this side and on that the hanging be fifteen cubit long on three pillar with their three base . all the hanging be of the best linen . and the base of the pillar be of brass their hook and the band round the top of them be of silver all the pillar be ring with silver . and the curtain for the doorway of the open space be of the best linen with design of blue and purple and red in needlework it be twenty cubit long and five cubit high to go with the hanging round the side . there be four pillar with their base all of brass the hook be of silver and their top and their band be cover with silver . all the nail use for the house and the open space round it be of brass . this be the price of the making of the house even the house of witness a it be value by the word of moses for the work of the levite under the direction of ithamar the son of aaron the priest . bezalel the son of uri the son of hur of the tribe of judah make everything a the lord have give order to moses . and with him be oholiab the son of ahisamach of the tribe of dan a designer and a trained workman expert in needlework of blue and purple and red and the best linen . the gold use for all the different work do for the holy place the gold which be give be twenty nine talent and seven hundred and thirty shekel in weight by the scale of the holy place . and the silver give by those who be number of the people be a hundred talent and a thousand seven hundred and seventy five shekel in weight by the scale of the holy place . a beka that be half a shekel by the holy scale for everyone who be number there be six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men of twenty year old and over . of this silver a hundred talent be use for make the base of the pillar of the holy place and of the veil a talent for every base . and a thousand seven hundred and seventy five shekel of silver be use to make the hook for the pillar and for plat the top of the pillar and for make their band . the brass which be give be seventy talent two thousand four hundred shekel from it he make the base of the doorway of the tent of meeting and the brass altar and the network for it and all the vessel for the altar and the base for the open space all round and for it doorway and all the nail for the house and for the open space .and from the needlework of blue and purple and red they make the robe use for the work of the holy place and the holy robe for aaron a the lord have give order to moses . the ephod he make of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen hammer the gold into thin plate and cut it into wire to be work into the blue and the purple and the red and the linen by the designer . and they make two band for join it edge together at the top of the arm . and the beautifully work band which go on it be of the same design and the same material work in gold and blue and purple and red and twisted linen work a the lord give order to moses . then they make the beryl stone fix in twisted frame of gold and cut like the cutting of a stamp with the name of the child of israel . these he put on the ephod over the arm hole to be stone of memory for the child of israel a the lord have say to moses . the priest 's bag be design like the ephod of the best linen work with gold and blue and purple and red . it be square and fold in two a long and as wide a the stretch of a man 's hand and on it they put four line of stone in the first line be a carnelian a chrysolite and an emerald in the second a ruby a sapphire and an onyx in the third a jacinth an agate and an amethyst in the fourth a topaz a beryl and a jasper they be fix in twisted frame of gold . there be twelve stone for the twelve tribe of israel on every one the name of one of the tribe of israel be cut like the cutting of a stamp . and on the bag they put gold chain twist like cord . and they make two gold frame and two gold ring the ring be fix to the end of the priest 's bag and they put the two twist chain on the two ring at the end of the priest 's bag and the other two end of the chain be join to the two frame and fix to the front of the ephod over the arm hole . and they make two ring of gold and put them on the two low end of the bag on the inner side near to the ephod . and two other gold ring be put on the front of the ephod over the arm hole at the join and over the worked band . and the ring on the bag be fix to the ring of the ephod by a blue cord keep it in place over the band so that the bag might not get loose a the lord give order to moses . the robe which go with the ephod be make all of blue with a hole at the top in the middle like the hole in the coat of a fight man edge with a band to make it strong . the skirt of the robe be work all round with fruit in blue and purple and red made of twisted linen . and between the fruit all round the skirt they put gold bell a the lord give order to moses . all round the skirt of the robe be bell and fruit in turn . the coat for aaron and his son they make of the best linen and the twisted head dress for aaron and beautiful head dress of linen and linen trouser and a linen band work with a design of blue and purple and red a the lord have say to moses . the plate for the holy crown be make of the best gold and on it be cut these word holy to the lord . it be fix to the head dress by a blue cord a the lord have give order to moses . so all the work on the house of the tent of meeting be do a the lord have give order to moses so the child of israel do it . then they take the house to moses the tent with all the thing for it it hook it board it rod it pillar and it base the outer cover of sheepskin colour red and the cover of leather and the veil for the doorway the ark of the law with it rod and it cover the table with all it vessel and the holy bread the support for the light with the vessel for the light to be put in their place on it and all it vessel and the oil for the light and the gold altar and the holy oil and the sweet perfume for burning and the curtain for the doorway of the tent and the brass altar with it network of brass and it rod and all it vessel and the washing vessel and it base the hanging for the open space with the pillar and their base and the curtain for the doorway and the cord and nail and all the instrument necessary for the work of the house of the tent of meet the robe for use in the holy place and the holy robe for aaron and his son when act a priest . the child of israel do everything a the lord have give order to moses . then moses when he saw all their work and saw that they have do everything a the lord have say give them his blessing .and the lord say to moses on the first day of the first month you be to put up the house of the tent of meeting . and inside it put the ark of the law hang the veil before it . and put the table inside place all the thing on it in order and put in the support for the light and let it light be burn . and put the gold altar for burn perfume in front of the ark of the law hang the curtain over the doorway of the house . and put the altar of burn offering before the doorway of the house of the tent of meeting . and let the wash vessel with water in it be put between the tent of meeting and the altar . and put up the hanging form the open space all round it with the curtain over it doorway . and take the holy oil and put it on the house and everything in it and make it and everything in it holy and put oil on the altar of burned offering and make it and all it vessel holy this altar be to be most holy . and put oil on the wash vessel and it base and make them holy . then let aaron and his son come to the door of the tent of meeting and after wash them with water you be to put on aaron the holy robe and you be to put oil on him and make him holy so that he may be my priest . and take his son with him and put coat on them and put oil on them a you do on their father so that they may be my priest the put on of oil will make them priest for ever from generation to generation . and moses do this a the lord give him order so he do . so on the first day of the first month in the second year the house be put up . moses put up the house place it base in position and lift up it upright put in the rod and plant the pillar in their place stretch the outer tent over it and cover it a the lord have give him order . and he take the law and put it inside the ark and put the rod at it side and the cover over it and he take the ark into the house hang up the veil before it a the lord have give him order . and he put the table in the tent of meeting on the north side outside the veil . and he put the bread on it in order before the lord a the lord have say . the support for the light he put in the tent of meet opposite the table on the south side light the light before the lord a the lord have give him order . and he put the gold altar in the tent of meeting in front of the veil burn sweet perfume on it a the lord have give him order . and he put up the curtain at the doorway of the house . and at the door of the house of the tent of meeting he put the altar of burned offering offer on it the burned offering and the meal offering a the lord have give him order . and between the altar and the tent of meeting he put the vessel with water in it for wash . in it the hand and foot of moses and aaron and his son be wash whenever they go into the tent of meeting and when they come near the altar a the lord have give order to moses . and he put up the hanging form the open space round the house and the altar and put the curtain over the doorway . so moses make the work complete . then the cloud come down cover the tent of meeting and the house be full of the glory of the lord so that moses be not able to go into the tent of meeting because the cloud be rest on it and the house be full of the glory of the lord . and whenever the cloud be take up from the house the child of israel go forward on their journey but while the cloud be there they make no move till it be take up . for the cloud of the lord be rest on the house by day and at night there be fire in the cloud before the eye of all the people of israel and so it be through all their journey .and the voice of the lord come to moses out of the tent of meet say give these order to the child of israel when anyone of you make an offering to the lord you be to take it from the cattle from the herd or from the flock . if the offering be a burned offering of the herd let him give a male without a mark he be to give it at the door of the tent of meeting so that he may be please to the lord . and he be to put his hand on the head of the burned offering and it will be take for him to take away his sin . and the ox be to be put to death before the lord then aaron 's son the priest be to take the blood and put some of it on and round the altar which be at the door of the tent of meeting . and the burned offering be to be skin and cut up into it part . and aaron 's son the priest be to put fire on the altar and put the wood in order on the fire and aaron 's son the priest be to put the part the head and the fat in order on the wood which be on the fire on the altar but it inside part and it leg be to be wash with water and it will all be burn on the altar by the priest for a burned offer an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . and if his offering be of the flock a burned offering of sheep or goat let him give a male without a mark . and he be to put it to death on the north side of the altar before the lord and aaron 's son the priest be to put some of the blood on and round the altar . and the offering be to be cut into it part with it head and it fat and the priest be to put them in order on the wood which be on the fire on the altar but the inside part and the leg be to be wash with water and the priest will make an offering of all of it burn it on the altar it be a burned offer an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . and if his offering to the lord be a burned offering of bird then he be to make his offering of dove or of young pigeon . and the priest be to take it to the altar and after it head have be twist off it be to be burn on the altar and it blood drain out on the side of the altar and he be to take away it stomach with it feather and put it down by the east side of the altar where the burn waste be put and let it be break open at the wing but not cut in two and let it be burn on the altar by the priest on the wood which be on the fire it be a burned offer an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord .and when anyone make a meal offering to the lord let his offer be of the best meal with oil on it and perfume and let him take it to aaron 's son the priest and have take in his hand some of the meal and of the oil with all the perfume let him give it to the priest to be burn on the altar a a sign an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . and the rest of the meal offering will be for aaron and his son it be most holy among the lord 's fire offering . and when you give a meal offering cook in the oven let it be of unleavened cake of the best meal mixed with oil or thin unleavened cake cover with oil . and if you give a meal offering cook on a flat plate let it be of the best meal unleavened and mixed with oil . let it be break into bit and put oil on it it be a meal offering . and if your offering be of meal cook in fat over the fire let it be make of the best meal mixed with oil . and you be to give the meal offering make of these thing to the lord and let the priest take it to the altar . and he be to take from the meal offer a part for a sign burn it on the altar an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . and the rest of the meal offering will be for aaron and his son it be most holy among the lord 's fire offering . no meal offer which you give to the lord be to be make with leaven no leaven or honey be to be burn a an offering make by fire to the lord . you may give them a an offering of first fruit to the lord but they be not to go up a a sweet smell on the altar . and every meal offering be to be salt with salt your meal offering be not to be without the salt of the agreement of your god with all your offering give salt . and if you give a meal offering of first fruit to the lord give a your offering of first fruit new grain make dry with fire crush new grain . and put oil on it and perfume it be a meal offering . and part of the meal of the offering and part of the oil and all the perfume be to be burn for a sign by the priest it be an offering make by fire to the lord .and if his offering be give for a peace offering if he give of the herd male or female let him give it without any mark on it before the lord . and he be to put his hand on the head of his offering and put it to death at the door of the tent of meeting and aaron 's son the priest be to put some of the blood on and round the altar . and he be to give of the peace offering a an offering make by fire to the lord the fat cover the inside part and all the fat on the inside part and the two kidney and the fat on them which be by the top part of the leg and the fat join the liver and the kidney he be to take away that it may be burn by aaron 's son on the altar on the burn offering which be on the wood on the fire it be an offering make by fire of a sweet smell to the lord . and if what he give for a peace offering to the lord be of the flock let him give a male or female without any mark on it . if his offering be a lamb then let it be place before the lord and he be to put his hand on the head of his offering and put it to death before the tent of meeting and aaron 's son be to put some of it blood on and round the altar . and of the peace offer let him give an offering make by fire to the lord the fat of it all the fat tail he be to take away near the backbone and the fat cover the inside part and all the fat on the inside part and the two kidney with the fat on them which be by the top part of the leg and the fat join the liver and the kidney he be to take away that it may be burn by the priest on the altar it be the food of the offering make by fire to the lord . and if his offering be a goat then let it be place before the lord and let him put his hand on the head of it and put it to death before the tent of meeting and the son of aaron be to put some of it blood on and round the altar . and of it let him make his offer an offering make by fire to the lord the fat cover the inside part and all the fat on the inside part and the two kidney with the fat on them which be by the top part of the leg and the fat join the liver and the kidney let him take away that it may be burn by the priest on the altar it be the food of the offering make by fire for a sweet smell all the fat be the lord 's . let it be an order for ever through all your generation in all your house that you be not to take fat or blood for food .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel these be the offering of anyone who do wrong through error do any of the thing which by the lord 's order be not to be do if the chief priest by do wrong become a cause of sin to the people then let him give to the lord for the sin which he have do an ox without any mark for a sin offering . and he be to take the ox to the door of the tent of meeting before the lord and put his hand on it head and put it to death before the lord . and the chief priest be to take some of it blood and take it to the tent of meeting and the priest be to put his finger in the blood shake drop of it before the lord seven time in front of the veil of the holy place . and the priest be to put some of the blood on the horn of the altar on which perfume be burn before the lord in the tent of meet drain out all the rest of the blood of the ox at the base of the altar of burn offering which be at the door of the tent of meeting . and he be to take away all the fat of the ox of the sin offer the fat cover the inside part and all the fat of the inside part and the two kidney with the fat on them which be by the top part of the leg and the fat join the liver and the kidney he be to take away a it be take from the ox of the peace offering and it be to be burn by the priest on the altar of burned offering . and the skin of the ox and all it flesh with it head and it leg and it inside part and it waste all the ox he be to take away outside the circle of the tent into a clean place where the burn waste be put and there it be to be burn on wood with fire . and if all the people of israel do wrong without anyone 's knowledge if they have do any of the thing which by the lord 's order be not to be do cause sin to come on them when the sin which they have do come to light then let all the people give an ox for a sin offering and take it before the tent of meeting . and let the chief of the people put their hand on it head before the lord and put the ox to death before the lord . and the priest be to take some of it blood to the tent of meeting and put his finger in the blood shake drop of the blood seven time before the lord in front of the veil . and he be to put some of the blood on the horn of the altar which be before the lord in the tent of meeting and all the rest of the blood be to be drain out at the base of the altar of burned offering at the door of the tent of meeting . and he be to take off all it fat burn it on the altar . let him do with the ox a he do with the ox of the sin offering and the priest will take away their sin and they will have forgiveness . then let the ox be take away outside the tent circle that it may be burn a the other ox be burn it be the sin offering for all the people . if a ruler do wrong and in error do any of the thing which by the order of the lord his god be not to be do cause sin to come on him when the sin which he have do be make clear to him let him give for his offer a goat a male without any mark . and he be to put his hand on the head of the goat and put it to death in the place where they put to death the burn offering before the lord it be a sin offering . and the priest be to take some of the blood of the offering with his finger and put it on the horn of the altar of burned offering drain out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burned offering . and all the fat of it be to be burn on the altar like the fat of the peace offering and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness . and if any one of the common people do wrong in error do any of the thing which the lord have give order be not to be do cause sin to come on him when the sin which he have do be make clear to him then he be to give for his offer a goat a female without any mark for the sin which he have do . and he be to put his hand on the head of the sin offering and put it to death in the place where they put to death the burn offering . and the priest be to take some of the blood with his finger and put it on the horn of the altar of burned offering and all the rest of it blood be to be drain out at the base of the altar . and let all it fat be take away a the fat be take away from the peace offering and let it be burn on the altar by the priest for a sweet smell to the lord and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness . and if he give a lamb a his sin offering let it be a female without any mark and he be to put his hand on the head of the offering and put it to death for a sin offering in the place where they put to death the burn offering . and the priest be to take some of the blood of the offering with his finger and put it on the horn of the altar of burned offering and all the rest of the blood be to be drain out at the base of the altar and let him take away all it fat a the fat be take away from the lamb of the peace offering and let it be burn by the priest on the altar among the offering make by fire to the lord and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness .and if anyone do wrong by say nothing when he be put under oath a a witness of something he have see or have knowledge of then he will be responsible if anyone become unclean through touch unconsciously some unclean thing such a the dead body of an unclean beast or of unclean cattle or of any unclean animal which go flat on the earth he will be responsible or if he become unclean through touch unconsciously any unclean thing of man whatever it may be when it be make clear to him he will be responsible or if anyone without thought take an oath to do evil or to do good whatever he say without thought with an oath have no knowledge of what he be do when it become clear to him he will be responsible for any of these thing . and whoever be responsible for any such sin let him make a statement openly of his wrongdoing and take to the lord the offering for the wrong which he have do a female from the flock a lamb or a goat for a sin offering and the priest will take away his sin . and if he have not money enough for a lamb then let him give for his offering to the lord two dove or two young pigeon one for a sin offering and one for a burned offering . and let him take them to the priest who will first give the sin offer twist off it head from it neck but not cut it in two and he be to put drop of the blood of the offering on the side of the altar and the rest of the blood be to be drain out at the base of the altar it be a sin offering . and the second be for a burned offering in agreement with the law and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness . but if he have not enough money for two dove or two young pigeon then let him give for the sin he have do the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal for a sin offer let him put no oil on it and no perfume for it be a sin offering . and let him come to the priest with it and the priest will take some of it in his hand to be burn on the altar a a sign among the offering of the lord make by fire it be a sin offering . and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness and the rest of the offering will be the priest 's in the same way a the meal offering . and the lord say to moses if anyone be untrue sin in error in connection with the holy thing of the lord let him take his offering to the lord a male sheep from the flock without any mark of the value fix by you in silver by shekel by the scale of the holy place . and he be to make payment to the priest for what he have do wrong in relation to the holy thing together with a fifth part of it value in addition and the priest will take away his sin by the sheep of his offering and he will have forgiveness . and if anyone do wrong and do any of the thing which the lord have give order be not to be do though he have no knowledge of it still he be in the wrong and he be responsible . let him come to the priest with a sheep a male without any mark out of the flock of the value fix by you a an offering for his error and the priest will take away the sin which he do in error and he will have forgiveness . it be an offering for his error he be certainly responsible before the lord .and the lord say to moses if anyone do wrong and be untrue to the lord act falsely to his neighbour in connection with something put in his care or something give for a debt or have take away anything by force or have be cruel to his neighbour or have take a false oath about the loss of something which he have come across by chance if a man have do any of these evil thing cause sin to come on him then he will have to give back the thing he take by force or get by cruel act or the good which be put in his care or the thing he come on by chance or anything about which he take a false oath he will have to give it all back with the addition of a fifth of it value to him whose property it be when he have be judge to be in the wrong . then let him take to the lord the offering for his wrongdoing give to the priest for his offer a male sheep from the flock without any mark of the value fix by you and the priest will take away his sin from before the lord and he will have forgiveness for whatever crime he have do and the lord say to moses give order to aaron and to his son say this be the law for the burned offer the offering be to be on the fire wood on the altar all night till the morning and the fire of the altar be to be keep burn . and the priest be to put on his linen robe and his linen trouser and take up what be over of the offering after it have be burn on the altar and put it by the side of the altar . then have take off his linen robe and put on other clothing he be to take it away into a clean place outside the tent circle . the fire on the altar be to be keep burn it be never to go out every morning the priest be to put wood on it place the burned offering in order on it and there the fat of the peace offering be to be burn . let the fire be keep burn on the altar at all time it be never to go out . and this be the law for the meal offering it be to be offer to the lord before the altar by the son of aaron . the priest be to take in his hand some of the meal of the meal offering and of the oil of it and all the perfume on it burn it on the altar a a sign for a sweet smell to the lord . and whatever be over aaron and his son may have for their food take it without leaven in a holy place in the open space of the tent of meet they may take a meal of it . it be not to be cook with leaven . i have give it to them a their part of the offering make by fire to me it be most holy a be the sin offering and the offering for error . every male among the child of aaron may have it for food it be their right for ever through all your generation from the offering make by fire to the lord anyone touch them will be holy . and the lord say to moses this be the offering which aaron and his son be to make to the lord on the day when he be make a priest the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal for a meal offering for ever half of it in the morning and half in the evening . let it be make with oil on a flat plate when it be well mixed and cooked let it be break and take in a a meal offering for a sweet smell to the lord . and the same offering be to be give by that one of his son who take his place a priest by an order for ever all of it be to be burn before the lord . every meal offering offer for the priest be to be completely burn nothing of it be to be take for food . and the lord say to moses say to aaron and his son this be the law for the sin offer the sin offering be to be put to death before the lord in the same place a the burned offering it be most holy . the priest by whom it be offer for sin be to take it for his food in a holy place in the open space of the tent of meeting . anyone touch the flesh of it will be holy and if any of the blood be drop on any clothe the thing on which the blood have be drop be to be wash in a holy place . but the vessel of earth in which the flesh be cook be to be break or if a brass vessel be use it be to be rub clean and wash out with water . every male among the priest may take it for his food it be most holy . no sin offer the blood of which be take into the tent of meeting to take away sin in the holy place may be use for food it be to be burn with fire .and this be the law of the offering for wrongdoing it be most holy . they be to put to death the offering for wrongdoing in the same place a the burned offering and the priest be to put the blood on and round the altar . and all the fat of it the fat tail and the fat cover the inside part be to be give a an offering . and the two kidney and the fat on them which be by the top of the leg and the fat join the liver and the kidney he be to take away they be to be burn by the priest on the altar for an offering make by fire to the lord it be an offering for wrongdoing . every male among the priest may have it a food in a holy place it be most holy . a be the sin offering so be the offering for wrongdoing there be one law for them the priest who make the offering to take away sin he be to have it . and the priest offering any man 's burned offering for him may have the skin of the burn offering which be offer by him . and every meal offering which be cook in the oven and everything make in a cooking pot or on a flat plate be for the priest by whom it be offer . and every meal offer mixed with oil or dry be for all the son of aaron in equal measure . and this be the law for the peace offering offer to the lord . if any man give his offering a a praise offering then let him give with the offering unleavened cake mixed with oil and thin unleavened cake cover with oil and cake of the best meal well mixed with oil . with his peace offer let him give cake of leavened bread a a praise offering . and let him give one out of every offering to be lift up before the lord that it may be for the priest who put the blood of the peace offering on the altar . and the flesh of the praise offering be to be take a food on the day when it be offer no part of it may be keep till the morning . but if his offering be make because of an oath or give freely it may be take a food on the day when it be offer and the rest may be use up on the day after but if any of the flesh of the offering be still unused on the third day it be to be burn with fire . and if any of the flesh of the peace offering be take a food on the third day it will not be please to god and will not be put to the account of him who give it it will be unclean and a cause of sin to him who take it a food . and flesh touch by any unclean thing may not be take for food it be to be burn with fire and a for the flesh of the peace offering everyone who be clean may take it a food but he who be unclean when he take a food the flesh of the peace offering which be the lord 's will be cut off from his people . and anyone who after touch any unclean thing of man or an unclean beast or any unclean and disgusting thing take a food the flesh of the peace offering which be the lord 's will be cut off from his people . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel you be not to take any fat of ox or sheep or goat for food . and the fat of that which come to a natural death and the fat of that which be attack by beast may be use for other purpose but not in any way for food . for anyone who take a food the fat of any beast of which men make an offering by fire to the lord will be cut off from his people . and you be not to take for food any blood of bird or of beast in any of your house . whoever take any blood for food will be cut off from his people . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel he who make a peace offering to the lord be to give an offering to the lord out of his peace offering he himself be to take to the lord the offering make by fire even the fat with the breast so that the breast may be wave for a wave offering before the lord . and the fat be to be burn by the priest on the altar but the breast be for aaron and his son . and the right leg you be to give to the priest for an offering to be lift up out of what be give for your peace offering . that man among the son of aaron by whom the blood of the peace offering and the fat be offer be to have the right leg for his part . for the breast which be wave and the right leg which be lift up on high i have take from the child of israel from their peace offering and have give them to aaron the priest and to his son a their right for ever from the child of israel . this be the holy part give to aaron and to his son out of the offering make to the lord by fire on the day when they be make priest before the lord which the lord say the child of israel be to give them on the day when he make them his priest . it be their right for ever from generation to generation . these be the law for the burned offer the meal offering and the offering for wrongdoing and for the making of priest and for the give of peace offering a they be give by the lord to moses on mount sinai on the day when the lord give order to the child of israel to make their offering to the lord in the waste land of sinai .and the lord say to moses take aaron and his son with him and the robe and the holy oil and the ox of the sin offering and the two male sheep and the basket of unleavened bread and let all the people come together at the door of the tent of meeting . and moses do a the lord say and all the people come together at the door of the tent of meeting . and moses say to the people this be what the lord have give order to be do . then moses take aaron and his son and after wash them with water he put the coat on him make it tight with it band and then the robe and over it the ephod with it band of needlework to keep it in place . and he put the priest 's bag on him and in the bag he put the urim and thummim . and on his head he put the head dress and in front of the head dress the plate of gold the holy crown a the lord give order to moses . and moses take the holy oil and put it on the house and on all the thing in it to make them holy . seven time he put oil on the altar and on all it vessel and on the washing basin and it base to make them holy . and some of the oil he put on aaron 's head to make him holy . then he take aaron 's son clothe them with the coat and put the band round them and the head dress on their head a the lord have give him order . and he take the ox of the sin offering and aaron and his son put their hand on the head of the ox and he put it to death and moses take the blood and put it on the horn of the altar and round it with his finger and make the altar clean drain out the blood at the base of the altar so he make it holy take away what be unclean . and he take all the fat on the inside part and the fat on the liver and the two kidney with their fat to be burn on the altar but the ox with it skin and it flesh and it waste be burn with fire outside the tent circle a the lord give order to moses . and he put the male sheep of the burned offering before the lord and aaron and his son put their hand on it head and he put it to death and moses put some of the blood on and round the altar . and when the sheep have be cut into part the head and the part and the fat be burn by moses . and the inside part and the leg be wash with water and all the sheep be burn by moses on the altar it be a burned offering for a sweet smell it be an offering make by fire to the lord a the lord give order to moses . and he put the other sheep before the lord the sheep with which they be make priest and aaron and his son put their hand on the head of the sheep and he put it to death and moses take some of the blood and put it on the point of aaron 's right ear and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot . then he take aaron 's son and moses put some of the blood on the point of their right ear and on the thumb of their right hand and on the great toe of their right foot and moses put the blood on and round the altar . and he take the fat and the fat tail and the fat on the inside part and the fat on the liver and the two kidney with their fat and the right leg and out of the basket of unleavened bread which be before the lord he take one unleavened cake and one cake of bread with oil on it and one thin cake and put them on the fat and on the right leg and he put them all on the hand of aaron and on the hand of his son wave them for a wave offering before the lord . and moses take them from their hand and they be burn on the altar on the burned offering a a priest 's offering for a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . and moses take the breast wave it for a wave offering before the lord it be moses ' part of the sheep of the priest 's offering a the lord give order to moses . and moses take some of the holy oil and of the blood which be on the altar and put it on aaron and on his robe and on his son and on his son ' robe and make aaron holy and his robe and his son and his son ' robe with him . and moses say to aaron and to his son the flesh be to be cook in water at the door of the tent of meeting and there you be to take it a food together with the bread in the basket a i have give order say it be the food of aaron and his son . and that which be over of the flesh and of the bread be to be burn with fire . and you be not to go out from the door of the tent of meeting for seven day till the day for make you priest be end for this will be the work of seven day . what have be do this day have be order by the lord to take away your sin . and you be to keep watch for the lord at the door of the tent of meeting day and night for seven day so that death may not come to you for so he have give me order . and aaron and his son do all the thing about which the lord have give order through moses .and on the eighth day moses send for aaron and his son and the responsible men of israel and he say to aaron take a young ox for a sin offering and a male sheep for a burned offering without a mark and make an offering of them before the lord . and say to the child of israel take a he goat for a sin offering and a young ox and a lamb in their first year without any mark on them for a burned offering and an ox and a male sheep for peace offering to be put to death before the lord and a meal offering mixed with oil for this day you be to see the lord . and they take the thing order by moses before the tent of meeting and all the people come near wait before the lord . and moses say this be what the lord have say you be to do and you will see the glory of the lord . and moses say to aaron come near to the altar and make your sin offering and your burned offering to take away your sin and the sin of the people and make the people 's offering to take away their sin a the lord have give order . so aaron come near to the altar and put to death the ox for the sin offering for himself and the son of aaron give him the blood and he put his finger in the blood and put it on the horn of the altar drain out the blood at the base of the altar but the fat and the kidney and the fat on the liver of the sin offering be burn by him on the altar a the lord give order to moses . and the flesh and the skin be burn with fire outside the tent circle and he put to death the burn offering and aaron 's son give him the blood and he put some of it on and round the altar and they give him the part of the burned offering in their order and the head to be burn on the altar . and the inside part and the leg when they have be wash with water be burn on the burn offering on the altar . and he make an offering for the people and take the goat of the sin offering for the people and put it to death offering it for sin in the same way a the first . and he take the burned offering offer it in the ordered way and he put the meal offering before the lord and take some of it in his hand he have it burn on the altar separately from the burned offering of the morning . and he put to death the ox and the sheep which be the peace offering for the people and aaron 's son give him the blood and he put some of it on and round the altar and a for the fat of the ox and the fat tail of the sheep and the fat cover the inside part and the kidney and the fat on the liver they put the fat on the breast and the fat be burn on the altar . and aaron take the breast and the right leg wave them for a wave offering before the lord a moses give order . and aaron lift up his hand to the people give them a blessing and he come down from offer the sin offering and the burned offering and the peace offering . and moses and aaron go into the tent of meeting and come out and give the people a blessing and the glory of the lord be see by all the people . and fire come out from before the lord burn up the offering on the altar and the fat and when all the people saw it they give a loud cry fall down on their face .and nadab and abihu the son of aaron take their vessel and put fire in them and perfume burn strange fire before the lord which he have not give them order to do . and fire come out from before the lord burn them up and cause their destruction before the lord . then moses say to aaron this be what the lord say i will be holy in the eye of all those who come near to me and i will be honour before all the people . and aaron say nothing . and moses sent for mishael and elzaphan the son of uzziel the brother of aaron 's father and say to them come near and take your brother away from before the holy place outside the tent circle . so they come and take them in their coat outside the tent circle a moses have say . and moses say to aaron and to eleazar and ithamar his son do not let your hair be loose and give no sign of grief so that death may not overtake you and his wrath come on all the people but let there be weep among your brother and all the house of israel for this burning of the lord 's fire . and do not go out from the door of the tent of meeting or death will come to you for the holy oil of the lord be on you . and they do a moses say . and the lord say to aaron take no wine or strong drink you or your son with you when you go into the tent of meeting that it may not be the cause of death to you this be an order for ever through all your generation . and make a division between the holy and the common and between the unclean and the clean teach the child of israel all the law which the lord have give them by the hand of moses . and moses say to aaron and to eleazar and ithamar his son who be still live take the rest of the meal offering from the offering of the lord make by fire and take it for your food without leaven at the side of the altar for it be most holy . it be to be for your food in a holy place because it be your right and your son ' right from the offering of the lord make by fire for so be i order . and the breast which be wave and the leg which be lift up on high you be to take a your food in a clean place you and your son and your daughter with you for they be give to you a your right and your son ' right from the peace offering of the child of israel . let them take the breast which be wave and the leg which be lift up on high with the fat of the burned offering to be wave for a wave offering before the lord and this will be for you and for your son with you for a right for ever a the lord have give order . and moses be look for the goat of the sin offering but it be burn and he be angry with eleazar and ithamar the son of aaron who be still live say why do you not make a meal of the sin offering in the holy place ? for it be most holy and he have give it to you so that the sin of the people may be put on it to take away their sin before the lord . see it blood be not take into the holy place certainly it be right for you to have take it a food in the holy place a i give order . and aaron say to moses you have see that today they have make their sin offering and their burn offering before the lord and such thing a these have come on me . if i have take the sin offering a food today would it have be please to the lord ? and after hear this moses be no long angry .and the lord say to moses and aaron say to the child of israel these be the living thing which you may have for food among all the beast on the earth . you may have a food any beast which have a division in the horn of it foot and whose food come back into it mouth to be crush again . but at the same time of those beast you may not take for food the camel because it food come back but the horn of it foot be not part in two it be unclean to you . and the rock badger for the same reason be unclean to you . and the hare because the horn of it foot be not part in two be unclean to you . and the pig be unclean to you because though the horn of it foot be part it food do not come back . their flesh may not be use for food and their dead body may not even be touch they be unclean to you . these you may have for food of all thing live in the water anything living in the water in the sea or river which have special part for swimming and skin form of thin plate may be use for food . all other thing live and move in the water in the sea or in the river be a disgust thing to you they may not be use for food and their dead body be disgust to you . anything in the water which have no special part for swimming and no thin plate on it skin be disgust to you . and among bird these be to be disgust to you and not to be use for food the eagle and the gier eagle and the ospray and the kite and the falcon and bird of that sort every raven and bird of that sort and the ostrich and the night hawk and the sea hawk and bird of that sort and the little owl and the cormorant and the great owl and the water hen and the pelican and the vulture the stork and the heron and bird of that sort and the hoopoe and the bat . every wing four footed thing which go on the earth be disgust to you but of the winged four footed thing those which have long leg for jump on the earth you may have for food such a all the different sort of locust . but all other wing four foot thing which go on the earth be disgust to you . by these you will be make unclean anyone touch their dead body will be unclean till even whoever take away the dead body of one of them be to have his clothing wash and will be unclean till even . every beast in the horn of whose foot there be not a complete division and whose food do not come back be unclean to you anyone touch one of these will be unclean . any four foot beast which go on the ball of it foot be unclean to you anyone touch the dead body of one of these will be unclean till even . anyone who take away the dead body of one of these be to have his clothing wash and be unclean till even . and these be unclean to you among thing which go low down on the earth the weasel and the mouse and the great lizard and animal of that sort and the ferret and the land crocodile and the lizard and the sand lizard and the chameleon . all these be unclean to you anyone touch them when they be dead will be unclean till even . the dead body of any of these fall on anything will make that thing unclean if it be any vessel of wood or clothing or skin or bag whatever it be if it be use for any purpose it will have to be put into water and will be unclean till even after that it will be clean . and if one of them get into any vessel of earth whatever be in the vessel will be unclean and the vessel will have to be break . any food in it and anything on which water from it come will be unclean any drink take from such a vessel will be unclean . any part of the dead body of one of these fall on anything will make it unclean if it be an oven or a cooking pot it will have to be break they be unclean and will be unclean to you . but at the same time a fountain or a place where water be store for use will be clean but anyone touch their dead body will be unclean . if any part of the dead body of one of these get on to any seed for plant it be clean but if water be put on the seed and any part of the dead body get on to it it will be unclean to you . and if any beast which may be use for food come to a natural death anyone touch it dead body will be unclean till even . and he who make use of any part of it body for food be to have his clothing wash and be unclean till even and anyone take away it body be to have his clothing wash and be unclean till even . everything which go flat on it body on the earth be disgust and be not to be use for food . whatever go on it stomach or on four foot or have a great number of foot even all those go flat on the earth may not be use for food for they be disgust . you be not to make yourselves disgust with anything which go about flat on the earth you may not make yourselves unclean with them in such a way that you be not holy to me . for i be the lord your god for this reason make and keep yourselves holy for i be holy you be not to make yourselves unclean with any sort of thing which go about flat on the earth . for i be the lord who take you out of the land of egypt to be your god so be you holy for i be holy . this be the law about beast and bird and every living thing move in the water and every living thing which go flat on the earth mark out the unclean from the clean and the living thing which may be use for food from that which may not .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if a woman be with child and give birth to a male child she will be unclean for seven day a when she be unwell . and on the eighth day let him be give circumcision . and she will be unclean for thirty three day till the flow of her blood be stop no holy thing may be touch by her and she may not come into the holy place till the day for make her clean be end . but if she give birth to a female child then she will be unclean for two week a when she be unwell and she will not be completely clean for sixty six day . and when the day be end for make her clean for a son or a daughter let her take to the priest at the door of the tent of meet a lamb of the first year for a burned offering and a young pigeon or a dove for a sin offering and the priest be to make an offering of it before the lord and take away her sin and she will be make clean from the flow of her blood . this be the law for a woman who give birth to a male or a female . and if she have not money enough for a lamb then let her take two dove or two young pigeon one for a burned offering and the other for a sin offering and the priest will take away her sin and she will be cleanand the lord say to moses and aaron if a man have on his skin a growth or a mark or a white place and it become the disease of a leper let him be take to aaron the priest or to one of the priest his son and if when the priest see the mark on his skin the hair on the place be turn white and the mark seem to go deep than the skin it be the mark of a leper and the priest after look at him will say that he be unclean . but if the mark on his skin be white and do not seem to go deep than the skin and the hair on it be not turn white then the priest will keep him shut up for seven day and the priest be to see him on the seventh day and if in his opinion the place on his skin have not become bad and be not increase in size then the priest will keep him shut up for seven day more and the priest be to see him again on the seventh day and if the mark be less bright and be not increase on his skin then let the priest say that he be clean it be only a skin mark and after his clothing have be wash he will be clean . but if the size of the mark on his skin be increase after he have be see by the priest let him go to the priest again and if after look at him he see that the mark be increase in his skin let the priest say that he be unclean he be a leper . when the disease of a leper be see on a man let him be take to the priest and if the priest see that there be a white growth on the skin and the hair be turn white and there be diseased flesh in the growth it be an old disease in the skin of his flesh and the priest will say that he be unclean he will not have to be shut up for he be clearly unclean . and if the disease come out all over his skin from his head to his foot as far a the priest be able to see and if the priest see that all his flesh be cover with the leper 's disease the priest will say that he be clean it be all turned white he be clean . but whenever diseased flesh be see on him he will be unclean . and when the priest see the diseased flesh he will say that he be unclean the diseased flesh be unclean he be a leper . or if the diseased flesh be turn again and change to white then he be to come to the priest and the priest will see him and if the place be turn white then the priest will say that he be free from the disease . and if a bad place have come out on the skin and be well again and on the same place there be a white growth of a bright mark red and white then let the priest see it and after look at it if it seem to go deep than the skin and the hair on it be turn white then the priest will say that the man be unclean it be the leper 's disease it have come out in the bad place . but if after look at it he see that there be no white hair on it and it be not deep than the skin and it be not very bright then let the priest keep him shut up for seven day and if it be increase on the skin the priest will say that he be unclean it be a disease . but if the bright mark keep in the same place and get no great it be the mark of the old wound and the priest will say that he be clean . or if there be a burn on the skin of the flesh and if the diseased flesh in the burn become a bright place red and white or white the priest be to see it and if the hair on the bright place be turn white and it seem to go deep than the skin he be a leper it have come out in the burn and the priest will say that he be unclean it be the leper 's disease . but if after look at it the priest see that there be no white hair on the bright place and it be not deep than the skin and be not very bright then let the priest keep him shut up for seven day and the priest be to see him again on the seventh day if it be increase in the skin then the priest will say that he be unclean it be the leper 's disease . and if the bright place keep the same size and get no great on the skin but be less bright it be the effect of the burn and the priest will say that he be clean it be the mark of the burn . and when a man or a woman have a disease on the head or in the hair of the chin then the priest be to see the diseased place and if it seem to go deep than the skin and if there be thin yellow hair in it then the priest will say that he be unclean he have the mark of the leper 's disease on his head or in the hair of his chin . and after look at the diseased place if it do not seem to go deep than the skin and there be no black hair in it then the priest will have him shut up for seven day and on the seventh day the priest will see the place and if it be not increase and there be no yellow hair in it and it do not seem to go deep than the skin then his hair be to be cut off but not on the diseased place and he be to be shut up for seven day more and on the seventh day the priest will see the place and if it be not increase and do not seem to go deep than the skin the priest will say that he be clean and after his clothing have be wash he will be clean . but if the disease in his skin become bad after he have be make clean then the priest be to see him and if the mark be increase the priest without look for the yellow hair will say that he be unclean . but if in his opinion the growth be stop and black hair have come up on it the disease have go he be clean and the priest will say that he be clean . and if a man or a woman have bright mark on the skin of their flesh that be bright white mark then the priest be to see them and if the white mark on their skin be not very bright it be a skin disease which have come out on the skin he be clean . and if a man 's hair have come out and he have no hair still he be clean . and if the hair have go from the front part of his head so that he have no hair there still he be clean . but if on his head or on his brow where he have no hair there be a red and white place it be the disease of the leper come out on his head or on his brow . then if the priest see that the growth of the disease have become red and white on his head or on his brow where there be no hair like the mark in the skin of a leper he be a leper and unclean the priest be to say that he be most certainly unclean the disease be in his head . and the leper who have the disease on him be to go about with sign of grief with his hair loose and his mouth cover cry unclean unclean . while the disease be on him he will be unclean . he be unclean let him keep by himself live outside the tent circle . and any clothing of wool or of linen in which be the mark of the disease if it be in the thread of the linen or of the wool or in leather or in anything make of skin if there be red or green mark on the clothing or on the leather or in the thread of the cloth or in anything make of skin it be the leper 's disease let the priest see it . and after it have be see by the priest the thing which be so marked be to be shut up for seven day and he be to see the mark on the seventh day if the mark be increase in the clothing or in the thread of the material or in the leather whatever the leather be use for it be the disease bite into it it be unclean . and the clothing or the wool or linen material or anything of leather in which be the disease be to be burn for the disease be bite into it let it be burn in the fire . and if the priest see that the mark be not increase in the clothing or in any part of the material or in the leather then the priest will give order for the thing on which the mark be to be wash and to be shut up for seven day more and if after the mark have be wash the priest see that the colour of it be not change and it be not increase it be to be burn in the fire the disease be work in it though the damage may be inside or outside . and if the priest see that the mark be less bright after the wash then let him have it cut out of the clothing or the leather or from the thread of the material and if the mark be still see in the clothing or in the thread of the material or in the leather it be the disease come out the thing in which the disease be will have to be burn with fire . and the material of the clothing or anything of skin which have be wash if the mark have go out of it let it be wash a second time and it will be clean . this be the law about the leper 's disease in the thread of wool or linen material in clothing or in anything of skin say how it be to be judge clean or unclean .and the lord say to moses this be the law of the leper on the day when he be make clean he be to be take to the priest and the priest be to go outside the tent circle and if after look the priest see that the mark of the disease have go from him then the priest be to give order to take for him who be to be make clean two live clean bird and some cedar wood and red thread and hyssop . and the priest will give order for one of the bird to be put to death in a vessel make of earth over flowing water . and he will take the living bird and the wood and the red thread and the hyssop and put them in the blood of the bird which be put to death over flowing water . and shake it seven time over the man who be to be make clean he will say that he be clean and will let the living bird go free into the open country . and he who be to be make clean will have his clothing wash and his hair cut and have a bath and he will be clean . and after that he will come back to the tent circle but he be to keep outside his tent for seven day . and on the seventh day he be to have all the hair cut off his head and his chin and over his eye all his hair be to be cut off and he will have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and he will be clean . and on the eighth day let him take two male lamb without any mark on them and one female lamb of the first year without a mark and three tenth part of an ephah of the best meal mixed with oil and one log of oil . and the priest who be make him clean will put the man who be be make clean together with these thing before the door of the tent of meeting . and the priest be to take one of the male lamb and give it a an offering for wrongdoing and the log of oil wave them for a wave offering before the lord and he be to put the male lamb to death in the place where they put to death the sin offering and the burned offering in the holy place for a the sin offering be the property of the priest so be the offering for wrongdoing it be most holy . and let the priest take some of the blood of the offering for wrongdoing and put it on the point of the right ear of him who be to be make clean and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot and take some of the oil and put it in the hollow of his left hand and let the priest put his right finger in the oil which be in his left hand shake it out with his finger seven time before the lord and of the rest of the oil which be in his hand the priest will put some on the point of the right ear of the man who be to be make clean and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot over the blood of the offering for wrongdoing and the rest of the oil in the priest 's hand he will put on the head of him who be to be make clean and so the priest will make him free from sin before the lord . and the priest will give the sin offering and take away the sin of him who be to be make clean from his unclean condition and after that he will put the burned offering to death . and the priest be to have the burn offering and the meal offering burn on the altar and the priest will take away his sin and he will be clean . and if he be poor and not able to get so much then he may take one male lamb a an offering for wrongdoing to be wave to take away his sin and one tenth part of an ephah of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering and a log of oil and two dove or two young pigeon such a he be able to get and one will be for a sin offering and the other for a burned offering . and on the eighth day he will take them to the priest to the door of the tent of meeting before the lord so that he may be make clean . and the priest will take the lamb of the offering for wrongdoing and the oil wave them for a wave offering before the lord and he will put to death the lamb of the offering for wrongdoing and the priest will take some of the blood of the offering for wrongdoing and put it on the point of the right ear of him who be to be make clean and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot and the priest will put out some of the oil in the hollow of his left hand shake out drop of oil with his right finger before the lord seven time and the priest will put some of the oil which be in his hand on the point of the ear of the man who be to be make clean and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot on the place where the blood of the offering for wrongdoing be put and the rest of the oil which be in the priest 's hand he will put on the head of him who be to be make clean to take away his sin before the lord . and he will make an offering of one of the dove or the young pigeon such a he be able to get and of these he will give one for a sin offering and one for a burned offering with the meal offering and the priest will take away the sin of him who be to be make clean before the lord . this be the law for the man who have the disease of the leper on him and who be not able to get that which be necessary for make himself clean . and the lord say to moses and aaron when you have come into the land of canaan which i will give you for your heritage if i put the leper 's disease on a house in the land of your heritage then let the owner of the house come and say to the priest it seem to me that there be a sort of leper 's disease in the house . and the priest will give order for everything to be take out of the house before he go in to see the disease so that the thing in the house may not become unclean and then the priest be to go in to see the house and if he see that the wall of the house be mark with hollow of green and red and if it seem to go deep than the face of the wall then the priest will go out of the door of the house and keep the house shut up for seven day and the priest be to come again on the seventh day and have a look and see if the mark on the wall of the house be increase in size then the priest will give order to them to take out the stone in which the disease be see and put them out into an unclean place outside the town and he will have the house rub all over inside and the paste which be rub off will be put out into an unclean place outside the town and they will take other stone and put them in place of those stone and he will take other paste and put it on the wall of the house . and if the disease come out again in the house after he have take out the stone and after the wall have be rub and the new paste put on then the priest will come and see it and if the disease in the house be increase in size it be the leper 's disease work out in the house it be unclean . and the house will have to be pull down the stone of it and the wood and the paste and everything be to be take out to an unclean place outside the town . and in addition anyone who go into the house at any time while it be shut up will be unclean till even . and anyone who have be sleep in the house will have to have his clothing wash and anyone who take food in that house will have to have his clothing wash . and if the priest come in and see that the disease be not increase after the new paste have be put on the house then the priest will say that the house be clean because the disease be go . and in order to make the house clean let him take two bird and cedar wood and red thread and hyssop and put one of the bird to death in a vessel of earth over flowing water and take the cedar wood and the hyssop and the red thread and the living bird and put them in the blood of the dead bird and in the flowing water shake it over the house seven time . and he will make the house clean with the blood of the bird and the flowing water and with the living bird and with the cedar wood and the hyssop and the red thread . but he will let the living bird go out of the town into the open country so he will take away sin from the house and it will be clean . this be the law for all sign of the leper 's disease and for skin disease and for sign of disease in clothing or in a house and for a growth or a bad place or a bright mark on the skin to make clear when it be unclean and when it be clean this be the law about the disease of the leper .and the lord say to moses and to aaron say to the child of israel if a man have an unclean flow from his flesh it will make him unclean . if the flow go on or if the part be stop up to keep back the flow he be still unclean . every bed on which he have be rest will be unclean and everything on which he have be seat will be unclean . and anyone touch his bed be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and he who have be seat on anything on which the unclean man have be seat be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and anyone touch the flesh of the unclean man be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and if liquid from the mouth of the unclean man come on to him who be clean then he be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and any leather seat on a horse on which the unclean man have be seat will be unclean . and anyone touch anything which be under him will be unclean till the even anyone take up any of these thing be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and anyone on whom the unclean man put his hand without wash them in water be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and any vessel of earth which have be touch by the unclean man will have to be break and any vessel of wood wash . and when a man who have a flow from his body be make clean from it he be to take seven day to make himself clean wash his clothing and bath his body in flowing water and then he will be clean . and on the eighth day he be to take two dove or two young pigeon and come before the lord to the door of the tent of meeting and give them to the priest and they be to be offer by the priest one for a sin offering and one for a burned offering and the priest will take away his sin before the lord on account of his flow . and if a man 's seed go out from him then all his body will have to be bath in water and he will be unclean till even . and any clothing or skin on which the seed come be to be wash with water and be unclean till even . and if a man have sex relation with a woman and his seed go out from him the two of them will have to be bath in water and will be unclean till even . and if a woman have a flow of blood from her body she will have to be keep separate for seven day and anyone touch her will be unclean till even . and everything on which she have be rest while she be kept separate will be unclean and everything on which she have be seat will be unclean . and anyone touch her bed will have to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . and anyone touch anything on which she have be seat will have to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . anyone touch anything on the bed or on the thing on which she have be seat will be unclean till even . and if any man have sex relation with her so that her blood come on him he will be unclean for seven day and every bed on which he have be rest will be unclean . and if a woman have a flow of blood for a long time not at the time when she generally have it or if the flow go on long than the normal time she will be unclean while the flow of blood go on a she be at other normal time . every bed on which she have be rest will be unclean a at the time when she normally have a flow of blood and everything on which she have be seat will be unclean in the same way . and anyone touch these thing will be unclean and his clothing will have to be wash and his body bath in water and he will be unclean till even . but when her flow of blood be stop after seven day she will be clean . and on the eighth day let her get two dove or two young pigeon and take them to the priest to the door of the tent of meeting to be offer by the priest one for a sin offering and one for a burned offering and the priest will take away her sin before the lord on account of her unclean condition . in this way may the child of israel be make free from all sort of unclean condition so that death may not overtake them when they be unclean and when they make unclean my holy place which be among them . this be the law for the man who have a flow from his body or whose seed go from him so that he be unclean and for her who have a flow of blood and for any man or woman who have an unclean flow and for him who have sex relation with a woman when she be unclean .and the lord say to moses after the death of the two son of aaron when they take in strange fire before the lord and death overtake them the lord say to moses say to aaron your brother that he may not come at all time into the holy place inside the veil before the cover which be on the ark for fear that death may overtake him for i will be see in the cloud on the cover of the ark . let aaron come into the holy place in this way with an ox for a sin offering and a male sheep for a burned offering . let him put on the holy linen coat and the linen trouser on his body and the linen band round him and the linen head dress on his head for this be holy clothing and before he put them on his body be to be wash with water . and let him take from the child of israel two he goats for a sin offering and one male sheep for a burned offering . and aaron be to give the ox of the sin offering for himself to make himself and his house free from sin . and he be to take the two goat and put them before the lord at the door of the tent of meeting . and aaron will make selection from the two goat by the decision of the lord one goat for the lord and one for azazel . and the goat which be mark out for the lord let aaron give for a sin offering . but the goat for azazel be to be place live before the lord for the take away of sin that it may be send away for azazel into the waste land . and aaron be to give the ox of the sin offering for himself and take away sin from himself and his house and put to death the ox of the sin offering which be for himself . and he be to take a vessel full of burn coal from the altar before the lord and in his hand some sweet perfume crush small and take it inside the veil and let him put the perfume on the fire before the lord so that the ark may be cover with a cloud of the smoke of the perfume in order that death may not overtake him . and let him take some of the blood of the ox shake drop of it from his finger on the cover of the ark on the east side and before it seven time . then let him put to death the goat of the sin offering for the people and take it blood inside the veil and do with it a he do with the blood of the ox shake drop of it on and before the cover of the ark . and let him make the holy place free from whatever be unclean among the child of israel and from their wrongdoing in all their sin and let him do the same for the tent of meeting which have it place among an unclean people . and no man may be in the tent of meeting from the time when aaron go in to take away sin in the holy place till he come out have make himself and his house and all the people of israel free from sin . and he be to go out to the altar which be before the lord and make it free from sin and he be to take some of the blood of the ox and the blood of the goat and put it on the horn of the altar and round it shake drop of the blood from his finger on it seven time to make it holy and clean from whatever be unclean among the child of israel . and when he have do whatever be necessary to make the holy place and the tent of meeting and the altar free from sin let him put the living goat before the lord and aaron place his two hand on the head of the living goat will make a public statement over him of all the evil doings of the child of israel and all their wrongdoing in all their sin and he will put them on the head of the goat and send him away in the care of a man who will be wait there into the waste land . and the goat will take all their sin into a land cut off from men and he will send the goat away into the waste land . then let aaron come into the tent of meeting and take off the linen clothing which he put on when he go into the holy place and put them down there and after bath his body in water in a holy place he be to put on his clothing and come out and give his burned offering and the burned offering of the people to take away his sin and the sin of the people . and the fat of the sin offering be to be burn by him on the altar . and the man who take away the goat for azazel be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and then he may come back to the tent circle . and the ox of the sin offering and the goat of the sin offering whose blood be take in to make the holy place free from sin be to be take away outside the tent circle and their skin and their flesh and their waste be to be burn with fire . and the man by whom they be burn be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and then he may come back to the tent circle . and let this be an order to you for ever in the seventh month on the tenth day you be to keep yourselves from pleasure and do no sort of work those who be israelite by birth and those from other land who be live among you for on this day your sin will be take away and you will be clean you will be make free from all your sin before the lord . it be a special sabbath for you and you be to keep yourselves from pleasure it be an order for ever . and the man on whose head the holy oil have be put and who have be mark out to be a priest in his father 's place will do what be necessary to take away sin and will put on the linen clothing even the holy robe and he will make the holy place and the tent of meeting and the altar free from sin he will take away sin from the priest and from all the people . and let this be an order for ever for you so that the sin of the child of israel may be take away once every year . and he do a the lord give order to moses .and the lord say to moses say to aaron and to his son and to all the child of israel this be the order which the lord have give . if any man of israel put to death an ox or a lamb or a goat in or outside the tent circle and have not take it to the door of the tent of meeting to make an offering to the lord before the lord 's house it blood will be on him for he have take life and he will be cut off from among his people so that the child of israel may take to the lord to the door of the tent of meeting and to the priest the offering which they have put to death in the open country and that they may make their peace offering to the lord . and the priest will put blood on the altar of the lord at the door of the tent of meet burn the fat for a sweet smell to the lord . and let them make no more offering to evil spirit after which they have go turn away from the lord . let this be a law to them for ever through all their generation . and say to them if any man of israel or any other living among them make a burned offering or other offering and do not take it to the door of the tent of meeting to make an offering to the lord that man will be cut off from among his people . and if any man of israel or any other living among them take any sort of blood for food my wrath will be turn against that man and he will be cut off from among his people . for the life of the flesh be in it blood and i have give it to you on the altar to take away your sin for it be the blood which make free from sin because of the life in it . for this reason i have say to the child of israel no man among you or any others live with you may take blood a food . and any man of israel or any other living among them who get with his bow any beast or bird use for food be to see that it blood be cover with earth . for the blood be the life of all flesh and so i have say to the child of israel you may not take any sort of blood a food and any man who do so will be cut of . and anyone who take a food anything which have come to a natural end or anything which have be put to death by beast if he be one of you by birth or of another nation will have to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even and then he will be clean . but if his clothing be not wash and his body bath his sin will be on him .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel i be the lord your god . you may not do those thing which be do in the land of egypt where you be live and you may not do those thing which be do in the land of canaan where i be take you or be guide in your behaviour by their rule . but you be to be guide by my decision and keep my rule and be guide by them i be the lord your god . so keep my rule and my decision which if a man do them will be life to him i be the lord . you may not have sex connection with anyone who be a near relation i be the lord . you may not have sex relation with your father or your mother she be your mother you may not take her . and you may not have sex relation with your father 's wife she be your father 's . you may not take your sister the daughter of your father or of your mother wherever her birth take place among you or in another country . you may not have sex relation with your son 's daughter or your daughter 's daughter for they be part of yourself or your father 's wife 's daughter the child of your father for she be your sister . you may not have sex connection with your father 's sister for she be your father 's near relation . you may not have sex connection with your mother 's sister for she be your mother 's near relation . you may not have sex relation with the wife of your father 's brother for she be of your family or with your daughter in law for she be your son 's wife and you may not take her . you may not have sex relation with your brother 's wife for she be your brother 's . you may not take a wife a woman and her daughter or her son 's daughter or her daughter 's daughter for they be of one family it be an act of shame . and you may not take a wife a woman and at the same time her sister to be in competition with her in her life time . and you may not go near a woman or have sex relation with her when she be unclean at her regular time . and you may not have sex relation with your neighbour 's wife make yourself unclean with her . and you may not make any of your child go through the fire a an offering to molech and you may not put shame on the name of your god i be the lord . you may not have sex relation with men a you do with woman it be a disgusting thing . and you may not have sex relation with a beast make yourself unclean with it and a woman may not give herself to a beast it be an unnatural act . do not make yourself unclean in any of these way for so have those nation whom i be drive out from before you make themselves unclean and the land itself have become unclean so that i have send on it the reward of it wrongdoing and the land itself put out those who be live in it . so then keep my rule and my decision and do not do any of these disgust thing those of you who be israelite by birth or any others who be live with you for all these disgust thing be do by the men of this country who be there before you and the land have be make unclean by them so that the land may not put you out from it when you make it unclean a it put out the nation which be there before you . for all those who do any of these disgust thing will be cut off from among their people . so then keep my order so that you may not do any of these disgust thing which be do before you or make yourselves unclean through them i be the lord your god .and the lord say to moses say to all the people of israel you be to be holy for i the lord your god be holy . let every man give honour to his mother and to his father and keep my sabbath i be the lord your god . do not go after false god and do not make metal image of god for yourselves i be the lord your god . and when you give a peace offering to the lord do it in the way which be please to the lord . let it be use for food on the same day on which it be offer or on the day after and whatever be over on the third day be to be burn with fire . if any of it be use for food on the third day it be a disgusting thing and will not be please to the lord . and a for anyone who take it for food his sin will be on him for he have put shame on the holy thing of the lord he will be cut off from his people . and when you get in the grain from your land do not let all the grain be cut from the edge of the field or take up what have be drop on the earth after the get in of the grain . and do not take all the grape from your vine garden or the fruit drop on the earth let the poor man and the man from another country have these i be the lord your god . do not take anyone 's property or be false in act or word to another . and do not take an oath in my name falsely put shame on the name of your god i be the lord . do not be cruel to your neighbour or take what be his do not keep back a servant 's payment from him all night till the morning . do not put a curse on those who have no hearing or put a cause of fall in the way of the blind but keep the fear of your god before you i be the lord . do no wrong in your judging do not give thought to the position of the poor or honour to the position of the great but be a judge to your neighbour in righteousness . do not go about say untrue thing among your people or take away the life of your neighbour by false witness i be the lord . let there be no hate in your heart for your brother but you may make a protest to your neighbour so that he may be stop from do evil . do not make attempt to get equal with one who have do you wrong or keep hard feeling against the child of your people but have love for your neighbour a for yourself i be the lord . keep my law . do not let your cattle have offspring by those of a different sort do not put mixed seed into your field do not put on a robe make of two sort of cloth . if any man have sex relation with a servant woman who have give her word to be marry to a man and have not be make free for a price or in any other way the thing will be look into but they will not be put to death because she be not a free woman . let him take his offering for wrongdoing to the lord to the door of the tent of meet let him give a male sheep a an offering for wrongdoing . and the priest will take away his sin before the lord with the sheep which be offer for his wrongdoing and he will have forgiveness for the sin which he have do . and when you have come into the land and have put in all sort of fruit tree their fruit will be a if they have not have circumcision and for three year their fruit may not be use for food . and in the fourth year all the fruit will be holy a a praise offering to the lord . but in the fifth year you may take the fruit and the increase of it for your food i be the lord your god . nothing may be use for food with it blood in it you may not make use of strange art or go in search of sign and wonder . the end of the hair round your face and on your chin may not be cut off . you may not make cut in your flesh in respect for the dead or have mark print on your body i be the lord . do not make your daughter common by let her become a loose woman for fear that the land may become full of shame . keep my sabbath and have respect for my holy place i be the lord . do not go after those who make use of spirit or wonder worker do not go in their way or become unclean through them i be the lord your god . get up from your seat before the white haired and give honour to the old and let the fear of your god be before you i be the lord . and if a man from another country be live in your land with you do not make life hard for him let him be to you a one of your countryman and have love for him a for yourself for you be live in a strange land in the land of egypt i be the lord your god . do not make false decision in question of yard stick and weight and measure . have true scale true weight and measure for all thing i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt you be to keep all my rule and my decision and do them i be the lord .and the lord say to moses again say to the child of israel if any man of the child of israel or any other man live in israel give his offspring to molech he be certainly to be put to death he be to be stone by the people of the land and my face will be turn against that man and he will be cut off from his people because he have give his offspring to molech make my holy place unclean and make my holy name common . and if the people of the land do not take note of that man when he give his offspring to molech and do not put him to death then my face will be turn against him and his family and he and all those who do evil with him will be cut off from among their people . and whoever go after those who make use of spirit and wonder worker do evil with them against him will my face be turn and he will be cut off from among his people . so make and keep yourselves holy for i be the lord your god . and keep my rule and do them i be the lord who make you holy . every man curse his father or his mother be certainly to be put to death because of his curse on his father or his mother his blood will be on him . and if a man have sex relation with another man 's wife even the wife of his neighbour he and she be certainly to be put to death . and the man who have sex relation with his father 's wife have put shame on his father the two of them be to be put to death their blood will be on them . and if a man have sex relation with his son 's wife the two of them be to be put to death it be unnatural their blood will be on them . and if a man have sex relation with a man the two of them have do a disgust thing let them be put to death their blood will be on them . and if a man take a wife a woman and her mother it be an act of shame let them be burn with fire all three of them so that there may be no shame among you . and if a man have sex relation with a beast let him be put to death and let the beast be put to destruction . and if a woman go near a beast and have sex relation with it you will put an end to the woman and the beast their blood will be on them . and if a man take his sister daughter of his father or his mother and have sex relation with her and she with him it be an act of shame they be to be cut off before the child of their people he have have sex relation with his sister and his sin will be on him . and if a man have sex relation with a woman at the time when she be unwell he have see her fountain and she have let the fountain of her blood be uncover and the two of them be to be cut off from among their people . and you may not have sex connection with your mother 's sister or your father 's sister for they be his near relation their sin will be on them . and if a man have sex relation with the wife of his father 's brother he have put shame on his father 's brother their sin will be on them till the day of their death they will have no child . and if a man take his brother 's wife it be an unclean act he have put shame on his brother they will have no child . so then keep my rule and my decision and do them so that the land which i be give you a your rest place may not violently send you out again . and do not keep the rule of the nation which i be drive out before you for they do all these thing and for that reason my soul be turn against them . but i have say to you you will take their land and i will give it to you for your heritage a land flow with milk and honey i be the lord your god who have make you separate from all other people . so then make division between the clean beast and the unclean and between the clean bird and the unclean do not make yourselves disgust by any beast or bird or anything which go flat on the earth which have be mark by me a unclean for you . and you be to be holy to me for i the lord be holy and have make you separate from the nation so that you may be my people . any man or woman who make use of spirit or who be a wonder worker be to be put to death they be to be stone with stone their blood will be on them .and the lord say to moses say to the priest the son of aaron let no man make himself unclean for the dead among his people but only for his near relation for his mother or his father his son or his daughter and his brother and for his sister a virgin for she be his near relation and have have no husband he may make himself unclean . but let him be a chief among his people not make himself unclean in such a way a to put shame on himself . they be not to have their hair cut off for the dead or the hair on their chin cut short or make cut in their flesh . let them be holy to their god and not make the name of their god common for the fire offering of the lord and the bread of their god be offer by them and they be to be holy . they may not take a wife a loose or common woman or one who have be put away by her husband for the priest be holy to his god . and he be to be holy in your eye for by him the bread of your god be offer he be to be holy in your eye for i the lord who make you holy be holy . and if the daughter of a priest make herself common and by her loose behaviour put shame on her father let her be burn with fire . and he who be the chief priest among his brother on whose head the holy oil have be put who be mark out to put on the holy robe may not let his hair go loose or have his clothe out of order a a sign of sorrow . he may not go near any dead body or make himself unclean for his father or his mother he may not go out of the holy place or make the holy place of his god common for the crown of the holy oil of his god be on him i be the lord . and let him take a his wife one who have not have relation with a man . a widow or one whose husband have put her away or a common woman of loose behaviour may not be the wife of a priest but let him take a virgin from among his people . and he may not make his seed unclean among his people for i the lord have make him holy . and the lord say to moses say to aaron if a man of your family in any generation be damage in body let him not come near to make the offering of the bread of his god . for any man whose body be damage may not come near one who be blind or have not the use of his leg or one who have a break nose or any unnatural growth or a man with broken foot or hand or one whose back be bent or one who be unnaturally small or one who have a damage eye or whose skin be diseased or whose sex part be damage no man of the offspring of aaron whose body be damage in any way may come near to give the fire offering of the lord he be damage he may not come near to make the offering . he may take of the bread of god the holy and the most holy but he may not go inside the veil or come near the altar because he be damage and he may not make my holy place common for i the lord have make them holy . these be the word which moses say to aaron and to his son and to all the child of israel .and the lord say to moses give order to aaron and to his son to keep themselves separate from the holy thing of the child of israel which they give to me and not to make my holy name common i be the lord say to them if any man of all your seed through all your generation be unclean come near the holy thing which the child of israel make holy to the lord he will be cut off from before me i be the lord . no man of the seed of aaron who be a leper or who have a flow from his body may take of the holy food till he be clean . and any man touch anything which be unclean because of the dead or any man whose seed go from him or anyone touch any unclean thing which go flat on the earth or someone by whom he may be make unclean in any way whatever any person touch any such unclean thing will be unclean till even and may not take of the holy food till his flesh have be bath in water and when the sun have go down he will be clean and after that he may take part in the holy food because it be his bread . that which come to a natural death or be attack by beast he may not take a food for it will make him unclean i be the lord . so then let them keep what i have put into their care for fear that sin may come on them because of it so cause their death because they have make it common i be the lord who make them holy . no outside person may take of the holy food or one living a a guest in the priest 's house or a servant working for payment . but any person for whom the priest have give money to make him his may take of it with him and those who come to birth in his house may take of his bread . and if the daughter of a priest be marry to an outside person she may not take of the holy thing which be lift up a offering . but if a priest 's daughter be a widow or part from her husband and have no child and have come back to her father 's house a when she be a girl she may take of her father 's bread but no outside person may do so . and if a man take the holy food in error he will have to give the holy thing back to the priest with the addition of a fifth part . and they may not make common the holy thing which the child of israel give to the lord so cause sin to come on them when they take their holy thing for food i be the lord who make them holy . and the lord say to moses say to aaron and to his son and to all the child of israel if any man of the child of israel or of another nation living in israel make an offering give because of an oath or freely give to the lord for a burned offering so that it may be please to the lord let him give a male without any mark from among the ox or the sheep or the goat . but anything which have a mark you may not give it will not make you please to the lord . and whoever make a peace offering to the lord in payment of an oath or a a free offering from the herd or the flock if it be to be please to the lord let it be free from any mark or damage . anything blind or broken or damage or have any disease or any mark on it may not be offer to the lord you may not make an offering of it by fire on the altar to the lord . an ox or a lamb which have more or less than it natural part may be give a a free offering but it will not be take in payment of an oath . an animal which have it sex part damage or crush or break or cut may not be offer to the lord such a thing may not be do anywhere in your land . and from one who be not an israelite you may not take any of these for an offering to the lord for they be unclean there be a mark on them and the lord will not be please with them . and the lord say to moses when an ox or a sheep or a goat be give birth let it be with it mother for seven day and after the eighth day it may be take a an offering make by fire to the lord . a cow or a sheep may not be put to death with it young on the same day . and when you make an offering of praise to the lord make it in a way which be please to him . let it be use for food on the same day do not keep any part of it till the morning i be the lord . so then keep my order and do them i be the lord . and do not make my holy name common so that it may be keep holy by the child of israel i be the lord who make you holy who take you out of the land of egypt that i might be your god i be the lord .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel these be the fixed feast of the lord which you will keep for holy meeting these be my feast . on six day work may be do but the seventh day be a special day of rest a time for worship you may do no sort of work it be a sabbath to the lord wherever you may be live . these be the fixed feast of the lord the holy day of worship which you will keep at their regular time . in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month at nightfall be the lord 's passover and on the fifteenth day of the same month be the feast of unleavened bread for seven day let your food be unleavened bread . on the first day you will have a holy meeting you may do no sort of field work . and every day for seven day you will give a burned offering to the lord and on the seventh day there will be a holy meeting you may do no field work . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel when you have come to the land which i will give you and have get in the grain from it field take some of the first fruit of the grain to the priest and let the grain be wave before the lord so that you may be please to him on the day after the sabbath let it be wave by the priest . and on the day of the waving of the grain you be to give a male lamb of the first year without any mark for a burned offering to the lord . and let the meal offering with it be two tenth part of an ephah of the best meal mixed with oil an offering make by fire to the lord for a sweet smell and the drink offering with it be to be of wine the fourth part of a hin . and you may take no bread or dry grain or new grain for food till the very day on which you have give the offering for your god this be a rule for ever through all your generation wherever you be live . and let seven full week be number from the day after the sabbath the day when you give the grain for the wave offering let fifty day be number to the day after the seventh sabbath then you be to give a new meal offering to the lord . take from your house two cake of bread make of a fifth part of an ephah of the best meal cook with leaven to be wave for first fruit to the lord . and with the bread take seven lamb of the first year without any mark and one ox and two male sheep to be a burned offering to the lord with their meal offering and their drink offering an offering of a sweet smell make by fire to the lord . and you be to give one male goat for a sin offering and two male lamb of the first year for peace offering . and these will be wave by the priest with the bread of the first fruit for a wave offering to the lord with the two lamb they will be holy to the lord for the priest . and on the same day let it be give out that there will be a holy meeting for you you may do no field work on that day it be a rule for ever through all your generation wherever you be live . and when you get in the grain from your land do not let all the grain at the edge of the field be cut and do not take up the grain which have be drop in the field let that be for the poor and for the man from another country i be the lord your god . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel in the seventh month on the first day of the month let there be a special day of rest for you a day of memory mark by the blowing of horn a meeting for worship . do no field work and give to the lord an offering make by fire . and the lord say to moses the tenth day of this seventh month be the day for the take away of sin let it be a holy day of worship you be to keep from pleasure and give to the lord an offering make by fire . and on that day you may do no sort of work for it be a day of take away sin to make you clean before the lord your god . for any person whoever he may be who take his pleasure on that day will be cut off from his people . and if any person whoever he may be on that day do any sort of work i will send destruction on him from among his people . you may not do any sort of work this be an order for ever through all your generation wherever you may be live . let this be a sabbath of special rest to you and keep yourselves from all pleasure on the ninth day of the month at nightfall from even to even let this sabbath be keep . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel on the fifteenth day of this seventh month let the feast of tent be keep to the lord for seven day . on the first day there will be a holy meeting do no field work . every day for seven day give an offering make by fire to the lord and on the eighth day there be to be a holy meeting when you be to give an offering make by fire to the lord this be a special holy day you may do no field work on that day . these be the fixed feast of the lord to be keep by you a holy day of worship for make an offering by fire to the lord a burn offering a meal offer an offering of beast and drink offering every one on it special day in addition to the sabbath of the lord and in addition to the thing you give and the oath you make and the free offering to the lord . but on the fifteenth day of the seventh month when you have get in all the fruit of the land you will keep the feast of the lord for seven day the first day will be a sabbath and the eighth day the same . on the first day take the fruit of fair tree branch of palm tree and branch of thick tree and tree from the riverside and be glad before the lord for seven day . and let this feast be keep before the lord for seven day in the year it be a rule for ever from generation to generation in the seventh month let it be keep . for seven day you will be live in tent all those who be israelite by birth be to make tent their living place so that future generation may keep in mind how i give the child of israel tent a their living place when i take them out of the land of egypt i be the lord your god . and moses make clear to the child of israel the order about the fixed feast of the lord .and the lord say to moses give order to the child of israel to give you clean olive oil for the light so that a light may be burn at all time outside the veil of the ark in the tent of meet let aaron see that it be burn from even till morning at all time before the lord it be a rule for ever through all your generation . let aaron put the light in order on the support before the lord at all time . and take the best meal and make twelve cake of it a fifth part of an ephah in every cake . and put them in two line six in a line on the holy table before the lord . and on the line of cake put clean sweet smell spice for a sign on the bread an offering make by fire to the lord . every sabbath day regularly the priest be to put it in order before the lord it be offer for the child of israel an agreement make for ever . and it will be for aaron and his son they be to take it for food in a holy place it be the most holy of all the offering make by fire to the lord a rule for ever . and a son of an israelite woman whose father be an egyptian go out among the child of israel and have a fight with a man of israel by the tent and the son of the israelite woman say evil against the holy name with curse and they take him to moses . his mother 's name be shelomith the daughter of dibri of the tribe of dan . and they keep him shut up till a decision might be give by the mouth of the lord . and the lord say to moses take the curser outside the tent circle and let all in whose hear the word be say put their hand on his head and let him be stone by all the people . and say to the child of israel a for any man curse god his sin will be on his head . and he who say evil against the name of the lord will certainly be put to death he will be stone by all the people the man who be not of your nation and one who be an israelite by birth whoever say evil against the holy name be to be put to death . and anyone who take another 's life be certainly to be put to death . and anyone wound a beast and cause it death will have to make payment for it a life for a life . and if a man do damage to his neighbour a he have do so let it be do to him wind for wound eye for eye tooth for tooth whatever damage he have do so let it be do to him . he who put a beast to death will have to make payment for it he who put a man to death will himself be put to death . you be to have the same law for a man of another nation living among you a for an israelite for i be the lord your god . and moses say these word to the child of israel and they take the man who have be curse outside the tent circle and have him stone . the child of israel do a the lord give order to moses .and the lord say to moses on mount sinai say to the child of israel when you come into the land which i will give you let the land keep a sabbath to the lord . for six year put seed into your land and for six year give care to your vine and get in the produce of them but let the seventh year be a sabbath of rest for the land a sabbath to the lord do not put seed into your land or have your vine cut . that which come to growth of itself may not be cut and the grape of your uncared for vine may not be take off let it be a year of rest for the land . and the sabbath of the land will give food for you and your man servant and your woman servant and those work for payment and for those of another country who be live among you and for your cattle and the beast on the land all the natural increase of the land will be for food . and let seven sabbath of year be number to you seven time seven year even the day of seven sabbath of year that be forty nine year then let the loud horn be sound far and wide on the tenth day of the seventh month on the day of take away sin let the horn be sound through all your land . and let this fiftieth year be keep holy and say publicly that everyone in the land be free from debt it be the jubilee and every man may go back to his heritage and to his family . let this fiftieth year be the jubilee no seed may be plant and that which come to growth of itself may not be cut and the grape may not be take from the uncared for vine . for it be the jubilee and it be holy to you your food will be the natural increase of the field . in this year of jubilee let every man go back to his heritage . and in the business of trading good for money do no wrong to one another . let your exchange of good with your neighbour have relation to the number of year after the year of jubilee and the number of time the earth have give her produce . if the number of year be great the price will be increase and if the number of year be small the price will be less for it be the produce of a certain number of year which the man be give you . and do no wrong one to another but let the fear of your god be before you for i be the lord your god . so keep my rule and my decision and do them and you will be safe in your land . and the land will give her fruit and you will have food in full measure and be safe in the land . and if you say where will our food come from in the seventh year when we may not put in seed or get in the increase then i will send my blessing on you in the sixth year and the land will give fruit enough for three year . and in the eighth year you will put in your seed and get your food from the old store till the fruit of the ninth year be ready . no exchange of land may be for ever for the land be mine and you be a my guest live with me for a time . wherever there be property in land the owner be to have the right of get it back . if your brother become poor and have to give up some of his land for money his near relation may come and get back that which his brother have give up . and if he have no one to get it back for him and later he himself get wealth and have enough money to get it back then let him take into account the year from the time when he give it up and make up the loss for the rest of the year to him who take it and so get back his property . but if he be not able to get it back for himself then it will be keep by him who give a price for it till the year of jubilee and in that year it will go back to it first owner and he will have his property again . and if a man give his house in a walled town for money he have the right to get it back for the space of a full year after he have give it up . and if he do not get it back by the end of the year then the house in the town will become the property of him who give the money for it and of his child for ever it will not go from him in the year of jubilee . but house in small unwalled town will be the same a property in the country they may be get back and they will go back to their owner in the year of jubilee . but the house in the town of the levite may be get back by the levite at any time . and if a levite do not give money to get back his property his house in the town which be exchange for money will come back to him in the year of jubilee . for the house of the town of the levite be their property among the child of israel . but the land on the outskirt of their town may not be exchange for money for it be their property for ever . and if your brother become poor and be not able to make a living then you be to keep him with you help him a you would a man from another country who be live among you . take no interest from him in money or in good but have the fear of your god before you and let your brother make a living among you . do not take interest on the money which you let him have or on the food which you give him . i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt to give you the land of canaan that i might be your god . and if your brother become poor and give himself to you for money do not make use of him like a servant who be your property but let him be with you a a servant working for payment till the year of jubilee then he will go out from you he and his child with him and go back to his family and to the property of his father . for they be my servant whom i take out from the land of egypt they may not become the property of another . do not be a hard master to him but have the fear of god before you . but you may get servant a property from among the nation round about from them you may take men servant and woman servant . and in addition you may get for money servant from among the child of other nation who be live with you and from their family which have come to birth in your land and these will be your property . and they will be your child 's heritage after you to keep a their property they will be your servant for ever but you may not be hard master to your countryman the child of israel . and if one from another nation living among you get wealth and your countryman at his side become poor and give himself for money to the man from another nation or to one of his family after he have give himself he have the right to be make free for a price by one of his brother or his father 's brother or the son of his father 's brother or any near relation or if he get money he may make himself free . and let the year be number from the time when he give himself to his owner till the year of jubilee and the price give for him will be in relation to the number of year on the scale of the payment of a servant . if there be still a long time he will give back on account of it a part of the price which be give for him . and if there be only a short time he will take account of it with his master and in relation to the number of year he will give back the price of make him free . and he will be with him a a servant working for payment year by year his master be not to be cruel to him before your eye . and if he be not make free in this way he will go out in the year of jubilee he and his child with him . for the child of israel be servant to me they be my servant whom i take out of the land of egypt i be the lord your god .do not make image of false god or put up an image cut in stone or a pillar or any pictured stone in your land to give worship to it for i be the lord your god . keep my sabbath and give honour to my holy place i be the lord . if you be guide by my rule and keep my law and do them then i will give you rain at the right time and the land will give her increase and the tree of the field will give their fruit and the crushing of the grain will overtake the cutting of the grape and the cutting of the grape will overtake the planting of the seed and there will be bread in full measure and you will be live in your land safely . and i will give you peace in the land and you will take your rest and no one will give you cause for fear and i will put an end to all evil beast in the land and no sword of war will go through your land . and you will put to flight those who be against you and they will be put to death by your sword . then five of you will put to flight a hundred and a hundred of you will put to flight ten thousand and all who be against you will be put to death by your sword . and i will have pleasure in you and make you fertile and great in number and i will keep my agreement with you . and old store long kept will be your food and you will take out the old because of the new and i will put my holy house among you and my soul will not be turn away from you in disgust . and i will be present among you and will be your god and you will be my people . i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt so that you might not be servant to them by me the cord of your yoke be break and i make you go upright . but if you do not give ear to me and do not keep all these my law and if you go against my rule and if you have hate in your soul for my decision and you do not do all my order but go against my agreement this will i do to you i will put fear in your heart even waste disease and burn pain dry up the eye and make the soul feeble and you will get no profit from your seed for your hater will take it for food . and my face will be turn from you and you will be break before those who be against you and your hater will become your ruler and you will go in flight when no man come after you . and if even after these thing you will not give ear to me then i will send you punishment seven time more for your sin . and the pride of your strength will be break and i will make your heaven a iron and your earth a brass and your strength will be use up without profit for your land will not give her increase and the tree of the field will not give their fruit . and if you still go against me and will not give ear to me i will put seven time more punishment on you because of your sin . i will let loose the beast of the field among you and they will take away your child and send destruction on your cattle so that your number will become small and your road become waste . and if by these thing you will not be turn to me but still go against me then i will go against you and i will give you punishment i myself seven time for all your sin . and i will send a sword on you to give effect to the punishment of my agreement and when you come together into your town i will send disease among you and you will be give up into the hand of your hater . when i take away your bread of life ten woman will be cook bread in one oven and your bread will be measure out by weight you will have food but never enough . and if after all this you do not give ear to me but go against me still then my wrath will be burn against you and i will give you punishment i myself seven time for your sin . then you will take the flesh of your son and the flesh of your daughter for food and i will send destruction on your high place overturn your perfume altar and will put your dead body on your broken image and my soul will be turn from you in disgust . and i will make your town waste and send destruction on your holy place i will take no pleasure in the smell of your sweet perfume and i will make your land a waste a wonder to your hater live in it . and i will send you out in all direction among the nation and my sword will be uncover against you and your land will be without any living thing and your town will be make waste . then will the land take pleasure in it sabbath while it be waste and you be live in the land of your hater then will the land have rest . all the day while it be waste will the land have rest such rest a it never have in your sabbath when you be live in it . and a for the rest of you i will make their heart feeble in the land of their hater and the sound of a leaf move by the wind will send them in flight and they will go in flight a from the sword fall down when no one come after them fall on one another a before the sword when no one come after them you will give way before your hater . and death will overtake you among strange nation and the land of your hater will be your destruction . and those of you who be still live will be waste away in their sin in the land of your hater in the sin of their father they will be waste away . and they will have grief for their sin and for the sin of their father when their heart be untrue to me and they go against me so that i go against them and send them away into the land of their hater if then the pride of their heart be break and they take the punishment of their sin then i will keep in mind the agreement which i make with jacob and with isaac and with abraham and i will keep in mind the land . and the land while she be without them will keep her sabbath and they will undergo the punishment of their sin because they be turn away from my decision and in their soul be hate for my law . but for all that when they be in the land of their hater i will not let them go or be turn away from them or give them up completely my agreement with them will not be break for i be the lord their god . and because of them i will keep in mind the agreement which i make with their father whom i take out of the land of egypt before the eye of the nation to be their god i be the lord . these be the rule decision and law which the lord make between himself and the child of israel in mount sinai by the hand of moses .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if a man make a special oath you will give your decision a to the value of the person for the lord . and you will put the value of a male from twenty year to sixty year old at fifty shekel of silver by the scale of the holy place . and if it be a female the value will be thirty shekel . and if the person be from five to twenty year old the value will be twenty shekel for a male and ten for a female . and if the person be from one month to five year old then the value for a male will be five shekel of silver and for a female three shekel . and for sixty year old and over for a male the value will be fifteen shekel and for a female ten . but if he be poor than the value which you have put on him then let him be take to the priest and the priest will put a value on him such a it be possible for him to give . and if it be a beast of which men make offering to the lord whatever any man give of such to the lord will be holy . it may not be change in any way a good give for a bad or a bad for a good if one beast be change for another the two will be holy . and if it be any unclean beast of which offering be not make to the lord then let him take the beast before the priest and let the priest put a value on it if it be good or bad whatever value the priest put on it so will it be . but if he have a desire to get it back for himself let him give a fifth more than your value . and if a man have give his house a holy to the lord then the priest will put a value on it if it be good or bad a the priest give decision so will the value be fix . and if the owner have a desire to get back his house let him give a fifth more than your value and it will be his . and if a man give to the lord part of the field which be his property then let your value be in relation to the seed which be plant in it a measure of barley grain will be value at fifty shekel of silver . if he give his field from the year of jubilee the value will be fix by your decision . but if he give his field after the year of jubilee the amount of the money will be work out by the priest in relation to the number of year till the come year of jubilee and the necessary amount will be take off your value . and if the man who have give the field have a desire to get it back let him give a fifth more than the price at which it be value and it will be his . but if he have no desire to get it back or if he have give it for a price to another man it may not be get back again . but the field when it become free at the year of jubilee will be holy to the lord a a field give under oath it will be the property of the priest . and if a man give to the lord a field which he have get for money from another which be not part of his heritage then the value fix by you up to the year of jubilee will be work out for him by the priest and in that day he will give the amount of your value a holy to the lord . in the year of jubilee the field will go back to him from whom he get it that be to him whose heritage it be . and let all your value be base on the shekel of the holy place that be twenty gerahs to the shekel . but a man may not give by oath to the lord the first fruit of cattle which be offer to the lord if it be an ox or a sheep it be the lord 's . and if it be an unclean beast then the owner of it may give money to get it back in agreement with the value fix by you by give a fifth more or if it be not take back let it be give for money in agreement with your valuing . but nothing which a man have give completely to the lord out of all his property of man or beast or of the land which be his heritage may be give away or get back in exchange for money anything completely give be most holy to the lord . any man give completely to the lord may not be get back he be certainly to be put to death . and every tenth part of the land of the seed plant or of the fruit of tree be holy to the lord . and if a man have a desire to get back any of the tenth part which he have give let him give a fifth more . and a tenth part of the herd and of the flock whatever go under the rod of the valuer will be holy to the lord . he may not make search to see if it be good or bad or make any change in it and if he make exchange of it for another the two will be holy he will not get them back again . these be the order which the lord give to moses for the child of israel in mount sinai .and the lord say to moses in the waste land of sinai in the tent of meeting on the first day of the second month in the second year after they come out of the land of egypt take the full number of the child of israel by their family and by their father ' house every male by name all those of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war in israel be to be number by you and aaron . and to give you help take one man from every tribe the head of his father 's house . these be the name of those who be to be your helper from reuben elizur the son of shedeur from simeon shelumiel the son of zurishaddai from judah nahshon the son of amminadab from issachar nethanel the son of zuar from zebulun eliab the son of helon of the child of joseph from ephraim elishama the son of ammihud from manasseh gamaliel the son of pedahzur from benjamin abidan the son of gideoni from dan ahiezer the son of ammi shaddai from asher pagiel the son of ochran from gad eliasaph the son of reuel from naphtali ahira the son of enan . these be the men name out of all the people chief of their father ' house head of the tribe of israel . and moses and aaron take these men mark out by name and they get together all the people on the first day of the second month and everyone make clear his family and his father 's house by the number of the name from twenty year old and over . a the lord have give order to moses so they be number by him in the waste place of sinai . the generation of the son of reuben the old son of israel be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war forty six thousand five hundred of the tribe of reuben be number . the generation of the son of simeon be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war fifty nine thousand three hundred of the tribe of simeon be number . the generation of the son of gad be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war forty five thousand six hundred and fifty of the tribe of gad be number . the generation of the son of judah be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war seventy four thousand six hundred of the tribe of judah be number . the generation of the son of issachar be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war fifty four thousand four hundred of the tribe of issachar be number . the generation of the son of zebulun be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war fifty seven thousand four hundred of the tribe of zebulun be number . the generation of the son of joseph be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war forty thousand five hundred of the tribe of ephraim be number . the generation of the son of manasseh be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war thirty two thousand two hundred of the tribe of manasseh be number . the generation of the son of benjamin be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war thirty five thousand four hundred of the tribe of benjamin be number . the generation of the son of dan be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year and over who be able to go to war sixty two thousand seven hundred of the tribe of dan be number . the generation of the son of asher be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war forty one thousand five hundred of the tribe of asher be number . the generation of the son of naphtali be number by their family and their father ' house every male of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war fifty three thousand four hundred of the tribe of naphtali be number . these be they who be number by moses and aaron and by the twelve chief of israel one from every tribe . so all those who be number of the child of israel by their family all those of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war be six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty . but the levite of the tribe of their father be not number among them . for the lord say to moses only the tribe of levi be not to be number among the child of israel but to them you be to give the care of the tent of meeting with it vessel and everything in it they be to take up the tent and be responsible for everything to do with it and put up their tent round it . and when the tent of meeting go forward the levite be to take it down and when it be to be put up they be to do it any strange person who come near it be to be put to death . the child of israel be to put up their tent every man in his tent circle round his flag . but the tent of the levite be to be round the tent of meeting so that wrath may not come on the child of israel the tent of meeting be to be in the care of the levite . so the child of israel do a the lord have give order to moses .and the lord say to moses and aaron the child of israel be to put up their tent in the order of their family by the flag of their father ' house face the tent of meeting on every side . those whose tent be on the east side look to the dawn will be round the flag of the child of judah with nahshon the son of amminadab a their chief . the number of his army be seventy four thousand six hundred . and near to him will be the tribe of issachar with nethanel the son of zuar a their chief . the number of his army be fifty four thousand four hundred . after him the tribe of zebulun with eliab the son of helon a their chief . the number of his army be fifty seven thousand four hundred . the number of all the army of judah be a hundred and eighty six thousand four hundred . they go forward first . on the south side be the flag of the child of reuben in the order of their army with elizur the son of shedeur a their chief . the number of his army be forty six thousand five hundred . and near to him the tribe of simeon with shelumiel the son of zurishaddai a their chief . the number of his army be fifty nine thousand three hundred . then the tribe of gad with eliasaph son of reuel a their chief . the number of his army be forty five thousand six hundred and fifty . the number of all the army of reuben together come to a hundred and fifty one thousand four hundred and fifty . they go forward second . then the tent of meeting be to go forward with the tent of the levite in the middle of the army in the same order a their tent be place they be to go forward every man under his flag . on the west side will be the flag of the child of ephraim with elishama the son of ammihud a their chief . the number of his army be forty thousand five hundred . and by him the tribe of manasseh with gamaliel the son of pedahzur a their chief . the number of his army be thirty two thousand two hundred . then the tribe of benjamin with abidan the son of gideoni a their chief . the number of his army be thirty five thousand four hundred . the number of all the army of ephraim be a hundred and eight thousand one hundred . they go forward third . on the north side will be the flag of the child of dan with ahiezer the son of ammishaddai a their chief . the number of his army be sixty two thousand seven hundred . near to him will be the tribe of asher with pagiel the son of ochran a their chief . the number of his army be forty one thousand five hundred then the tribe of naphtali with ahira the son of enan a their chief . the number of his army be fifty three thousand four hundred . the number of all the army in the tent of dan be a hundred and fifty seven thousand six hundred . they will go forward last by their flag . these be all who be number of the child of israel in the order of their father ' family all the army in their tent together come to six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty . but the levite be not number among the child of israel a the lord say to moses . so the child of israel do a the lord say to moses so they put up their tent by their flag and they go forward in the same order by their family and by their father ' house .now these be the generation of aaron and moses in the day when the word of the lord come to moses on mount sinai . these be the name of the son of aaron nadab the old and abihu eleazar and ithamar . these be the name of the son of aaron the priest on whom the holy oil be put who be mark out a priest . and nadab and abihu be put to death before the lord when they make an offering of strange fire before the lord in the waste land of sinai and they have no child and eleazar and ithamar do the work of priest before aaron their father . and the lord say to moses make the tribe of levi come near and put them before aaron the priest to be his helper in order that they may be responsible to him and to all israel for the care of the tent of meeting and to do the work of the house and they will have the care of all the vessel of the tent of meeting and will do for the child of israel all the necessary work of the house . give the levite to aaron and his son so that they may be his without question from among the child of israel . and give order that aaron and his son be to keep their place a priest any strange person who come near be to be put to death . and the lord say to moses see i have take the levite out of the child of israel to be mine in place of the first son of the child of israel for all the first son be mine on the day when i put to death all the first son in the land of egypt i take for myself every first male birth of man and beast . they be mine i be the lord . and the lord say to moses in the waste land of sinai let all the child of levi be number by their family and their father ' house let every male of a month old and over be number . so moses do a the lord say number them a he have be order . these be the son of levi by name gershon and kohath and merari . and these be the name of the son of gershon by their family libni and shimei . and the son of kohath by their family amram and izhar and hebron and uzziel . and the son of merari by their family mahli and mushi . these be the family of the levite in the order of their father ' house . from gershon come the libnites and the shimeites these be the family of the gershonites . those who be number of them the male from one month old and over be seven thousand five hundred . the tent of the gershonites be to be place at the back of the house to the west . the chief of the gershonites be eliasaph the son of lael . in the tent of meet the gershonites be to have the care of the house and the tent with it cover and the veil for the door of the tent of meeting and the hanging for the open space round the house and the altar and the curtain for it doorway and all the cord need for it use . from kohath come the amramites and the izharites and the hebronites and the uzzielites these be the family of the kohathites . those who be number of them the male from one month old and over be eight thousand six hundred who be responsible for the care of the holy place . the tent of the kohathites be to be place on the south side of the house . their chief be elizaphan the son of uzziel . in their care be the ark and the table and the light and the altar and all the vessel use in the holy place and the veil and all they be use for . eleazar the son of aaron the priest will be head over all the levite and overseer of those responsible for the care of the holy place . from merari come the mahlites and the mushites these be the family of merari . those who be number of them the male of a month old and over be six thousand two hundred . the chief of the family of merari be zuriel the son of abihail their tent be to be place on the north side of the house . and in their care be to be all the board of the tent with their rod and pillar and base and all the instrument and all they be use for and the pillar of the open space round it with their base and nail and cord . and those whose tent be to be place on the east side of the house in front of the tent of meet look to the dawn be moses and aaron and his son who will do the work of the holy place for the child of israel and any strange person who come near will be put to death . all the levite number by moses and aaron at the order of the lord all the male of one month old and over number in the order of their family be twenty two thousand . and the lord say to moses let all the first male child be number and take the number of their name . and give to me the levite i be the lord in place of the first son of the child of israel and the cattle of the levite in place of the first birth among the cattle of the child of israel . so moses have all the first son among the child of israel number a the lord say to him . every first son from a month old and over be number by name and the number come to twenty two thousand two hundred and seventy three . and the lord say to moses take the levite in place of all the first son of the child of israel and the cattle of the levite in place of their cattle the levite be to be mine i be the lord . and the price you have to give for the two hundred and seventy three first son of the child of israel which be in addition to the number of the levite will be five shekel for every one by the scale of the holy place the shekel be twenty gerahs and this money the price of those over the number of the levite be to be give to aaron and his son . so moses take the money the price of those whose place have not be take by the levite from the first son of israel he take it a thousand three hundred and sixty five shekel by the scale of the holy place and he give the money to aaron and his son a the lord have say .and the lord say to moses and aaron let the son of kohath from among the son of levi be number by their family in the order of their father ' house all those from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work of the tent of meeting . and this be to be the work of the son of kohath in connection with the most holy thing . when all the people go forward aaron be to go in with his son and take down the veil of the curtain cover the ark of witness with it and put over it the leather cover and over that a blue cloth and put it rod in place . and on the table of the holy bread they be to put a blue cloth and on it all the vessel the spoon and the basin and the cup and the holy bread with them and over them they be to put a red cloth cover it with a leather cover and put it rod in their place . and they be to take a blue cloth cover with it the light support with it light and it instrument and it tray and all the oil vessel which be use for it all these they be to put in a leather cover and put it on the frame . on the gold altar they be to put a blue cloth cover it with a leather cover and they be to put it rod in their place . all the vessel which be use in the holy place they be to put in a blue cloth cover them with a leather cover and put them on the frame . and they be to take away the burned waste from the altar and put a purple cloth on it place on the cloth all it vessel the fire baskets the meat hook the spade and the basin all the vessel of the altar they be to put a leather cover over all these and put it rod in their place . and after the holy place and all it vessel have be cover up by aaron and his son when the tent of the people go forward the son of kohath be to come and take it up but the holy thing may not be touch by them for fear of death . and eleazar the son of aaron the priest be to be responsible for the oil for the light and the sweet perfume for burning and the regular meal offering and the holy oil the house and the holy place and everything in it will be in his care . and the lord say to moses and aaron do not let the family of the kohathites be cut off from among the levite but do this to them so that life and not death may be theirs when they come near the most holy thing let aaron and his son go in and give to every one his work and that which he be to take up but they themselves be not to go in to see the holy place even for a minute for fear of death . and the lord say to moses let the son of gershon be number by family in the order of their father ' house all those from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work of the tent of meeting . this be to be the work of the gershonites the thing they be to do and take up . they be to take up the curtain of the house and the tent of meeting with it cover and the leather cover over it and the hanging for the door of the tent of meeting and the hanging for the open space round the house and the altar and the curtain for it doorway with the cord and all the thing use for them whatever be necessary for these they be to do . from the mouth of aaron and his son the gershonites will have word about all the thing they be to do and take up you be to give them their order . this be the work of the family of the gershonites in the tent of meeting and they will be under the direction of ithamar the son of aaron the priest . the son of merari be to be number by family in the order of their father ' house every one from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work of the tent of meeting . and this be their part in the work of the tent of meet the transport of the board and the rod of the tent with the pillar and their base and the pillar of the open space outside it with their base and their nail and cord and all the instrument use and everything which have to be do there all the instrument for which they be responsible be to be number by name . this be the work which the son of merari be to do in connection with the tent of meet under the direction of ithamar the son of aaron the priest . so moses and aaron and the chief of the people take in hand the numbering of the son of the kohathites by family in the order of their father ' house number all those from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work in the tent of meeting and the number of all these be two thousand seven hundred and fifty . this be the number of those of the kohathites who do the work in the tent of meeting a they be number by moses and aaron at the order of the lord . and those of the son of gershon who be number by family all those from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work in the tent of meeting who be number by family in the order of their father ' house be two thousand six hundred and thirty . this be the number of the son of gershon who do the work in the tent of meeting a they be number by moses and aaron at the order of the lord . and those of the son of merari who be number by family in the order of their father ' house all those from thirty to fifty year old who do the work in the tent of meeting who be number by family be three thousand two hundred . this be the number of the son of merari number by moses and aaron at the order of the lord . and all the levite who be number by moses and aaron and the chief of the people by family in the order of their father ' house those from thirty to fifty year old who be able to do the work of the tent of meeting and of it transport come to eight thousand five hundred and eighty . at the order of the lord they be number by moses every one in relation to his work and to his part in the transport so they be number by moses at the order of the lord .and the lord say to moses give order to the child of israel to put outside the tent circle every leper and anyone who have any sort of flow from his body and anyone who be unclean from the touch of the dead male or female they be to be put outside the tent circle so that they may not make unclean my resting place among them . so the child of israel do a the lord have say to moses and put them outside the tent circle . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if a man or a woman do any of the sin of men go against the word of the lord and be in the wrong let them say openly what they have do and make payment for the wrong do with the addition of a fifth part and give it to him to whom the wrong be do . but if the man have no relation to whom the payment may be make then the payment for sin make to the lord will be the priest 's in addition to the sheep offer to take away his sin . and every offering lift up of all the holy thing which the child of israel give to the priest will be his . and every man 's holy thing will be his whatever a man give to the priest will be his . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if any man 's wife do wrong sin against him by take a her lover another man and keep it secret so that her husband have no knowledge of it and there be no witness against her and she be not take in the act if the spirit of doubt come into her husband 's heart and he have doubt of his wife with good cause or if he have doubt of her without cause then let him take her to the priest offering for her the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal without oil or perfume for it be a meal offering of a bitter spirit a meal offering keep wrongdoing in mind . and the priest will make her come near and put her before the lord and the priest will take holy water in a pot and put in it dust from the floor of the house and he will make the woman come before the lord with her hair loose and will put the meal offer the offering of a bitter spirit in her hand and the priest will take in his hand the bitter water cause the curse and he will make her take an oath and say to her if no man have be your lover and you have not be with another in place of your husband you be free from this bitter water cause the curse but if you have be with another in place of your husband and have make yourself unclean with a lover then the priest will put the oath of the curse on the woman and say to her may the lord make you a curse and an oath among your people send on you waste of the leg and disease of the stomach and this water of the curse will go into your body cause disease of your stomach and wasting of your leg and the woman will say so be it . and the priest will put these curse in a book wash out the write with the bitter water and he will give to the woman the bitter water for drink and the bitter water cause the curse will go into her . and the priest will take from her hand the meal offering of doubt wave it before the lord and will take it to the altar and he will take some of it in his hand burn it on the altar a a sign and then he will give the woman the bitter water . and it will be that if the woman have become unclean sin against her husband when she have take the bitter water it will go into her body cause disease of the stomach and wasting of the leg and she will be a curse among her people . but if she be clean she will be free and will have offspring . this be the law for test a wife who go with another in place of her husband and become unclean or for a husband who in a bitter spirit have doubt in his heart about his wife let him take her to the priest who will put in force this law . then the man will be free from all wrong and the woman 's sin will be on her .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if a man or a woman take an oath to keep himself separate and give himself to the lord he be to keep himself from wine and strong drink and take no mixed wine or strong drink or any drink make from grape or any grape green or dry . all the time he be separate he may take nothing make from the grape vine from it seed to it skin . all the time he be under his oath let no blade come near his head till the day while he be separate be end he be holy and his hair may not be cut . all the time he be separate he may not come near any dead body . he may not make himself unclean for his father or his mother his sister or his brother if death come to them because he be under an oath to keep himself separate for god . all the time he be separate he be holy to the lord . if death come suddenly to a man at his side so that he become unclean let his hair be cut off on the day when he be make clean on the seventh day . and on the eighth day let him take to the priest at the door of the tent of meet two dove or two young pigeon and the priest will give one for a sin offering and the other for a burned offering to take away the sin which come on him on account of the dead and he will make his head holy that same day . and he will give to the lord his day of be separate offering a he lamb of the first year a an offering for error but the early day will be a loss because he become unclean . and this be the law for him who be separate when the necessary day be end he be to come to the door of the tent of meeting and make his offering to the lord one he lamb of the first year without a mark for a burned offering and one female lamb of the first year without a mark for a sin offering and one male sheep without a mark for peace offering and a basket of unleavened bread cake of the best meal mixed with oil and thin unleavened cake cover with oil with their meal offering and drink offering . and the priest will take them before the lord and make his sin offering and his burned offering give the sheep of the peace offering with the basket of unleavened bread and at the same time the priest will make his meal offering and his drink offering . then let his long hair the sign of his oath be cut off at the door of the tent of meeting and let him put it on the fire on which the peace offering be burn . and the priest will take the cooked leg of the sheep and one unleavened cake and one thin cake out of the basket and put them on the hand of the separate one after his hair have be cut wave them for a wave offering before the lord this be holy for the priest together with the wave breast and the leg which be lift up after that the man may take wine . this be the law for him who take an oath to keep himself separate and for his offering to the lord on that account in addition to what he may be able to get this be the law of his oath which he will have to keep . and the lord say to moses say to aaron and his son these be the word of bless which be to be use by you in bless the child of israel say to them may the lord send his bless on you and keep you may the light of the lord 's face be shin on you in grace may the lord 's approval be rest on you and may he give you peace . so they will put my name on the child of israel and i will give them my blessing .and when moses have put up the house completely and have put oil on it and make it holy with all the thing in it and have make the altar and all it vessel holy with oil then the chief of israel the head of their father ' house make offering these be the chief of the tribe who be over those who be number . and they come with their offering before the lord six cover cart and twelve ox a cart for every two of the chief and for every one an ox . and the lord say to moses take the thing from them to be use for the work of the tent of meeting and give them to the levite to every man what be need for his work . so moses take the cart and the ox and give them to the levite . two cart and four ox he give to the son of gershon for their work and four cart and eight ox he give to the son of merari for their work under the direction of ithamar the son of aaron the priest . but to the son of kohath he give nothing because they have the care of the holy place take it about on their back . and the chief give an offering for the altar on the day when the holy oil be put on it they make their offering before the altar . and the lord say to moses let every chief on his day give his offering to make the altar holy . and he who make his offering on the first day be nahshon the son of amminadab of the tribe of judah and his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice for burn one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of nahshon the son of amminadab . on the second day nethanel the son of zuar chief of issachar make his offering he give one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of nethanel the son of zuar . on the third day eliab the son of helon chief of the child of zebulun his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of eliab the son of helon . on the fourth day elizur the son of shedeur chief of the child of reuben his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of elizur the son of shedeur . on the fifth day shelumiel the son of zurishaddai chief of the child of simeon his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of shelumiel the son of zurishaddai . on the sixth day eliasaph the son of reuel chief of the child of gad his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of eliasaph the son of reuel on the seventh day elishama the son of ammihud chief of the child of ephraim his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of elishama the son of ammihud . on the eighth day gamaliel the son of pedahzur chief of the child of manasseh his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of gamaliel the son of pedahzur . on the ninth day abidan the son of gideoni chief of the child of benjamin his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of abidan the son of gideoni . on the tenth day ahiezer the son of ammishaddai chief of the child of dan his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of ahiezer the son of ammishaddai . on the eleventh day pagiel the son of ochran chief of the child of asher his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of pagiel the son of ochran . on the twelfth day ahira the son of enan chief of the child of naphtali his offering be one silver plate a hundred and thirty shekel in weight one silver basin of seventy shekel by the scale of the holy place the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offer one gold spoon of ten shekel full of spice one young ox one male sheep one he lamb of the first year for a burned offer one male of the goat for a sin offering and for the peace offering two oxen five male sheep five he goats five he lamb of the first year this be the offering of ahira the son of enan . these be the offering give for the altar by the chief of israel when the holy oil be put on it twelve silver plate twelve silver basin twelve gold spoon the weight of every silver plate be a hundred and thirty shekel and of every basin seventy the weight of all the silver of the vessel be two thousand and four hundred shekel by the scale of the holy place the weight of the twelve gold spoon of spice for burning be ten shekel for every one by the scale of the holy place all the gold of the spoon be a hundred and twenty shekel all the ox for the burned offering be twelve the male sheep twelve the he lamb of the first year twelve with their meal offering and the male of the goat for sin offering twelve and all the ox for the peace offering twenty four ox the male sheep sixty and the he goats sixty the he lamb of the first year sixty . this be give for the altar after the holy oil be put on it . and when moses go into the tent of meeting to have talk with him then the voice come to his ear from over the cover which be on the ark of witness from between the two wing one . and he have talk with him .and the lord say to moses say to aaron when you put the light in their place the seven light will give light in front of the support . and aaron do so he put the light in their place so that they give light in front of the support a the lord give order to moses . the support for the light be of hammered gold work from it base to it flower it be of hammered work from the design which the lord have give to moses he make the support for the light . and the lord say to moses take the levite out from among the child of israel and make them clean . and this be how you be to make them clean let the holy water which take away sin be put on them and let the hair all over their body be cut off with a sharp blade and let their clothing be wash and their body make clean . then let them take a young ox and it meal offering crush grain mixed with oil and take another ox for a sin offering . and make the levite come forward in front of the tent of meeting and let all the child of israel come together and you be to take the levite before the lord and the child of israel be to put their hand on them and aaron be to give the levite to the lord a a wave offering from the child of israel so that they may do the lord 's work . and the levite be to put their hand on the head of the ox and one of the ox be to be offer for a sin offering and the other for a burned offering to the lord to take away the sin of the levite . then the levite be to be put before aaron and his son to be offer a a wave offering to the lord . so you be to make the levite separate from the child of israel and the levite will be mine . after that the levite will go in to do whatever have to be do in the tent of meeting you be to make them clean and give them a a wave offering . for they have be give to me from among the child of israel in place of every mother 's first son the first to come to birth in israel i have take them for myself . for every mother 's first son among the child of israel be mine the first male birth of man or beast on the day when i send death on all the first son in the land of egypt i make them mine . and in place of the first son among the child of israel i have take the levite . and i have give them to aaron and to his son from among the child of israel to undertake for them all the work of the tent of meeting and to take away sin from the child of israel so that no evil may come on them when they come near the holy place . all these thing moses and aaron and the child of israel do to the levite a the lord give order to moses about the levite so the child of israel do . and the levite be make clean from sin and their clothing be wash and aaron give them for a wave offering before the lord and aaron take away their sin and make them clean . and then the levite go in to do their work in the tent of meeting before aaron and his son all the order which the lord have give moses about the levite be put into effect . and the lord say to moses this be the rule for the levite those of twenty five year old and over be to go in and do the work of the tent of meeting but after they be fifty year old they be to give up their work and do no more but be with their brother in the tent of meeting take care of it but do no work . this be what you be to do in connection with the levite and their work .and the lord say to moses in the waste land of sinai in the first month of the second year after they have come out of the land of egypt let the child of israel keep the passover at it regular time . in the fourteenth day of this month at even you be to keep it at the regular time and in the way order in the law . and moses give order to the child of israel to keep the passover . so they keep the passover in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the waste land of sinai a the lord give order to moses so the child of israel do . and there be certain men who be unclean because of a dead body so that they be not able to keep the passover on that day and they come before moses and before aaron on that day and these men say to him we have be make unclean by the dead body of a man why may we not make the offering of the lord at the regular time among the child of israel ? and moses say to them do nothing till the lord give me direction about you . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel if any one of you or of your family be unclean because of a dead body or be on a journey far away still he be to keep the passover to the lord in the second month on the fourteenth day in the evening they be to keep it take it with unleavened bread and bitter tasting plant nothing of it be to be keep till the morning and no bone of it be to be break they be to keep it by the rule of the passover . but the man who not be unclean or on a journey do not keep the passover will be cut off from his people because he do not make the offering of the lord at the regular time his sin will be on him . and if a man from another country be among you and have a desire to keep the passover to the lord let him do a be order in the law of the passover there be to be the same rule for the man from another nation and for him who have his birth in the land . and on the day when the house be put up the cloud come down on it on the tent of witness and in the evening there be a light like fire over the house till the morning . and so it be at all time it be cover by the cloud and by a light a of fire by night . and whenever the cloud be take up from over the house then the child of israel go journey on and in the place where the cloud come to rest there the child of israel put up their tent . at the order of the lord the child of israel go forward and at the order of the lord they put up their tent as long a the cloud be rest on the house they do not go away from that place . when the cloud be rest on the house for a long time the child of israel wait for the order of the lord do not go on . sometimes the cloud be rest on the house for two or three day then by the order of the lord they keep their tent in that place and when the lord give the order they go on . and sometimes the cloud be there only from even to morning and when the cloud be take up in the morning they go on their journey again or if it be rest there by day and by night whenever the cloud be take up they go forward . or if the cloud come to rest on the house for two day or a month or a year without move the child of israel go on wait there and do not go on but whenever it be take up they go forward on their journey . at the word of the lord they put up their tent and at the word of the lord they go forward on their journey they keep the order of the lord a he give them by moses .and the lord say to moses make two silver horn of hammered work to be use for get the people together and to give the sign for the moving of the tent . when they be sound all the people be to come together to you at the door of the tent of meeting . if only one of them be sound then the chief the head of the thousand of israel be to come to you . when a loud note be sound the tent place on the east side be to go forward . at the sound of a second loud note the tent on the south side be to go forward the loud note will be the sign to go forward . but when all the people be to come together the horn be to be sound but not loudly . the horn be to be sound by the son of aaron the priest this be to be a law for you for ever from generation to generation . and if you go to war in your land against any who do you wrong then let the loud note of the horn be sound and the lord your god will keep you in mind and give you salvation from those who be against you . and on day of joy and on your regular feast and on the first day of every month let the horn be sound over your burn offering and your peace offering and they will put the lord in mind of you i be the lord your god . now in the second year on the twentieth day of the second month the cloud be take up from over the tent of witness . and the child of israel go on their journey out of the waste land of sinai and the cloud come to rest in the waste land of paran . they go forward for the first time on their journey a the lord have give order by the hand of moses . first the flag of the child of judah go forward with their army and at the head of his army be nahshon the son of amminadab . and at the head of the army of the child of issachar be nethanel the son of zuar . and at the head of the army of the child of zebulun be eliab the son of helon . then the house be take down and the son of gershon and the son of merari who be responsible for move the house go forward . then the flag of the child of reuben go forward with their army and at the head of his army be elizur the son of shedeur . and at the head of the army of the child of simeon be shelumiel the son of zurishaddai . at the head of the army of the child of gad be eliasaph the son of reuel . then the kohathites go forward with the holy place the others put up the house ready for their coming . then the flag of the child of ephraim go forward with their army and at the head of his army be elishama the son of ammihud . at the head of the army of the child of manasseh be gamaliel the son of pedahzur . at the head of the army of the child of benjamin be abidan the son of gideoni . and the flag of the child of dan whose tent be move last of all go forward with their army and at the head of his army be ahiezer the son of ammishaddai . at the head of the army of the child of asher be pagiel the son of ochran . and at the head of the army of the child of naphtali be ahira the son of enan . this be the order in which the child of israel be journey by army so they go forward . then moses say to hobab the son of his father in law reuel the midianite we be journey to that place of which the lord have say i will give it to you so come with u and it will be for your profit for the lord have good thing in store for israel . but he say i will not go with you i will go back to the land of my birth and to my relation . and he say do not go from u for you will be eye for u guide u to the right place in the waste land to put up our tent . and if you come with u we will give you a part in whatever good the lord do for u . so they go forward three day ' journey from the mountain of the lord and the ark of the lord 's agreement go three day ' journey before them look for a resting place for them and by day the cloud of the lord go over them when they go forward from the place where they have put up their tent . and when the ark go forward moses say come up o lord and let the army of those who be against you be break and let your hater go in flight before you . and when it come to rest he say take rest o lord and give a blessing to the family of israel .now the people be say evil against the lord and the lord hear it be angry and sent fire on them burn the outer part of the tent circle . and the people make an outcry to moses and moses make prayer to the lord and the fire be stop . so that place be name taberah because of the fire of the lord which have be burn among them . and the mixed band of people who go with them be overcome by desire and the child of israel weep again say who will give u flesh for our food ? sweet be the memory of the fish we have in egypt for nothing and the fruit and green plant of every sort sharp and please to the taste but now our soul be waste away there be nothing at all we have nothing but this manna before our eye . now the manna be like a seed of grain like small clear drop . the people go about take it up from the earth crush it between stone or hammer it to powder and boil it in pot and they make cake of it it taste be like the taste of cake cook with oil . when the dew come down on the tent at night the manna come down with it . and at the sound of the people weep every man at his tent door the wrath of the lord be great and moses be very angry . and moses say to the lord why have you do me this evil ? and why have i not grace in your eye that you have put on me the care of all this people ? be i the father of all this people ? have i give them birth that you say to me take them in your arm like a child at the breast to the land which you give by an oath to their father ? where be i to get flesh to give to all this people ? for they be weep to me and say give u flesh for our food . i be not able by myself to take the weight of all this people for it be more than my strength . if this be to be my fate put me to death now in answer to my prayer if i have grace in your eye and let me not see my shame . and the lord say to moses send for seventy of the responsible men of israel who be in your opinion men of weight and authority over the people make them come to the tent of meeting and be there with you . and i will come down and have talk with you there and i will take some of the spirit which be on you and put it on them and they will take part of the weight of the people off you so that you do not have to take it by yourself . and say to the people make yourselves clean before tomorrow and you will have flesh for your food for in the ear of the lord you have be weep and say who will give u flesh for food ? for we be well off in egypt and so the lord will give you flesh and it will be your food not for one day only or even for five or ten or twenty day but every day for a month till you be tire of it turn from it in disgust because you have go against the lord who be with you and have be weep before him say why do we come out of egypt ? then moses say the people among whom i be be six hundred thousand men on foot and you have say i will give them flesh to be their food for a month . be flock and herd to be put to death for them ? or be all the fish in the sea to be get together so that they may be full ? and the lord say to moses have the lord 's hand become short ? now you will see if my word come true for you or not . and moses go out and give the people the word of the lord and he take seventy of the responsible men of the people place them round the tent . then the lord come down in the cloud and have talk with him and put on the seventy men some of the spirit which be on him now when the spirit come to rest on them they be like prophet but only at that time . but two men be still in the tent circle one of them name eldad and the other medad and the spirit come to rest on them they be among those who have be send for but they have not go out to the tent and the prophet 's power come on them in the tent circle . and a young man go run to moses and say eldad and medad be act a prophet in the tent circle . then joshua the son of nun who have be moses ' servant from the time when he be a child say my lord moses let them be stop . and moses say to him be you move by envy on my account ? if only all the lord 's people be prophet and the lord might put his spirit on them ! then moses with the responsible men of israel go back to the tent circle . then the lord send a wind drive little bird from the sea so that they come down on the tent and all round the tent circle about a day 's journey on this side and on that in mass about two cubit high over the face of the earth . and all that day and all night and the day after the people be take up the bird the small amount which anyone get be ten homer and they put them out all round the tent . but while the meat be still between their teeth before it be taste the wrath of the lord be move against the people and he send a great outburst of disease on them . so that place be name kibroth hattaavah because there they put in the earth the body of the people who have give way to their desire . from kibroth hattaavah the people go on to hazeroth and there they put up their tent .now miriam and aaron say evil against moses because of the cushite woman to whom he be marry for he have take a cushite woman a his wife . and they say have the word of the lord be give to moses only ? have they not come to u ? and the lord take note of it . now the man moses be more gentle than any other man on earth . and suddenly the lord say to moses and aaron and miriam come out you three to the tent of meeting . and the three of them go out . and the lord come down in a pillar of cloud take his place at the door of the tent and make aaron and miriam come before him . and he say now give ear to my word if there be a prophet among you i will give him knowledge of myself in a vision and will let my word come to him in a dream . my servant moses be not so he be true to me in all my house with him i will have talk mouth to mouth openly and not in dark saying and with his eye he will see the form of the lord why then have you no fear of say evil against my servant moses ? and burn with wrath against them the lord go away . and the cloud be move from over the tent and straight away miriam become a leper as white a snow and aaron look at miriam saw that she be a leper . then aaron say to moses o my lord let not our sin be on our head for we have do foolishly and be sinner . let her not be a one dead whose flesh be half wasted when he come out from the body of his mother . and moses cry to the lord say let my prayer come before you o god and make her well . and the lord say to moses if her father have put a mark of shame on her would she not be sham for seven day ? let her be shut up outside the tent circle for seven day and after that she may come in again . so miriam be shut up outside the tent circle for seven day and the people do not go forward on their journey till miriam have come in again . after that the people go on from hazeroth and put up their tent in the waste land of paran .and the lord say to moses send men to get knowledge about the land of canaan which i be give to the child of israel from every tribe of their father you be to send a man every one a chief among them . and moses send them from the waste land of paran a the lord give order all of them men who be head of the child of israel . and these be their name of the tribe of reuben shammua the son of zaccur . of the tribe of simeon shaphat the son of hori . of the tribe of judah caleb the son of jephunneh . of the tribe of issachar igal the son of joseph . of the tribe of ephraim hoshea the son of nun . of the tribe of benjamin palti the son of raphu . of the tribe of zebulun gaddiel the son of sodi . of the tribe of joseph that be of the family of manasseh gaddi the son of susi . of the tribe of dan ammiel the son of gemalli . of the tribe of asher sethur the son of michael of the tribe of naphtali nahbi the son of vophsi . of the tribe of gad gevel the son of machi . these be the name of the men whom moses sent to get knowledge about the land . and moses give to hoshea the son of nun the name of joshua . so moses send them to have a look at the land of canaan and say to them go up into the south and into the hill country and see what the land be like and if the people live in it be strong or feeble small or great in number and what sort of land they be live in if it be good or bad and what their living place be tent circle or wall town and if the land be fertile or poor and if there be wood in it or not . and be of good heart and come back with some of the produce of the land . now it be the time when the first grape be ready . so they go up and get a view of the land from the waste land of zin to rehob on the way to hamath . they go up into the south and come to hebron and ahiman and sheshai and talmai the child of anak be live there . now the building of hebron take place seven year before that of zoan in egypt . and they come to the valley of eshcol and cut down a vine branch with it grape two of them take it on a rod between them and they take some pomegranate and fig . that place be name the valley of eshcol because of the grape which the child of israel take from there . at the end of forty day they come back from view the land . and they come back to moses and aaron and all the child of israel to kadesh in the waste land of paran and give an account to them and to all the people and let them see the produce of the land . and they say we come to the land where you send u and truly it be flow with milk and honey and here be some of the produce of it . but the people live in the land be strong and the town be wall and very great far we saw the child of anak there . and the amalekites be in the south and the hittite and the jebusites and the amorites be live in the hill country and the canaanite by the sea and by the side of jordan . then caleb make sign to the people to keep quiet and say to moses let u go up straight away and take this land for we be well able to overcome it . but the men who have go up with him say we be not able to go up against the people for they be strong than we . and they give the child of israel a bad account of the land they have be to see say this land through which we go be a land cause destruction to those live in it and all the people we saw there be men of more than common size . there we saw those great men the son of anak offspring of the nephilim and we seem to ourselves no more than insect and so we seem to them .then all the people give load cry of grief and all that night they give themselves up to weep . and all the child of israel cry out against moses and aaron say if only we have come to our death in the land of egypt or even in this waste land ! why be the lord take u into this land to come to our death by the sword ? our wife and our little one will get into strange hand would it not be good for u to go back to egypt ? and they say to one another let u make a captain over u and go back to egypt . then moses and aaron go down on their face before the meeting of the people . and joshua the son of nun and caleb the son of jephunneh two of those who have be to see the land give sign of grief say to all the child of israel this land which we go through to see be a very good land . and if the lord have delight in u he will take u into this land and give it to u a land flow with milk and honey . only do not go against the lord or go in fear of the people of the land for they will be our food their strength have be take from them and the lord be with u have no fear of them . but all the people say they be to be stone . then the glory of the lord be see in the tent of meeting before the eye of all the child of israel . and the lord say to moses how long will this people have no respect for me ? how long will they be without faith in the face of all the sign i have do among them ? i will send disease on them for their destruction and take away their heritage and i will make of you a nation great and strong than they . and moses say to the lord then it will come to the ear of the egyptian for by your power you take this people out from among them and they will give the news to the people of this land they have have word that you lord be present with this people let yourself be see face to face and that your cloud be rest over them and that you go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of fire by night . now if you put to death all this people a one man then the nation who have have word of your glory will say because the lord be not able to take this people into the land which he make an oath to give them he send destruction on them in the waste land . so now may my prayer come before you and let the power of the lord be great a you say the lord be slow to wrath and great in mercy overlook wrongdoing and evil and will not let wrongdoer go free send punishment on child for the sin of their father to the third and fourth generation . may the sin of this people have forgiveness in the measure of your great mercy a you have have mercy on them from egypt up till now . and the lord say i have have mercy a you say but truly a i be live and a all the earth will be full of the glory of the lord because all these men have see my glory and the sign which i have do in egypt and in the waste land still have put me to the test ten time and have not give ear to my voice they will not see the land about which i make an oath to their father not one of these by whom i have not be honour will see it . but my servant caleb because he have a different spirit in him and have be true to me with all his heart him i will take into that land into which he go and his seed will have it for their heritage . now the amalekites and the canaanite be in the valley tomorrow turn round go into the waste land by the way to the red sea . then the lord say to moses and aaron how long be i to put up with this evil people and their outcry against me ? the word which they say against me have come to my ear . say to them by my life say the lord as certainly a your word have come to my ear so certainly will i do this to you your dead body will be stretch out in this waste land and of all your number all those of twenty year old and over who have be cry out against me not one will come into the land which i give my word you would have for your rest place but only caleb the son of jephunneh and joshua the son of nun . and your little one whom you say would come into strange hand i will take in and they will see the land which you would not have . but a for you your dead body will be stretch in this waste land . and your child will be wanderer in the waste land for forty year undergoing punishment for your false way till your body become dust in the waste land . and a you go through the land view it for forty day so for forty year a year for every day you will undergo punishment for your wrongdoing and you will see that i be against you . i the lord have say it and this i will certainly do to all this evil people who have come together against me in this waste land destruction will come on them and death will be their fate . and the men whom moses sent to see the land and who by the bad account they give of the land be the cause of the outcry the people make against moses those same men who say evil of the land come to their death by disease before the lord . but joshua the son of nun and caleb the son of jephunneh of those who go to see the land be not touch by disease . and when moses put these word before the child of israel the people be full of grief . and early in the morning they get up and go to the top of the mountain say we be here and we will go up to the place which the lord say he would give u for we have do wrong . and moses say why be you now act against the lord 's order seeing that no good will come of it ? go not up for the lord be not with you and you will be overcome by those who be fight against you . for the amalekites and the canaanite be there before you and you will be put to death by their sword because you have go back from the way of the lord the lord will not be with you . but they give no attention to his word and go to the top of the mountain though moses and the ark of the lord 's agreement do not go out of the tent circle . then the amalekites come down and the canaanite who be live in the hill country and overcome them completely drive them back as far a hormah .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel when you have come into the land which i be give to you for your rest place and be go to make an offering by fire to the lord a burned offering or an offering in connection with an oath or an offering freely give or at your regular feast an offering for a sweet smell to the lord from the herd or the flock then let him who be make his offer give to the lord a meal offering of a tenth part of a measure of the best meal mixed with a fourth part of a hin of oil and for the drink offering you be to give with the burned offering or other offer the fourth part of a hin of wine for every lamb . or for a male sheep give a a meal offering two tenth part of a measure of the best meal mixed with a third part of a hin of oil and for the drink offer give a third part of a hin of wine for a sweet smell to the lord . and when you make ready a young ox for a burn or other offering or for the effecting of an oath or for peace offering to the lord then with the ox give a meal offering of three tenth part of a measure of the best meal mixed with half a hin of oil . and for the drink offer give half a hin of wine for an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . this be to be do for every young ox and for every male sheep or he lamb or young goat . whatever number you make ready so you be to do for every one . all those who be israelite by birth be to do these thing in this way when give an offering make by fire of a sweet smell to the lord . and if a man from another country or any other person live among you through all your generation have the desire to give an offering make by fire of a sweet smell to the lord let him do a you do . there be to be one law for you and for the man of another country live with you one law for ever from generation to generation a you be so be he to be before the lord . the law and the rule be to be the same for you and for those from other land live with you . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel when you come into the land where i be guide you then when you take for your food the produce of the land you be to give an offering lift up before the lord . of the first of your rough meal you be to give a cake for a lifted offering lift it up before the lord a the offering of the grain floor be lift up . from generation to generation you be to give to the lord a lifted offering from the first of your rough meal . and if in error you go against any of these law which the lord have give to moses all the law which the lord have give you by the hand of moses from the day when the lord give them and ever after from generation to generation then if the wrong be do in error without the knowledge of the meeting of the people let all the meeting give a young ox a a burned offering a sweet smell to the lord with it meal offering and it drink offering a be order in the law together with a he goat for a sin offering . so the priest will make the people free from sin and they will have forgiveness for it be an error and they have give their offering make by fire to the lord and their sin offering before the lord on account of their error and all the meeting of the child of israel as well a those from other land live among them will have forgiveness for it be an error on the part of the people . and if one person do wrong without be conscious of it then let him give a she goat of the first year for a sin offering . and the priest will take away the sin of the person who have do wrong if the wrong be do unconsciously and he will have forgiveness . the law in connection with wrong do unconsciously be to be the same for him who be an israelite by birth and for the man from another country who be live among them . but the person who do wrong in the pride of his heart if he be one of you or of another nation by birth be act without respect for the lord and will be cut off from his people . because he have no respect for the word of the lord and do not keep his law that man will be cut off without mercy and his sin will be on him . now while the child of israel be in the waste land they saw a man who be get stick on the sabbath day . and those who saw him get stick take him before moses and aaron and all the people . and they have him shut up because they have no direction about what be to be do with him . then the lord say to moses certainly the man be to be put to death let him be stone by all the people outside the tent circle . so all the people take him outside the tent circle and he be stone to death there a the lord give order to moses . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel that through all their generation they be to put on the edge of their robe an ornament of twisted thread and in every ornament a blue cord so that look on these ornament you may keep in mind the order of the lord and do them and not be guide by the desire of your heart and eye through which you have be untrue to me and that you may keep in mind all my order and do them and be holy to your god . i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt so that i might be your god i be the lord your god .now korah the son of izhar the son of kohath the son of levi with dathan and abiram the son of eliab and on the son of pallu the son of reuben make themselves ready and come before moses with certain of the child of israel two hundred and fifty chief of the people men of good name who have a place in the meeting of the people . they come together against moses and against aaron and say to them you take overmuch on yourselves see that all the people be holy every one of them and the lord be among them why then have you put yourselves in authority over the people of the lord ? and moses hear this go down on his face and he say to korah and his band in the morning the lord will make clear who be his and who be holy and who may come near him the man of his selection will be cause to come near him . so do this let korah and all his band take vessel for burn perfume and put spice on the fire in them before the lord tomorrow then the man mark out by the lord will be holy you take overmuch on yourselves you son of levi . and moses say to korah give ear now you son of levi do it seem only a small thing to you that the god of israel have make you separate from the rest of israel let you come near himself to do the work of the house of the lord and to take your place before the people to do what have to be do for them let you and all your brother the son of levi come near to him ? and would you now be priest ? so you and all your band have come together against the lord and aaron who be he that you be cry out against him ? then moses sent for dathan and abiram the son of eliab and they say we will not come up be it not enough that you have take u from a land flow with milk and honey to put u to death in the waste land but now you be desire to make yourself a chief over u ? and more than this you have not take u into a land flow with milk and honey or give u a heritage of field and vine garden will you put out the eye of these men ? we will not come up . then moses be very angry and say to the lord give no attention to their offering not one of their ass have i take or do wrong to any of them . and moses say to korah you and all your band be to come before the lord tomorrow you and they and aaron and let every man take a vessel for burn perfume and put sweet spice in them let every man take his vessel before the lord two hundred and fifty vessel you and aaron and everyone with his vessel . so every man take his vessel and they put fire in them with spice and come to the door of the tent of meet with moses and aaron . and korah make all the people come together against them to the door of the tent of meeting and the glory of the lord be see by all the people . and the lord say to moses and aaron come out from among this people so that i may send sudden destruction on them . then fall down on their face they say o god the god of the spirit of all flesh because of one man 's sin will your wrath be move against all the people ? and the lord say to moses say to the people come away from the tent of korah dathan and abiram . so moses get up and go to dathan and abiram and the responsible men of israel go with him . and he say to the people come away now from the tent of these evil men without touch anything of theirs or you may be take in the punishment of their sin . so on every side they go away from the tent of korah dathan and abiram and dathan and abiram come out to the door of their tent with their wife and their son and their little one . and moses say now you will see that the lord have send me to do all these work and i have not do them of myself . if these men have the common death of men or if the natural fate of all men overtake them then the lord have not send me . but if the lord do something new open the earth to take them in with everything which be theirs and they go down live into the underworld then it will be clear to you that the lord have not be honour by these men . and while these word be on his lip the earth under them be part in two and the earth open her mouth take them in with their family and all the men who be join to korah and their good . so they and all theirs go down live into the underworld and the earth be shut over them and they be cut off from among the meeting of the people . and all israel round about them go in flight at their cry for fear say they that we go down into the heart of the earth . then fire come out from the lord burn up the two hundred and fifty men who be offer the perfume . and the lord say to moses say to eleazar the son of aaron the priest that he be to take out of the flame the vessel with the perfume in them turn the fire out of them for they be holy and let the vessel of those men who with their life have make payment for their sin be hammer out into plate a a cover for the altar for they have be offer before the lord and be holy so that they may be a sign to the child of israel . so eleazar the priest take the brass vessel which have be offer by those who be burn up and they be hammer out to make a cover for the altar to be a sign kept in memory for ever by the child of israel that no man who be not of the seed of aaron have the right of burn spice before the lord so that he may not be like korah and his band a the lord say to him by the mouth of moses . but on the day after all the child of israel make an outcry against moses and against aaron say you have put to death the lord 's people . now when the people have come together against moses and aaron look in the direction of the tent of meet they saw the cloud cover it and the glory of the lord come before their eye . then moses and aaron come to the front of the tent of meeting . and the lord say to moses come out from among this people so that i may send sudden destruction on them . and they go down on their face . and moses say to aaron take your vessel and put in it fire from the altar and sweet spice and take it quickly into the meeting of the people and make them free from sin for wrath have go out from the lord and the disease be start . and at the word of moses aaron take his vessel and go run among the people and even then the disease have make a start among them and he put spice in his vessel to take away the sin of the people . and he take his place between the dead and the living and the disease be stop . now fourteen thousand seven hundred death be cause by that disease in addition to those who come to their end because of what korah have do . then aaron go back to moses to the door of the tent of meeting and the disease come to a stop .and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel that they be to give you rods one for every family for every chief the head of his father 's house making twelve rod let every man 's name be place on his rod . and let aaron 's name be place on the rod of levi for there be to be one rod for the head of every family . and let them be store up in the tent of meeting in front of the ark of witness where i come to you . and the rod of that man who be mark out by me for myself will have bud on it so i will put a stop to the outcry which the child of israel make to me against you . so moses give these order to the child of israel and all their chief give him rods one for the head of every family make twelve rod and aaron 's rod be among them . and moses put the rod before the lord in the tent of witness . now on the day after moses go into the tent of witness and he saw that aaron 's rod the rod of the house of levi have put out bud and be cover with bud and flower and fruit . then moses take out all the rod from before the lord and give them back to the child of israel and they saw them and every man take his rod . and the lord say to moses put aaron 's rod back in front of the ark of witness to be keep for a sign against this false hearted people so that you may put a stop to their outcry against me and death may not overtake them . this moses do a the lord give order so he do . and the child of israel say to moses truly destruction have come on u an evil fate have overtake u all . death will overtake everyone who come near who come near the house of the lord be we all to come to destruction ?and the lord say to aaron you and your son and your father 's family be to be responsible for all wrongdoing in relation to the holy place and you and your son be to be responsible for the error which come about in your work a priest . let your brother the family of levi come near with you so that they may be join with you and be your servant but you and your son with you be to go in before the ark of witness . they be to do your order and be responsible for the work of the tent but they may not come near the vessel of the holy place or the altar so that death may not overtake them or you . they be to be join with you in the care of the tent of meet do whatever be need for the tent and no one of any other family may come near you . you be to be responsible for the holy place and the altar so that wrath may never again come on the child of israel . now see i have take your brother the levite from among the child of israel they be give to you and to the lord to do the work of the tent of meeting . and you and your son with you be to be responsible a priest for the altar and everything on it and everything inside the veil you be to do the work of priest i have give you your position a priest and any other man who come near will be put to death . and the lord say to aaron see i have give into your care my lift offering even all the holy thing of the child of israel i have give to you and to your son a your right for ever because you have be mark with the holy oil . this be to be yours of the most holy thing out of the fire offering every offering of theirs every meal offering and sin offering and every offering which they make on account of error be to be most holy for you and your son . a most holy thing they be to be your food let every male have them for food it be to be holy to you . and this be yours the lifted offering which they give and all the wave offering of the child of israel i have give to you and to your son and to your daughter a your right for ever everyone in your house who be clean may have them for food . all the best of the oil and the wine and the grain the first fruit of them which they give to the lord to you have i give them . the early produce from their land which they take to the lord be to be yours everyone in your house who be clean may have it for his food . everything give by oath to the lord in israel be to be yours . the first birth of every living thing which be offer to the lord of man or beast be to be yours but for the first son of man payment be to be make and for the first young of unclean beast . payment be to be make for these when they be a month old at the value fix by you a price of five shekel by the scale of the holy place that be twenty gerahs to the shekel . but no such payment may be make for the first birth of an ox or a sheep or a goat these be holy their blood be to be drop on the altar and their fat burn for an offering make by fire a sweet smell to the lord . their flesh be to be yours like the breast of the wave offering and the right leg it be to be yours . all the lifted offering of the holy thing which the child of israel give to the lord i have give to you and to your son and to your daughter a a right for ever . this be an agreement make with salt before the lord to you and to your seed for ever . and the lord say to aaron you will have no heritage in their land or any part among them i be your part and your heritage among the child of israel . and to the child of levi i have give a their heritage all the tenth offer in israel a payment for the work they do the work of the tent of meeting . in future the child of israel be not to come near the tent of meeting so that death may not come to them because of sin . but the levite be to do the work of the tent of meeting and be responsible for error in connection with it this be a law for ever through all your generation and among the child of israel they will have no heritage . for the tenth which the child of israel give a a lifted offering to the lord i have give to the levite a their heritage . and so i have say to them among the child of israel they will have no heritage . and the lord say to moses say to the levite when you take from the child of israel the tenth which i have give to you from them a your heritage a tenth part of that tenth be to be offer a an offering lift up before the lord . and this lifted offering be to be put to your credit a if it be grain from the grain floor and wine from the vine . so you be to make an offering lift up to the lord from all the tenth which you get from the child of israel give out of it the lord 's lifted offering to aaron the priest . from everything give to you let the best of it the holy part of it be offer a a lifted offering to the lord . say to them then when the best of it be lift up on high it be to be put to the account of the levite a the increase of the grain floor and of the place where the grape be crush . it be to be your food for you and your family in every place it be your reward for your work in the tent of meeting . and no sin will be yours on account of it when the best of it have be lift up on high you be not to make a wrong use of the holy thing of the child of israel so that death may not overtake you .and the lord say to moses and aaron this be the rule of the law which the lord have make say give order to the child of israel to give you a red cow without any mark on her and on which the yoke have never be put give her to eleazar the priest and let him take her outside the tent circle and have her put to death before him . then let eleazar the priest take some of her blood on his finger shake the blood seven time in the direction of the front of the tent of meeting and the cow be to be burn before him her skin and her flesh and her blood and her waste be to be burn then let the priest take cedar wood and hyssop and red thread and put them into the fire where the cow be burn . and the priest after wash his clothing and bath his body in water may come back to the tent circle and will be unclean till even . and he who do the burning be to have his clothing wash and his body bath in water and be unclean till even . then let a man who be clean take the dust of the burn cow and put it outside the tent circle in a clean place where it be to be keep for the child of israel and use in make the water which take away what be unclean it be a sin offering . and he who take up the dust of the burned cow be to have his clothing wash with water and be unclean till even this be to be a law for ever for the child of israel as well a for the man from another country who be live among them . anyone touch a dead body will be unclean for seven day on the third day and on the seventh day he be to make himself clean with the water and so he will be clean but if he do not do this on the third day and on the seventh day he will not be clean . anyone touch the body of a dead man without make himself clean in this way make the house of the lord unclean and that man will be cut off from israel because the water be not put on him he will be unclean his unclean condition be unchanged . this be the law when death come to a man in his tent everyone who come into the tent and everyone who be in the tent will be unclean for seven day . and every open vessel without a cover fix on it will be unclean . and anyone touch one who have be put to death with the sword in the open country or the body of one who have come to his end by a natural death or a man 's bone or the resting place of a dead body will be unclean for seven day . and for the unclean they be to take the dust of the burning of the sin offering and put flow water on it in a vessel and a clean person be to take hyssop and put it in the water shake it over the tent and all the vessel and the people who be there and over him by whom the bone or the body of one who have be put to death with the sword or the body of one who have come to his end by a natural death or the resting place be touch . let the clean person do this to the unclean on the third day and on the seventh day and on the seventh day he be to make him clean and after wash his clothing and bath himself in water he will be clean in the evening . but the man who be unclean do not make himself clean in this way will be cut off from the meeting of the people because he have make the holy place of the lord unclean the water have not be put on him he be unclean . this be to be a law for them for ever he who put the water on the unclean person be to have his clothing wash and anyone touch the water will be unclean till even . anything touch by the unclean person will be unclean and any person touch it will be unclean till evening .in the first month all the child of israel come into the waste land of zin and put up their tent in kadesh there death come to miriam and they put her body to rest in the earth . and there be no water for the people and they come together against moses and against aaron . and the people be angry with moses and say if only death have overtake u when our brother come to their death before the lord ! why have you take the lord 's people into this waste for death to come to u and to our cattle there ? why have you make u come out of egypt into this evil place ? this be no place of seed or fig or vine or other fruit and there be no water for drinking . then moses and aaron go away from the people to the door of the tent of meeting and fall on their face there they saw the glory of the lord . and the lord say to moses take the rod you and aaron your brother and make all the people come together and before their eye give order to the rock to give out it water and so make water come out of the rock for them and give the people and their cattle drink . and moses take the rod from before the lord a he give him order . then moses and aaron make the people come together in front of the rock and he say to them give ear now you people whose heart be turn from the lord be we to get water for you out of the rock ? and lift up his hand moses give the rock two blow with his rod and water come stream out and the people and their cattle have drink enough . then the lord say to moses and aaron because you have not enough faith in me to keep my name holy before the child of israel you will not take this people into the land which i have give them . these be the water of meribah because the child of israel go against the lord and they saw that he be holy among them . then moses send men from kadesh to the king of edom to say to him your brother israel say you have knowledge of all the thing we have be through how our father go down into egypt and we be live in egypt for a long time and the egyptian be cruel to u and to our father and the lord give ear to the voice of our cry and send an angel and take u out of egypt and now we be in kadesh a town on the edge of your land let u now go through your land we will not go into field or vine garden or take the water of the spring we will go by the highway not turn to the right or to the left till we have go past the limit of your land . and edom say you be not to go through my land for if you do i will come out against you with the sword . and the child of israel say to him we will go up by the highway and if we or our cattle take of your water we will give you a price for it only let u go through on our foot nothing more . but he say you be not to go through . and edom come out against them in his strength with a great army . so edom would not let israel go through his land and israel go in another direction . and they go on from kadesh and come with all their people to mount hor . and at mount hor at the edge of the land of edom the lord say to moses and aaron aaron will be put to rest with his people he will not go into the land which i have give to the child of israel because you go against my word at the water of meribah . so take aaron and eleazar his son up into mount hor and take aaron 's robe off him and put them on eleazar his son and death will come to aaron there and he will be put to rest with his people . so moses do a the lord have say and before the eye of all the people they go up mount hor . and moses take off aaron 's robe and put them on eleazar his son and there on the top of the mountain death come to aaron then moses and eleazar come down from the mountain . and when the people saw that aaron be dead all the child of israel give themselves up to weep for him for thirty day .and it come to the ear of the canaanite the king of arad living in the south that israel be come by the way of atharim and he come out against them and take some of them prisoner . then israel make an oath to the lord and say if you will give up this people into my hand then i will send complete destruction on all their town . and the lord in answer to the voice of israel give the canaanite up to them and they put them and their town completely to destruction and that place be name hormah . then they go on from mount hor by the way to the red sea go round the land of edom and the spirit of the people be overcome with weariness on the way . and cry out against god and against moses they say why have you take u out of egypt to come to our death in the waste land ? for there be no bread and no water and this poor bread be disgust to u . then the lord send poison snake among the people and their bite be a cause of death to number of the people of israel . then the people come to moses and say we have do wrong in cry out against the lord and against you make prayer to the lord to take away the snake from u . so moses make prayer for the people . and the lord say to moses make an image of a snake and put it on a rod and anyone who have be wound by the snake look on it will be make well . so moses make a snake of brass and put it on a rod and anyone who have a snakebite after look on the snake of brass be make well . then the child of israel go on and put up their tent in oboth . and journey on again from oboth they put up their tent in iye abarim in the waste land before moab look east . and move on from there they put up their tent in the valley of zered . from there they go on and put up their tent on the other side of the arnon which be on the waste land at the edge of the land of the amorites for the arnon be the line of division between moab and the amorites a it say in the book of the war of the lord vaheb in suphah and the valley of the amon the slope of the valley go down to the tent of ar and touch the edge of moab . from there they go on to beer the water spring of which the lord say to moses make the people come together and i will give them water . then israel give voice to this song come up o water spring let u make a song to it the fountain make by the chief make deep by the great one of the people with the law giver ' rod and with their stick . then from the waste land they go on to mattanah and from mattanah to nahaliel and from nahaliel to bamoth and from bamoth to the valley in the open country of moab and to the top of pisgah look over jeshimon . and israel send men to sihon king of the amorites say let me go through your land we will not go into field or vine garden or take the water of the spring we will go by the highway till we have go past the limit of your land . and sihon would not let israel go through his land but get all his people together and go out against israel into the waste land as far a jahaz to make war on israel . but israel overcame him and take all his land from the arnon to the jabbok as far a the country of the child of ammon for the country of the child of ammon be strongly arm . and israel take all their town live in heshbon and all the town and small place of the amorites . for heshbon be the town of sihon king of the amorites who have make war against an early king of moab and take from him all his land as far a the arnon . so the maker of wise saying say come to heshbon build up the town of sihon and make it strong for a fire have go out of heshbon a flame from the town of sihon for the destruction of ar in moab and the lord of the high place of the arnon . sorrow be yours o moab ! destruction be your fate o people of chemosh his son have go in flight and his daughter be prisoner in the hand of sihon king of the amorites . they be wound with our arrow destruction have come on heshbon even to dibon and we have make the land waste as far a nophah stretch out to medeba . so israel put up their tent in the land of the amorites . and moses send men secretly to jazer and they take it town drive out the amorites who be live there . then turn they go up by the way of bashan and og king of bashan go out against them with all his people to the fight at edrei . and the lord say to moses have no fear of him for i have give him up into your hand with all his people and his land do to him a you do to sihon king of the amorites at heshbon . so they overcome him and his son and his people drive them all out and they take his land for their heritage .then the child of israel journeying on put up their tent in the lowland of moab on the other side of jordan at jericho . now balak the son of zippor saw what israel have do to the amorites . and in moab there be great fear of the people because their number be so great and the feeling of moab be bitter against the child of israel . then moab say to the responsible men of midian it be clear that this great people will be the destruction of everything round u make a meal of u a the ox do of the grass of the field . at that time balak the son of zippor be king of moab . so he send men to balaam son of beor at pethor by the river in the land of the child of his people say to him see a people have come out of egypt cover all the face of the earth and they have put up their tent opposite to me come now in answer to my prayer and put a curse on this people for they be great than i and then i may be strong enough to overcome them and send them out of the land for it be clear that good come to him who have your blessing but he on whom you put your curse be curse . so the responsible men of moab and midian go away take in their hand reward for the prophet and they come to balaam and say to him what balak have give them order to say . and he say to them take your rest here tonight and i will give you an answer after hear what the lord say so the chief of moab keep there with balaam that night . and god come to balaam and say who be these men with you ? and balaam say to god balak the son of zippor king of moab have send them to me say see the people who have come out of egypt be cover all the earth now put a curse on this people for me so that i may be able to make war on them drive them out of the land . and god say to balaam you be not to go with them or put a curse on this people for they have my blessing . in the morning balaam get up and say to the chief of balak go back to your land for the lord will not let me go with you . so the chief of moab go back to balak and say balaam will not come with u . so balak send more chief great in number and of high position than the others . and they come to balaam and say balak son of zippor say let nothing keep you from come to me for i will give you a place of very great honour and whatever you say to me i will do so come in answer to my prayer and put a curse on this people . but balaam in answer say to the servant of balak even if balak give me his house full of silver and gold it would not be possible for me to do anything more or less than the order of the lord my god . so take your rest here this night till i have knowledge what more the lord have to say to me . and that night god come to balaam and say to him if these men have come for you go with them but do only what i say to you . so in the morning balaam get up and make his as ready go with the chief of moab . but god be move to wrath because he go and the angel of the lord take up a position in the road to keep him from his purpose . now he be seat on his as and his two servant be with him . and the as saw the angel of the lord wait in the road with his sword in his hand and turning from the road the as go into the field and balaam give the as blow to get her back on to the road . then the angel of the lord take up his position in a narrow road through the vine garden with a wall on this side and on that . and the as saw the angel of the lord and go near the wall crush balaam 's foot against the wall and he give her more blow . then the angel of the lord go further stopping in a narrow place where there be no room for turn to the right or to the left . and the as saw the angel of the lord and go down on the earth under balaam and full of wrath balaam give her hard blow with his stick . then the lord give the as the power of talk and open her mouth she say to balaam what have i do to you that you have give me blow these three time ? and balaam say to the as you have make me seem foolish if only i have a sword in my hand i would put you to death . and the as say to balaam be i not your as upon which you have go all your life till this day ? and have i ever do this to you before ? and he say no . then the lord make balaam 's eye open and he saw the angel of the lord in the way with his sword in his hand and he go down on his face to the earth . and the angel of the lord say to him why have you give your as blow these three time ? see i have come out against you to keep you back because your purpose be not please to me . and the as saw me turn to one side from me three time if she have not go to one side i would certainly have put you to death and keep her safe . and balaam say to the angel of the lord i have do wrong for i do not see that you be in the way against me but now if it be evil in your eye i will go back again . and the angel of the lord say to balaam go with the men but say only what i give you to say . then balaam go on with the chief of balak . now balak hearing that balaam have come go to the chief town of moab on the edge of the arnon in the farthest part of the land for the purpose of meet him . and balak say to balaam do i not send to you request you with all my heart to come to me ? why do you not come ? be i not able to give you a place of honour ? then balaam say to balak now i have come to you but have i power to say anything ? only what god put into my mouth may i say . and balaam go with balak to kiriath huzoth . and balak make offering of ox and sheep and send to balaam and the chief who be with him . and in the morning balak take balaam up to the high place of baal and from there he be able to see the out limit of the people .and balaam say to balak make me here seven altar and get ready seven ox and seven male sheep . and balak do a balaam have say and balak and balaam make an offering on every altar of an ox and a male sheep . then balaam say to balak take your place by your burned offering and i will go and see if the lord come to me and i will give you word of whatever he say to me . and he go to an open place on a hill . and god come to balaam and balaam say to him i have make ready seven altar offer an ox and a male sheep on every altar . and the lord put word in balaam 's mouth and say go back to balak and this be what you be to say . so he go back to him where he be wait by his burned offering with all the chief of moab . and in the word which the lord have give him he say from aram balak have send for me the king of moab from the mountain of the east come put curse on jacob for me and be angry with israel . how may i put curse on him who be not curse by god ? how may i be angry with him with whom the lord be not angry ? from the top of the rock i see him look down on him from the hill it be a people make separate not to be number among the nation . who be able to take the measure of the dust of jacob or the number of the thousand of israel ? may my death be the death of the upright and my last end like his ! then balak say to balaam what have you do to me ? i send for you so that my hater might be curse and see you have give them a blessing . and in answer he say be i not order to say only what the lord put into my mouth ? and balak say to him come with me now into another place from which you will not be able to see them all but only the outskirt of them and you will send curse on them from there . so he take him into the country of zophim to the top of pisgah and there they make seven altar offer an ox and a male sheep on every altar . then he say to balak take your place here by your burn offering while i go over there to the lord . and the lord come to balaam and put word in his mouth and say go back to balak and this be what you be to say . so he come to him where he be wait by his burned offering with the chief of moab by his side . and balak say to him what have the lord say ? and in the word which the lord have give him he say up ! balak and give ear give attention to me o son of zippor god be not a man to say what be false or the son of man that his purpose may be change what he have say will he not do ? and will he not give effect to the word of his mouth ? see i have have order to give blessing and he have give a blessing which i have no power to take away . he have see no evil in jacob or wrongdoing in israel the lord his god be with him and the glad cry of a king be among them . it be god who have take them out of egypt his horn be like those of the mountain ox . no evil power have effect against jacob no secret art against israel at the right time it will be say of jacob and of israel see what god have do ! see israel come up like a she lion lift himself up like a lion he will take no rest till he have make a meal of those he have overcome drink the blood of those he have put to death . then balak say to balaam if you will not put a curse on them at all event do not give them a blessing . but balaam in answer say to balak do i not say to you i may only do what the lord say ? then balak say to balaam come now i will take you to another place it may be that god will let you put a curse on them from there . so balak take balaam to the top of peor look down over the waste land . and balaam say to balak make me seven altar here and get seven ox and seven male sheep ready for me . and balak do a balaam say offer an ox and a male sheep on every altar .now when balaam saw that it be the lord 's pleasure to give his blessing to israel he do not a at other time make use of secret art but turn his face to the waste land and lift up his eye he saw israel there with their tent in the order of their tribe and the spirit of god come on him . and move by the spirit he say these be the word of balaam son of beor the word of the man whose eye be open he say whose ear be open to the word of god who have see the vision of the ruler of all fall down but have his eye open how fair be your tent o jacob your house o israel ! they be stretch out like valley like garden by the riverside like flower tree plant by the lord like cedar tree by the water . people will be in fear before his strength his arm will be on great nation his king will be high than agag and his kingdom make great in honour . it be god who have take him out of egypt his horn be like those of the mountain ox the nation war against him will be his food their bone will be break they will be wound with his arrow . he take his sleep stretch out like a lion and like a she lion by whom will his rest be break ? may a blessing be on everyone who give you bless and a curse on everyone by whom you be curse . then balak be full of wrath against balaam and angrily wave his hand he say to balaam i sent for you so that those who be against me might be curse but now see three time you have give them a blessing . go back quickly to the place you come from it be my purpose to give you a place of honour but now the lord have keep you back from honour . then balaam say to balak do i not say to the men you send to me even if balak give me his house full of silver and gold it would not be possible for me to go outside the order of the lord do good or evil at the impulse of my mind whatever the lord say i will say ? so now i will go back to my people but first let me make clear to you what this people will do to your people in day to come . then he go on with his story and say these be the word of balaam the son of beor the word of him whose eye be open he say whose ear be open to the word of god who have knowledge of the most high who have see the vision of the ruler of all fall down and have his eye open i see him but not now look on him but not near a star will come out of jacob and a rod of authority out of israel send destruction to the farthest limit of moab and on the head of all the son of sheth . edom will be his heritage and he will put an end to the last of the people of seir . and israel will go on in strength and jacob will have rule over his hater . then turn his eye to amalek he go on with his story and say amalek be the first of the nation but his part will be destruction for ever . and look on the kenites he go on with his story and say strong be your living place and your secret place be safe in the rock . but still the kenites will be waste till asshur take you away prisoner . then he go on with his story and say but who may keep his life when god do this ? but ship will come from the direction of kittim trouble asshur and troubling eber and like the others their fate will be destruction . then balaam get up and go back to his place and balak go away .now when israel be live in shittim the people become false to the lord do evil with the daughter of moab for they send for the people to be present at the offering make to their god and the people take part in their feast and give honour to their god . so israel have relation with the woman of moab in honour of the baal of peor and the lord be move to wrath against israel . then the lord say to moses take all the chief of the people hang them up in the sun before the lord so that the wrath of the lord may be turn from israel . so moses say to the judge of israel let everyone put to death those of his men who have have relation with the woman of moab in honour of the baal of peor . then one of the child of israel come to his brother take with him a woman of midian before the eye of moses and all the meeting of the people while they be weep at the door of the tent of meeting . and phinehas the son of eleazar the son of aaron the priest see it get up from among the people and take a spear in his hand and go after the man of israel into the tent drive the spear through the two of them through the man of israel and through the stomach of the woman . so the disease be stop among the child of israel . but twenty four thousand of them have come to their death by the disease . and the lord say to moses through phinehas and because of his passion for my honour my wrath have be turn away from the child of israel so that i have not send destruction on them all in my wrath . so say to them that i will make with him an agreement of peace and by this agreement he and his son after him have the right to be priest for ever because by his care for the honour of his god he take away the sin of the child of israel . now the man of israel who be put to death with the woman of midian be zimri the son of salu a chief of one of the family of the simeonites . and the woman of midian who be put to death be cozbi the daughter of zur he be the head of a family in midian . then the lord say to moses take up arm against the midianites and overcome them for they be a danger to you with their false way cause sin to come on you in the question of peor and because of cozbi their sister the daughter of the chief of midian who be put to death at the time of the disease which come on you because of peor .now after the disease be over the lord say to moses and eleazar the son of aaron the priest let all the child of israel be number by the name of their father ' family all those of twenty year old and over who be able to go to war in israel . so moses and eleazar the priest give them the order in the lowland of moab by jordan at jericho say let all the people of twenty year old and over be number a the lord have give order to moses and the child of israel who have come out of egypt . reuben the first son of israel the son of reuben by their family of hanoch the family of the hanochites of pallu the family of the palluites of hezron the family of the hezronites of carmi the family of the carmites . these be the family of the reubenites their number be forty three thousand seven hundred and thirty . and the son of pallu eliab and the son of eliab nemuel and dathan and abiram . these be the same dathan and abiram who have a place in the meeting of the people who together with korah make an outcry against moses and aaron and against the lord and they go down into the open mouth of the earth together with korah when death overtake him and all his band at the time when two hundred and fifty men be burn in the fire and they become a sign . but death do not overtake the son of korah . the son of simeon by their family of nemuel the family of the nemuelites of jamin the family of the jaminites of jachin the family of the jachinites of zerah the family of the zerahites of shaul the family of the shaulites . these be the family of the simeonites twenty two thousand two hundred . the son of gad by their family of zephon the family of the zephonites of haggi the family of the haggites of shuni the family of the shunites of ozni the family of the oznites of eri the family of the erites of arod the family of the arodites of areli the family of the arelites . these be the family of the son of gad a they be number forty thousand five hundred . the son of judah er and onan and er and onan have come to their death in the land of canaan . and the son of judah by their family be of shelah the family of the shelahites of perez the family of the perezites of zerah the family of the zerahites . and the son of perez be of hezron the family of the hezronites of hamul the family of the hamulites . these be the family of judah a they be number seventy six thousand five hundred . the son of issachar by their family of tola the family of the tolaites of puvah the family of the punites of jashub the family of the jashubites of shimron the family of the shimronites . these be the family of issachar a they be number sixty four thousand three hundred . the son of zebulun by their family of sered the family of the seredites of elon the family of the elonites of jahleel the family of the jahleelites . these be the family of the zebulunites a they be number sixty thousand five hundred . the son of joseph by their family manasseh and ephraim . the son of manasseh of machir the family of the machirites and machir be the father of gilead of gilead the family of the gileadites . these be the son of gilead of iezer the family of the iezerites of helek the family of the helekites and of asriel the family of the asrielites and of shechem the family of the shechemites and of shemida the family of the shemidaites and of hepher the family of the hepherites . and zelophehad the son of hepher have no son but only daughter and the name of the daughter of zelophehad be mahlah and noah hoglah milcah and tirzah . these be the family of manasseh and those who be number of them be fifty two thousand seven hundred . these be the son of ephraim by their family of shuthelah the family of the shuthelahites of becher the family of the becherites of tahan the family of the tahanites . and these be the son of shuthelah of eran the family of the eranites these be the family of ephraim a they be number thirty two thousand five hundred . these be the son of joseph by their family . the son of benjamin by their family of bela the family of the belaites of ashbel the family of the ashbelites of ahiram the family of the ahiramites of shephupham the family of the shuphamites and of hupham the family of the huphamites . and the son of bela be ard and naaman of ard the family of the ardites of naaman the family of the naamites . these be the son of benjamin by their family and those who be number of them be forty five thousand six hundred . these be the son of dan by their family of shuham the family of the shuhamites . these be the family of dan by their family . all the family of the shuhamites a they be number be sixty four thousand four hundred . the son of asher by their family of imnah the family of the imnites of ishvi the family of the ishvites of beriah the family of the beriites . of the son of beriah of heber the family of the heberites of malchiel the family of the malchielites and the name of the daughter of asher be serah . these be the family of the son of asher a they be number fifty three thousand four hundred . the son of naphtali by their family of jahzeel the family of the jahzeelites of guni the family of the gunite of jezer the family of the jezerites of shillem the family of the shillemites . these be the family of naphtali by their family and those who be number of them be forty five thousand four hundred . those who be number of the child of israel be six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty . and the lord say to moses let there be a division of the land among these for their heritage in relation to the number of name . to those family who be more in number give a great heritage to those who be less in number a small part to every one let the heritage be give in relation to the number in his family . but let the distribution of the land be make by the decision of the lord by the name of the tribe of their father let their heritage be give them . a it be order by the decision of the lord let distribution be make between those who be more in number and those who be less . these be those of the levite who be number by their family of gershon the family of the gershonites of kohath the family of the kohathites of merari the family of the merarites . these be the family of levi the family of the libnites the family of the hebronites the family of the mahlites the family of the mushites the family of the korahites . and kohath be the father of amram . amram 's wife be jochebed the daughter of levi whom he have in egypt by amram she have moses and aaron and their sister miriam . aaron 's son be nadab and abihu eleazar and ithamar . death overtook nadab and abihu when they make an offering of strange fire before the lord . of these twenty three thousand male from one month old and over be number they be not number with the rest of the child of israel for they have no heritage among the child of israel . all these be number by moses and eleazar the priest when the child of israel be number in the lowland of moab by the jordan at jericho . but among all these be not one of those number by moses and aaron the priest when the child of israel be number in the waste land of sinai . for the lord have say of them death will certainly overtake them in the waste land . and of them all only caleb the son of jephunneh and joshua the son of nun be still live .then the daughter of zelophehad the son of hepher the son of gilead the son of machir the son of manasseh of the family of manasseh the son of joseph come forward their name be mahlah noah and hoglah and milcah and tirzah . they come before moses and eleazar the priest and the chief and all the people at the door of the tent of meeting and say death overtook our father in the waste land he be not among those who be band together with korah against the lord but death come to him in his sin and he have no son . why be the name of our father to be take away from among his family because he have no son ? give u a heritage among our father 's brother . so moses put their cause before the lord . and the lord say to moses what the daughter of zelophehad say be right certainly you be to give them a heritage among their father 's brother and let the property which would have be their father 's go to them . and say to the child of israel if a man have no son at the time of his death let his heritage go to his daughter . and if he have no daughter then give his heritage to his brother . and if he have no brother then give his heritage to his father 's brother . and if his father have no brother then give it to his near relation in the family a his heritage this be to be a decision make by law for the child of israel a the lord give order to moses . and the lord say to moses go up into this mountain of abarim so that you may see the land which i have give to the child of israel . and when you have see it you will be put to rest with your people a your brother aaron be because in the waste land of zin when the people be angry you and he go against my word and do not keep my name holy before their eye at the water . these be the water of meribah in kadesh in the waste land of zin . then moses say to the lord let the lord the god of the spirit of all flesh put a man at the head of this people to go out and come in before them and be their guide so that the people of the lord may not be like sheep without a keeper . and the lord say to moses take joshua the son of nun a man in whom be the spirit and put your hand on him and take him before eleazar the priest and all the meeting of the people and give him his order before their eye . and put your honour on him so that all the child of israel may be under his authority . he will take his place before eleazar the priest so that he may get direction from the lord for him with the urim at his word they will go out and at his word they will come in he and all the child of israel . so moses do a the lord say he take joshua and put him before eleazar the priest and the meeting of the people and he put his hand on him and give him his order a the lord have say by moses .and the lord say to moses give order to the child of israel and say to them let it be your care to give me my offering at their regular time the food of the offering make by fire to me for a sweet smell . say to them this be the offering make by fire which you be to give to the lord he lamb of the first year without any mark two every day a a regular burned offering . let one be offer in the morning and the other at even and the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with the fourth part of a hin of clear oil . it be a regular burned offering a it be order in mount sinai for a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . and for it drink offering take the fourth part of a hin for one lamb in the holy place let the wine be drain out for a drink offering for the lord . let the other lamb be offer at even like the meal offering of the morning and it drink offering let it be offer a an offering make by fire for a sweet smell to the lord . and on the sabbath day two he lamb of the first year without any mark and two tenth part of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil and it drink offering this be the burned offering for every sabbath day in addition to the regular burned offering and it drink offering . and on the first day of every month you be to give a burned offering to the lord two ox one male sheep and seven he lamb of the first year without any mark and three tenth part of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil for every ox and two tenth part of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil for the one sheep and a separate tenth part of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering for every lamb for a burned offering of a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . and their drink offering be to be half a hin of wine for an ox and the third part of a hin for a male sheep and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb this be the burned offering for every month through all the month of the year . and one he goat for a sin offering to the lord it be to be offer in addition to the regular burned offering and it drink offering . and in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month be the lord 's passover . on the fifteenth day of this month there be to be a feast for seven day let your food be unleavened cake . on the first day there be to be a holy meeting you may do no sort of field work and you be to give an offering make by fire a burned offering to the lord two ox one male sheep and seven he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offer the best meal mixed with oil let three tenth part of an ephah be offer for an ox and two tenth part for a male sheep and a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lamb and one he goat for a sin offering to take away your sin . these be to be offer in addition to the morning burn offering which be a regular burned offering at all time . in this way every day for seven day give the food of the offering make by fire a sweet smell to the lord it be to be offer in addition to the regular burned offering and it drink offering . then on the seventh day there will be a holy meeting you may do no field work . and at the time of the first fruit when you give an offering of new meal to the lord at your feast of week there be to be a holy meeting you may do no field work and give a burned offering for a sweet smell to the lord two ox one male sheep and seven he lamb of the first year and their meal offer the best meal mixed with oil three tenth part for an ox two tenth part for a male sheep and a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lamb and one he goat to take away your sin . these be in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering take care that they be without any mark and let them be offer with their drink offering .in the seventh month on the first day of the month let there be a holy meeting on it you may do no field work let the day be mark by the blowing of horn and give to the lord a burned offering for a sweet smell one ox one male sheep seven he lamb of the first year without any mark on them and their meal offer the best meal mixed with oil three tenth part for an ox two tenth part for a male sheep and a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lamb and one he goat for a sin offering to take away your sin in addition to the burned offering of the new moon and it meal offering and the regular burned offering and it meal offering and their drink offering a they be order for a sweet smell an offering make by fire to the lord . and on the tenth day of this seventh month there will be a holy meeting keep yourselves from pleasure and do no sort of work and give to the lord a burned offering for a sweet smell one ox one male sheep seven he lamb of the first year only those without any mark on them may be use and their meal offer the best meal mixed with oil three tenth part for an ox two tenth part for a male sheep a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lamb one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the offering for take away your sin and the regular burned offering and it meal offering and their drink offering . and on the fifteenth day of the seventh month let there be a holy meeting do no field work and keep a feast to the lord for seven day and give a burned offer an offering make by fire of a sweet smell to the lord thirteen oxen two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year all without any mark on them and their meal offer the best meal mixed with oil three tenth part for every one of the thirteen ox two tenth part for every male sheep and a separate tenth part for every one of the fourteen lamb and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and it drink offering . on the second day of the feast give an offering of twelve ox two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark on them and their meal offering and their drink offering for the ox and the sheep and the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and their drink offering . and on the third day eleven oxen two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offering and drink offering for the ox for the male sheep and for the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and it drink offering . and on the fourth day ten oxen two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offering and their drink offering for the ox for the male sheep and for the lamb in relation to their number a it be order . and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and it drink offering . and on the fifth day nine ox two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offering and their drink offering for the ox for the male sheep and for the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and it drink offering . and on the sixth day eight ox two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offering and their drink offering for the ox for the male sheep and for the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burn offer it meal offering and it drink offering . and on the seventh day seven ox two male sheep fourteen he lamb of the first year without any mark and their meal offering and their drink offering for the ox for the male sheep and for the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burn offer it meal offering and it drink offering . on the eighth day let there be a holy meeting you may do no field work and give a burned offer an offering make by fire of a sweet smell to the lord one ox one male sheep seven he lamb of the first year without any mark with the meal offering and the drink offering for the ox the male sheep and the lamb in relation to their number a it be order and one he goat for a sin offering in addition to the regular burned offering and it meal offering and it drink offering . these be the offering which you be to give to the lord at your regular feast in addition to the offering for an oath and the free offering you give for your burn offering and your drink offering and your peace offering . so moses give the child of israel all these direction a the lord have give him order .and moses say to the head of the tribe of the child of israel this be the order of the lord . when a man take an oath to the lord or give an undertaking have the force of an oath let him not go back from his word but let him do whatever he have say he will do . if a woman be young and under the authority of her father take an oath to the lord or give an undertaking if her father hearing of her oath or the undertaking she have give say nothing to her then all her oath and every undertaking she have give will have force . but if her father hearing of it make her take back her word then the oath or the undertakings she have give will have no force and she will have forgiveness from the lord because her oath be break by her father . and if she be marry to a husband at the time when she be under an oath or an undertaking give without thought if her husband hearing of it say nothing to her at the time then the oath she make and the undertakings she give will have force . but if her husband hearing of it make her take it back then the oath she make and the undertaking she give without thought will have no force or effect and she will have the lord 's forgiveness . but an oath make by a widow or one who be no longer marry to her husband and every undertaking she have give will have force . if she make an oath while she be under the authority of her husband and her husband hearing of it say nothing to her and do not put a stop to it then all her oath and every undertaking she give will have force . but if her husband on hearing of it make them without force or effect then whatever she have say about her oath or her undertaking have no force her husband have make them without effect and she will have the lord 's forgiveness . every oath and every undertaking which she give to keep herself from pleasure may be support or break by her husband . but if the day go on and her husband say nothing whatever to her then he be give the support of his authority to her oath and undertaking because at the time of hear them he say nothing to her . but if at some time after hear of them he make them without force then he be responsible for her wrongdoing . these be the law which the lord give moses in relation to a man and his wife or a father and a young daughter who be under his authority .then the lord say to moses give the midianites punishment for the wrong they do to the child of israel and after that you will go to rest with your people . so moses say to the people let men from among you be arm for war to put into effect against midian the lord 's punishment on them . from every tribe of israel send a thousand to the war . so from the thousand of israel a thousand be take from every tribe twelve thousand men arm for war . and moses send them out to war a thousand from every tribe and with them phinehas the son of eleazar the priest taking in his hand the vessel of the holy place and the horn for sound the note of war . and they make war on midian a the lord give order to moses and they put to death every male . they put the king of midian to death with the rest evi and reken and zur and hur and reba the five king of midian and balaam the son of beor they put to death with the sword . the woman of midian with their little one the child of israel take prisoner and all their cattle and flock and all their good they take for themselves and after burn all their town and all their tent circle they go away with the good they have take man and beast . and the prisoner and the good and everything they have take they take to moses and eleazar the priest and the people of israel to the tent circle in the lowland of moab by the jordan at jericho . then moses and eleazar the priest and the chief of the people go out to them before they have come into the tent circle . and moses be angry with the chief of the army the captain of thousand and the captain of hundred who have come back from the war . and moses say to them why have you keep all the woman safe ? it be these who move by balaam be the cause of israel 's sin against the lord in the question of peor because of which disease come on the people of the lord . so now put every male child to death and every woman who have have sex relation with a man . but all the female child who have have no sex relation with men you may keep for yourselves . you yourselves will have to keep outside the tent circle for seven day anyone of you who have put any person to death or come near a dead body and on the third day and on the seventh day make yourselves and your prisoner clean . and every bit of clothing and anything make of leather or goat ' hair or wood you be to make clean . then eleazar the priest say to the men of war who have be to the fight this be the rule of the law which the lord have give to moses but gold and silver and brass and iron and tin and lead and anything which may be heat be to go through the fire and be make clean but in addition it be to be put in the water of cleaning and anything which may not go through the fire be to be put in the water . and on the seventh day after wash your clothing you will be clean and then you may come into the tent circle . and the lord say to moses get an account of everything which be take in the war of man and of beast you and eleazar the priest and the head of family of the people and let division be make of it into two part one for the men of war who go out to the fight and one for all the people and from the men of war who go out let there be offer to the lord one out of every five hundred from the person and from the ox and ass and sheep take this from their part and give it to eleazar the priest a an offering to be lift up to the lord . and from the part give to the child of israel take one out of every fifty from the person and from the ox and ass and sheep and give it to the levite who have the care of the house of the lord . so eleazar and moses do a the lord have give order to moses . now the beast take in addition to what the fight men take for themselves be six hundred and seventy five thousand sheep and seventy two thousand ox and sixty one thousand ass and thirty two thousand person that be woman who have never have sex relation with a man . and the half give a their part to the men who go to the war be three hundred and thirty seven thousand five hundred sheep of which the lord 's part be six hundred and seventy five . the number of ox be thirty six thousand of which the lord 's part be seventy two the number of ass be thirty thousand five hundred of which the lord 's part be sixty one . and the number of person be sixteen thousand of which the lord 's part be thirty two person . and moses give the lord 's part lift up a an offering to eleazar the priest a the lord have give order to moses . and from the half give to the child of israel which moses have keep separate from that give to the fight men now the people 's half be three hundred and thirty seven thousand five hundred sheep and thirty six thousand ox and thirty thousand five hundred ass and sixteen thousand person even from the child of israel 's half moses take one out of every fifty men and beast and give them to the levite who have the care of the house of the lord a the lord give order to moses . then the men in authority over the thousand of the army the captain of thousand and captain of hundred come to moses and say to him your servant have take note of the number of all the fight men under our order and every one be present and we have here an offering for the lord from what every man take in the war ornament of gold leg chain and arm ring finger ring ear ring and neck ornament to make our soul free from sin before the lord . so moses and eleazar the priest take the gold from them even all the worked ornament . and the gold which the captain of thousand and captain of hundred give a an offering to be lift up before the lord come to sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekel . for every man of the army have take good for himself in the war . then moses and eleazar the priest take the gold give by the captain of thousand and captain of hundred and take it into the tent of meeting to be a sign in memory of the child of israel before the lord .now the child of reuben and the child of gad have a great number of cattle and when they saw that the land of jazer and the land of gilead be a good place for cattle the child of gad and the child of reuben come and say to moses and to eleazar the priest and to the chief of the meeting ataroth and dibon and jazer and nimrah and heshbon and elealeh and sebam and nebo and beon the land which the lord give into the hand of the child of israel be a land for cattle and your servant have cattle . and they say with your approval let this land be give to your servant a their heritage do not take u over jordan . and moses say to the child of gad and the child of reuben be your brother to go to the war while you take your rest here ? why would you take from the child of israel the desire to go over into the land which the lord have give them ? so do your father when i send them from kadesh barnea to see the land . for when they go up to the valley of eshcol and saw the land they take from the child of israel the desire to go into the land which the lord have give them . and at that time the lord be move to wrath and make an oath say truly not one of the men of twenty year old and over who come out of egypt will see the land which i give by oath to abraham isaac and jacob because they have not be true to me with all their heart but only caleb the son of jephunneh the kenizzite and joshua the son of nun because they have be true to the lord . then the lord be angry with israel and he make them wanderer in the waste land for forty year ? till all that generation who have do evil in the eye of the lord be dead . and now you have come to take the place of your father another generation of sinner increase the wrath of the lord against israel . for if you be turn away from him he will send them wander again in the waste land and you will be the cause of the destruction of all this people . then they come to him and say we will make safe place for our cattle here and town for our little one but we ourselves will be ready arm to go before the child of israel till we have take them to their place but our little one will be safe in the walled town against the people of the land . we will not come back to our house till every one of the child of israel have come into his heritage . for we will not have our heritage with them on the other side of jordan and forward because our heritage have come to u on this side of jordan to the east . then moses say to them if you will do this arm yourselves to go before the lord to the war every arm man of you go across jordan before the lord till he have overcome and send in flight all who be against him and the land be under the rule of the lord then after that you may come back have do no wrong to the lord and to israel and this land will be yours for your heritage before the lord . but if you do not do this then you be sinner against the lord and you may be certain that your sin will have it reward . so get to work build your town for your little one and safe place for your sheep and do a you have say . and the child of gad and the child of reuben say to moses your servant will do a my lord say . our little one our wife and our flock and all our cattle will be there in the town of gilead but your servant will go over every man arm for war before the lord to the fight a my lord say . so moses give order about them to eleazar the priest and to joshua the son of nun and to the head of family of the tribe of the child of israel . and moses say to them if the child of gad and the child of reuben go with you over jordan every man arm for the fight before the lord and all the land be give into your hand then let them have the land of gilead for a heritage but if they do not go over with you arm they will have to take their heritage with you in the land of canaan . then the child of gad and the child of reuben say a the lord have say to your servant so will we do . we will go over arm before the lord into the land of canaan and you will give u our heritage on this side of jordan . so moses give to them even to the child of gad and the child of reuben and to the half tribe of manasseh the son of joseph the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites and og king of bashan all the land with it town and the country round them . and the child of gad be the builder of dibon and ataroth and aroer and atroth shophan and jazer and jogbehah and beth nimrah and beth haran wall town and shut in place for sheep . and the child of reuben be the builder of heshbon and elealeh and kiriathaim and nebo and baal meon their name be change and sibmah and they give other name to the town they make . and the child of machir the son of manasseh go to gilead and take it drive out the amorites who be live there . and moses give gilead to machir the son of manasseh and he make it his live place . and jair the son of manasseh go and take the town of gilead name them havvoth jair . and nobah go and take kenath and it small town name it nobah after himself .these be the journey of the child of israel when they go out of the land of egypt in their army under the direction of moses and aaron . and the stage of their journey on their way out be put down in writing by moses at the order of the lord these be the stage of their journey and the way they go . on the fifteenth day of the first month they go out from rameses on the day after the passover the child of israel go out by the power of the lord before the eye of all the egyptian while the egyptian be place in the earth the body of their son on whom the lord have send destruction and their god have be judge by him . so the child of israel go from rameses and put up their tent in succoth . and they go on from succoth and put up their tent in etham on the edge of the waste land . and from etham turn back to pi hahiroth which be before baal zephon they put up their tent before migdol . and journey on from before hahiroth they go through the sea into the waste land they go three day ' journey through the waste land of etham and put up their tent in marah . and from marah they go on to elim and in elim there be twelve water spring and seventy palm tree and they put up their tent there . and they go on from elim and put up their tent by the red sea . then from the red sea they go on and put up their tent in the waste land of sin . and they go on from the waste land of sin and put up their tent in dophkah . and they go on from dophkah and put up their tent in alush . and they go on from alush and put up their tent in rephidim where there be no drinking water for the people . and they go on from rephidim and put up their tent in the waste land of sinai . and they go on from the waste land of sinai and put up their tent in kibroth hattaavah . and they go on from kibroth hattaavah and put up their tent in hazeroth . and they go on from hazeroth and put up their tent in rithmah . and they go on from rithmah and put up their tent in rimmon perez . and they go on from rimmon perez and put up their tent in libnah . and they go on from libnah and put up their tent in rissah . and they go on from rissah and put up their tent in kehelathah . and they go on from kehelathah and put up their tent in mount shepher . and they go on from mount shepher and put up their tent in haradah . and they go on from haradah and put up their tent in makheloth . and they go on from makheloth and put up their tent in tahath . and they go on from tahath and put up their tent in terah . and they go on from terah and put up their tent in mithkah . and they go on from mithkah and put up their tent in hashmonah . and they go on from hashmonah and put up their tent in moseroth . and they go on from moseroth and put up their tent in bene jaakan . and they go on from bene jaakan and put up their tent in hor haggidgad . and they go on from hor haggidgad and put up their tent in jotbathah . and they go on from jotbathah and put up their tent in abronah . and they go on from abronah and put up their tent in ezion geber . and they go on from ezion geber and put up their tent in the waste land of zin which be kadesh . and they go on from kadesh and put up their tent in mount hor on the edge of the land of edom . and aaron the priest go up into the mountain at the order of the lord and come to his death there in the fortieth year after the child of israel have come out of the land of egypt in the fifth month on the first day of the month . aaron be a hundred and twenty three year old at the time of his death in mount hor . and news of the come of the child of israel come to the king of arad the canaanite who be live in the south in the land of canaan . and from mount hor they go on and put up their tent in zalmonah . and they go on from zalmonah and put up their tent in punon . and they go on from punon and put up their tent in oboth . and they go on from oboth and put up their tent in iye abarim at the edge of moab . and they go on from iyim and put up their tent in dibon gad . and from dibon gad they go on and put up their tent in almon diblathaim . and from almon diblathaim they go on and put up their tent in the mountain of abarim before nebo . and they go on from the mountain of abarim and put up their tent in the lowland of moab by jordan at jericho plant their tent by the side of jordan from beth jeshimoth as far a abel shittim in the lowland of moab . and in the lowland of moab by jordan at jericho the lord say to moses say to the child of israel when you go over jordan into the land of canaan see that all the people of the land be force out from before you and put to destruction all their picture stone and all their metal image and all their high place and take the land for yourselves for your rest place for to you i have give the land a your heritage . and you will take up your heritage in the land by the decision of the lord to every family it part the great the family the great it heritage and the small the family the small will be it heritage wherever the decision of the lord give to any man his part that will be his distribution will be make to you by your father ' tribe . but if you be slow in drive out the people of the land then those of them who be still there will be like pin point in your eye and like thorn in your side trouble you in the land where you be live . and it will come about that a it be my purpose to do to them so i will do to you .and the lord say to moses give order to the child of israel and say to them when you come into the land of canaan this be the land which be to be your heritage the land of canaan inside these limit then your south quarter will be from the waste land of zin by the side of edom and your limit on the south will be from the east end of the salt sea and round to the south of the slope of akrabbim and on to zin and it direction will be south of kadesh barnea and it will go as far a hazar addar and on to azmon and from azmon it will go round to the stream of egypt as far a the sea . and for your limit on the west you will have the great sea and it edge this will be your limit on the west . and your limit on the north will be the line from the great sea to mount hor and from mount hor the line will go in the direction of hamath the farthest point of it will be at zedad and the limit will go on to ziphron with it farthest point at hazar enan this will be your limit on the north . and on the east your limit will be mark out from hazar enan to shepham go down from shepham to riblah on the east side of ain and on as far a the east side of the sea of chinnereth and so down to jordan stretch to the salt sea all the land inside these limit will be yours . and moses give order to the child of israel say this be the land which be to be your heritage by the decision of the lord which by the lord 's order be to be give to the nine tribe and the half tribe for the tribe of the child of reuben by their father ' family and the tribe of the child of gad by their father ' family and the half tribe of manasseh have be give their heritage the two tribe and the half tribe have be give their heritage on the other side of jordan at jericho on the east look to the dawn . and the lord say to moses these be the name of the men who be to make the distribution of the land among you eleazar the priest and joshua the son of nun . and you be to take one chief from every tribe to make the distribution of the land . and these be the name of the men of the tribe of judah caleb the son of jephunneh . and of the tribe of the child of simeon shemuel the son of ammihud . of the tribe of benjamin elidad the son of chislon . and of the tribe of the child of dan a chief bukki the son of jogli . of the child of joseph of the tribe of the child of manasseh a chief hanniel the son of ephod and of the tribe of the child of ephraim a chief kemuel the son of shiphtan . and of the tribe of the child of zebulun a chief elizaphan the son of parnach . and of the tribe of the child of issachar a chief paltiel the son of azzan . and of the tribe of the child of asher a chief ahihud the son of shelomi . and of the tribe of the child of naphtali a chief pedahel the son of ammihud . these be they to whom the lord give order to make the distribution of the heritage among the child of israel in the land of canaan .and the lord say to moses in the lowland of moab by jordan at jericho give order to the child of israel to give to the levite from the heritage which be theirs town for themselves with land on the outskirt of the town . these town be to be their living place with land round them for their cattle and their food and all their beast stretch from the wall of the town a distance of a thousand cubit all round . the measure of this space of land be to be two thousand cubit outside the town on the east and two thousand cubit on the south and on the west and on the north the town be in the middle . this space will be the outskirt of their town . and the town which you give the levite be to be the six safe place to which the taker of life may go in flight and in addition you be to give them forty two town . forty eight town be to be give to the levite all with land round them . and these town be to be give out of the heritage of the child of israel take the great number from those who have much and a small number from those who have little everyone in the measure of his heritage be to give of his property to the levite . and the lord say to moses say to the child of israel when you have go over jordan into the land of canaan then let certain town be mark out a safe place to which anyone who take the life of another in error may go in flight . in these town you may be safe from him who have the right of punishment so that death may not overtake the taker of life till he have be judge by the meeting of the people . six of the town which you give will be such safe place three on the other side of jordan and three in the land of canaan to be safe place for flight . for the child of israel and for the man from another country who be live among them these six town be to be safe place where anyone cause the death of another through error may go in flight . but if a man give another man a blow with an iron instrument cause his death he be a taker of life and be certainly to be put to death . or if he give him a blow with a stone in his hand cause his death he be a taker of life and be certainly to be put to death . or if he give him blow with a wood instrument in his hand cause his death he be a taker of life and be certainly to be put to death . he whose right it be to give punishment for blood may himself put to death the taker of life when he come face to face with him . if in his hate he put a sword through him or wait secretly for him send a spear or stone at him cause his death or in hate give him blow with his hand cause death he who give the death blow be to be put to death he be a taker of life he whose right it be to give punishment for blood may put to death the taker of life when he come face to face with him . but if a man have give a wound to another suddenly and not in hate or without design have send something against him or have give him a blow with a stone without see him so cause his death though he have nothing against him and no desire to do him evil then let the meeting of the people be judge between the man responsible for the death and him who have the right of punishment for blood acting by these rule and let the people keep the man responsible for the death safe from the hand of him who have the right of punishment for blood and send him back to his safe town where he have go in flight there let him be till the death of the high priest who be mark with the holy oil . but if ever he go outside the wall of the safe town where he have go in flight and the giver of punishment meeting him outside the wall of the town put him to death he will not be responsible for his blood because he have be order to keep inside the safe town till the death of the high priest but after the death of the high priest the taker of life may come back to the place of his heritage . these rule be to be your guide in judge through all your generation wherever you may be live . anyone cause the death of another be himself to be put to death on the word of witness but the word of one witness be not enough . further no price may be give for the life of one who have take life and whose right reward be death he be certainly to be put to death . and no price may be offer for one who have go in flight to a safe town for the purpose of let him come back to his place before the death of the high priest . so do not make the land where you be live unholy for blood make the land unholy and there be no way of make the land free from the blood which have come on it but only by the death of him who be the cause of it . do not make unclean the land where you be live and in which be my house for i the lord be present among the child of israel .now the head of the family of the child of gilead the son of machir the son of manasseh of the family of the son of joseph come to moses the chief and the head of family of the child of israel be present and say the lord give order to my lord to make distribution of the land a their heritage to the child of israel and my lord be order by the lord to give the heritage of zelophehad our brother to his daughter . now if they get marry to any of the son of other tribe of the child of israel then their property will be take away from the heritage of our father and become part of the heritage of the tribe into which they get marry and their heritage will be take away from the heritage of our tribe . and at the time of the jubilee of the child of israel their property will be join to the heritage of the tribe of which they be part and will be take away from the heritage of the tribe of our father . so by the direction of the lord moses give order to the child of israel say what the tribe of the son of joseph have say be right . this be the order of the lord about the daughter of zelophehad the lord say let them take a their husband whoever be most please to them but only among the family of their father 's tribe . and so no property will be hand from tribe to tribe among the child of israel but every one of the child of israel will keep the heritage of his father 's tribe . and every daughter own property in any tribe of the child of israel be to be marry to one of the family of her father 's tribe so that every man of the child of israel may keep the heritage of his father . and no property will be hand from one tribe to another but every tribe of the child of israel will keep it heritage . so the daughter of zelophehad do a the lord give order to moses for mahlah tirzah and hoglah and milcah and noah the daughter of zelophehad take a their husband the son of their father 's brother and be marry into the family of the son of manasseh the son of joseph and their property be keep in the tribe of their father 's family these be the law and the order which the lord give to the child of israel by moses in the lowland of moab by jordan at jericho .these be the word which moses say to all israel on the far side of jordan in the waste land in the arabah opposite suph between paran on the one side and tophel laban hazeroth and dizahab on the other . it be eleven day ' journey from horeb by the way of mount seir to kadesh barnea . now in the fortieth year on the first day of the eleventh month moses give to the child of israel all the order which the lord have give him for them after he have overcome sihon king of the amorites rule in heshbon and og king of bashan ruling in ashtaroth at edrei on the far side of jordan in the land of moab moses give the people this law say the lord our god say to u in horeb you have be long enough in this mountain make a move now and go on your way into the hill country of the amorites and the place near it in the arabah and the hill country and in the lowland and in the south and by the seaside all the land of the canaanite and lebanon as far a the great river the river euphrates . see all the land be before you go in and take for yourselves the land which the lord give by an oath to your father abraham isaac and jacob and to their seed after them . at that time i say to you i be not able to undertake the care of you by myself the lord your god have give you increase and now you be like the star of heaven in number . may the lord the god of your father make you a thousand time great in number than you be and give you his bless a he have say ! how be it possible for me by myself to be responsible for you and undertake the weight of all your trouble and your argument ? take for yourselves men who be wise far see and respect among you from your tribe and i will make them ruler over you . and you make answer and say to me it be good for u to do a you say . so i take the head of your tribe wise men and respect and make them ruler over you captain of thousand and captain of hundred and captain of fifty and captain of ten and overseer of your tribe . and at that time i give order to your judge say let all question between your brother come before you for hear and give decision uprightly between a man and his brother or one from another nation who be with him . in judge do not let a man 's position have any weight with you give hear equally to small and great have no fear of any man for it be god who be judge and any cause in which you be not able to give a decision you be to put before me and i will give it a hearing . and at that time i give you all the order which you be to do . then we go on from horeb through all that great and cruel waste which you saw on our way to the hill country of the amorites a the lord give u order and we come to kadesh barnea . and i say to you you have come to the hill country of the amorites which the lord our god be give u . see now the lord your god have put the land into your hand go up and take it a the lord the god of your father have say to you have no fear and do not be trouble . and you come near to me every one of you and say let u send men before u to go through the land with care and give u an account of the way we be to go and the town to which we will come . and what you say seem good to me and i take twelve men from among you one from every tribe and they go up into the hill country and come to the valley of eshcol and saw what be there . and take in their hand some of the fruit of the land they come down again to u and give u their account say it be a good land which the lord our god be give u . but go against the order of the lord your god you would not go up and you make an angry outcry in your tent and say in his hate for u the lord have take u out of the land of egypt to give u up into the hand of the amorites for our destruction . where be we go up ? our brother have make our heart feeble with fear by say the people be great and tall than we be and the town be great and wall up to heaven and more than this we have see the son of the anakim there . then i say to you have no fear of them . the lord your god who go before you will be fight for you and will do such wonder a he do for you in egypt before your eye and in the waste land where you have see how the lord be support you a a man do his son in all your journeying till you come to this place . but for all this you have no faith in the lord your god who go before you on your way look for a place where you may put up your tent in fire by night light up the way you be to go and in a cloud by day . and the lord hear your word be angry and say with an oath truly not one of this evil generation will see that good land which i say i would give to your father but only caleb the son of jephunneh he will see it and to him and to his child i will give the land over which his foot have go because he have be true to the lord with all his heart . and in addition the lord be angry with me because of you say you yourself will not go into it joshua the son of nun your servant he will go into the land say to him that he be to be strong for he will be israel 's guide into their heritage . and your little one who you say would come into strange hand your child who now have no knowledge of good or evil they will go into that land and to them i will give it and it will be theirs . but a for you go back journey into the waste land by the way of the red sea . then you say to me we have do evil against the lord we will go up to the attack a the lord our god have give u order . and arm yourselves every one you make ready to go up without care into the hill country . and the lord say to me say to them do not go up to the attack for i be not among you and you will be overcome by those who be against you . this i say to you but you give no attention and go against the order of the lord and in your pride go up into the hill country . and the amorites who be in the hill country come out against you and put you to flight rushing after you like bee and overcame you in seir driving you even as far a hormah . and you come back weep before the lord but the lord give no attention to your cry and do not give ear to you . so you be keep wait in kadesh for a long time .then we go back journey into the waste land by the way to the red sea a the lord have say to me and we be a long time go round mount seir . and the lord say to me you have be journey round this mountain long enough now go to the north and give the people order say you be about to go through the land of your brother the child of esau who be live in seir and they will have fear of you so take care what you do make no attack on them for i will not give you any of their land not even space enough for a man 's foot because i have give mount seir to esau for his heritage . you may get food for your need from them for a price and water for drinking . for the blessing of the lord your god have be on you in all the work of your hand he have knowledge of your wandering through this great waste these forty year the lord your god have be with you and you have be short of nothing . so we go on past our brother the child of esau living in seir by the road through the arabah from elath and ezion geber . and turn we go by the road through the waste land of moab . and the lord say to me make no attack on moab and do not go to war with them for i will not give you any of his land because i have give ar to the child of lot for their heritage . in the past the emim be live there a great people equal in number to the anakim and a tall they be number among the rephaim like the anakim but be name emim by the moabites . and the horites in early time be live in seir but the child of esau take their place they send destruction on them and take their land for themselves a israel do to the land of his heritage which the lord give them . get up now and go over the stream zered . so we go over the stream zered . thirty eight year have go by from the time when we come away from kadesh barnea till we go over the stream zered by that time all the generation of the men of war among u be dead a the lord have say . for the hand of the lord be against them work their destruction till all be dead . so when death have overtake all the men of war among the people the word of the lord come to me say you be about to go by ar the limit of the country of moab and when you come near the land of the child of ammon give them no cause of trouble and do not make war on them for i will not give you any of the land of the child of ammon for your heritage because i have give it to the child of lot . that land be say to have be a land of the rephaim for rephaim have be live there in early time but they be name zamzummim by the ammonite they be a great people tall a the anakim and equal to them in number but the lord send destruction on them and the child of ammon take their place living in their land a he do for the child of esau living in seir when he send destruction on the horites before them and they take their land where they be live to this day and the avvim living in the small town as far a gaza come to destruction by the hand of the caphtorim who come out from caphtor and take their land . get up now and go on your journey crossing over the valley of the arnon see i have give into your hand sihon the amorite king of heshbon and all his land go forward to make it yours and make war on him from now on i will put the fear of you in all people under heaven who hearing of you will be shake with fear and grief of heart because of you . then from the waste land of kedemoth i send representative to sihon king of heshbon with word of peace say let me go through your land i will keep to the highway not turn to the right or to the left let me have food at a price for my need and water for drink only let me go through on foot a the child of esau do for me in seir and the moabites in ar till i have go over jordan into the land which the lord our god be give u . but sihon king of heshbon would not let u go through for the lord your god make his spirit hard and his heart strong so that he might give him up into your hand a at this day . and the lord say to me see from now on i have give sihon and his land into your hand go forward now to take his land and make it yours . then sihon come out against u with all his people to make an attack on u at jahaz . and the lord our god give him into our hand and we overcome him and his son and all his people . at that time we take all his town and give them over to complete destruction together with men woman and child we have no mercy on any only the cattle we take for ourselves with the good from the town we have take . from aroer on the edge of the valley of the arnon and from the town in the valley as far a gilead no town be strong enough to keep u out the lord our god give them all into our hand but you do not go near the land of the child of ammon that be all the side of the river jabbok or the town of the hill country wherever the lord our god have say we be not to go .then turn we take the road to bashan and og king of bashan come out against u with all his people and make an attack on u at edrei . and the lord say to me have no fear of him for i have give him and all his people and his land into your hand do to him a you do to sihon king of the amorites who be rule in heshbon . so the lord our god give up og king of bashan and all his people into our hand and we overcome him so completely that all his people come to their end in the fight . at that time we take all his town there be not one town of the sixty town all the country of argob the kingdom of og in bashan which we do not take . all these town have high wall round them with door and lock and in addition we take a great number of unwalled town . and we put them to the curse every town together with men woman and child . but we take for ourselves all the cattle and the stored wealth of the town . at that time we take their land from the two king of the amorites on the far side of jordan from the valley of the arnon to mount hermon by the sidonians hermon be name sirion and by the amorites shenir all the town of the table land and all gilead and bashan as far a salecah and edrei town of the kingdom of og in bashan . for og king of bashan be the last of all the rephaim his bed be make of iron be it not in rabbah in the land of the child of ammon ? it be nine cubit long and four cubit wide measure by the common cubit . and this land which we take at that time from aroer by the valley of the arnon and half the hill country of gilead with it town i give to the reubenites and the gadites . the rest of gilead and all bashan the kingdom of og all the land of argob together with bashan i give to the half tribe of manasseh . this land be name the land of the rephaim . jair the son of manasseh take all the land of argob as far a the country of the geshurites and the maacathites name it bashan havvoth jair after himself a it be to this day . and gilead i give to machir . and the land from gilead to the valley of the arnon with the middle of the valley a a limit as far a the river jabbok which be the limit of the country of the child of ammon i give to the reubenites and the gadites as well a the arabah with the river jordan a their limit from chinnereth to the salt sea under the slope of pisgah to the east . at that time i give you order say the lord have give you this land for your heritage all the men of war be to go over arm before your brother the child of israel . but your wife and your little one and your cattle for it be clear that you have much cattle may go on living in the town i have give you till the lord have give rest to your brother a to you and till they have take for themselves the land which the lord your god be give them on the other side of jordan then you may go back every man of you to the heritage which i have give you . and i give order to joshua at that time say your eye have see what the lord your god have do to these two king so will the lord do to all the kingdom into which you come . have no fear of them for the lord your god will be fight for you . and at that time i make request to the lord say o lord god you have now for the first time let your servant see your great power and the strength of your hand for what god be there in heaven or on earth able to do such great work and such act of power ? let me go over o lord and see the good land on the other side of jordan and that fair mountain country even lebanon . but the lord be angry with me because of you and would not give ear to my prayer and the lord say to me let it be enough say no more about this thing . go up to the top of pisgah and turn your eye to the west and the north to the south and the east see the land with your eye for you be not to go over jordan . but give my order to joshua comfort him and make him strong for he be to go over jordan at the head of this people and he will give them this land which you will see for their heritage . so we be wait in the valley face beth peor .and now give ear o israel to the law and the decision which i be teach you and do them so that life may be yours and you may go in and take for yourselves the land which the lord the god of your father be give you . make no addition to the order which i give you and take nothing from them but keep the order of the lord your god which i give you . your eye have see what the lord do because of baal peor for destruction come from the lord on all those among you who go after baal peor . but you who keep faith with the lord be live every one of you today . i have be teach you law and decision a i be order to do by the lord my god so that you might keep them in the land to which you be go to take it for your heritage . so keep these law and do them for so will your wisdom and good sense be clear in the eye of the people who hear all these law will say truly this great nation be a wise and far see people . for what great nation have a god so near to them a the lord our god be whenever we be turn to him in prayer ? and what great nation have law and decision so right a all this law which i put before you today ? only take care and keep watch on your soul for fear that the thing which your eye have see go from your memory and from your heart all the day of your life but let the knowledge of them be give to your child and to your child 's child that day when you be wait before the lord your god in horeb and the lord say to me make all the people come together so that hear my word they may go in fear of me all the day of their life on earth and give this teaching to their child . and you come near wait at the foot of the mountain and flame of fire go up from the mountain to the heart of heaven with dark cloud and all be black a night . and the voice of the lord come to you out of the fire the sound of his word come to your ear but you saw no form there be nothing but a voice . and he give you his agreement with you the ten rule which you be to keep which he put in write on the two stone of the law . and the lord give me order at that time to make clear to you these law and decision so that you might do them in the land to which you be go and which be to be your heritage . so keep watch on yourselves with care for you saw no form of any sort on the day when the voice of the lord come to you in horeb out of the heart of the fire so that you may not be turn to evil way and make for yourselves an image in the form of any living thing male or female or any beast of the earth or wing bird of the air or of anything which go flat on the earth or any fish in the water under the earth . and when your eye be lift up to heaven and you see the sun and the moon and the star all the army of heaven do not let yourselves be move to give them worship or become the servant of what the lord have give equally to all people under heaven . but the lord have take you out of the flaming fire out of egypt to be to him the people of his heritage a you be today . and the lord be angry with me because of you and make an oath that i be not to go over jordan into the good land which the lord be give you for your heritage but death be to come to me in this land i may not go over jordan but you will go over and take that good land for your heritage . take care that you do not let the agreement of the lord your god which he have make with you go out of your mind or make for yourselves image of any sort against the order which the lord your god have give you . for the lord your god be an all burning fire and he will not let the honour which be his be give to any other . if when you have have child and child 's child and have be live a long time in the land you be turn to evil way and make an image of any sort and do evil in the eye of the lord your god move him to wrath may heaven and earth be my witness against you today that destruction will quickly overtake you cut you off from that land which you be go over jordan to take your day will not be long in that land but you will come to a complete end . and the lord will send you wander among the people only a small band of you will be keep from death among the nation where the lord will send you . there you will be the servant of god make by men 's hand of wood and stone have no power of see or hearing or take food or smelling . but if in those land you be turn again to the lord your god search for him with all your heart and soul he will not keep himself from you . when you be in trouble and all these thing have come on you if in the future you be turn again to the lord your god and give ear to his voice because the lord your god be a god of mercy he will not take away his help from you or let destruction overtake you or be false to the agreement which he make by an oath with your father . give thought now to the day which be past before your time from the day when god first give life to man on the earth and search from one end of heaven to the other see if such a great thing a this have ever be or if anything like it have be talk of in story . have any people ever go on living after hear the voice of god out of the heart of the fire a you do ? have god ever before take a nation for himself from out of another nation by punishment and sign and wonder by war and by a strong hand and a stretch out arm and great act of wonder and fear a the lord your god do for you in egypt before your very eyes ? all this he let you see so that you might be certain that the lord be god and there be no other . out of heaven itself his voice come to you teach you and on earth he let you see his great fire and his word come to your ear out of the heart of the fire . and because of his love for your father he take their seed and make it his and he himself present among you take you out of egypt by his great power drive out before you nations great and strong than you to take you into their land and give it to you for your heritage as at this day . so today be certain and keep the knowledge deep in your heart that the lord be god in heaven on high and here on earth there be no other god . then keep his law and his order which i give you today so that it may be well for you and for your child after you and that your life may be long in the land which the lord your god be give you for ever . then moses have three town mark out on the far side of jordan look to the east to which anyone cause the death of his neighbour in error and not through hate might go in flight so that in one of these town he might be keep from death the name of the town be bezer in the waste land in the table land for the reubenites and ramoth in gilead for the gadites and golan in bashan for manasseh . this be the law which moses put before the child of israel these be the rule and the law and the decision which moses give to the child of israel after they come out of egypt on the far side of jordan in the valley face beth peor in the land of sihon king of the amorites who be rule in heshbon whom moses and the child of israel overcame after they have come out of egypt and they take his land for a heritage and the land of og king of bashan the two king of the amorites whose land be on the other side of jordan to the east from aroer on the edge of the valley of the arnon as far a mount sion which be hermon and all the arabah on the far side of jordan to the east as far a the sea of the arabah under the slope of pisgah .and moses send for all israel and say to them give ear o israel to the law and the decision which i give you today and give attention to them so that you may keep and do them . the lord our god make an agreement with u in horeb . the lord do not make this agreement with our father but with u who be all living and present here today . the word of the lord come to you face to face on the mountain out of the heart of the fire i be between the lord and you at that time to make clear to you the word of the lord because through fear of the fire you do not go up the mountain say i be the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt out of the prison house . you be to have no other god but me . you may not make for yourselves an image in the form of anything in heaven or on earth or in the water under the earth you may not go down on your face before them or give them worship for i the lord your god be a god who will not give his honour to another and i will send punishment on the child for the wrongdoing of their father to the third and fourth generation of my hater and i will have mercy through a thousand generation on those who have love for me and keep my law . you be not to make use of the name of the lord your god for an evil purpose whoever take the lord 's name on his lip for an evil purpose will be judge a a sinner by the lord . keep the sabbath day a a holy day a you have be order by the lord your god . on six day do all your work but the seventh day be a sabbath to the lord your god on that day do no work you or your son or your daughter or your man servant or your woman servant or your ox or your as or any of your cattle or the man from a strange country who be live among you so that your man servant and your woman servant may have rest as well a you . and keep in mind that you be a servant in the land of egypt and that the lord your god take you out of that land by his strong hand and his stretch out arm for this reason the lord have give you order to keep the sabbath day . give honour to your father and your mother a you have be order by the lord your god so that your life may be long and all may be well for you in the land which the lord your god be give you . do not put anyone to death without cause . do not be false to the married relation . do not take the property of another . do not give false witness against your neighbour or let your desire be turn to your neighbour 's wife or his house or his field or his man servant or his woman servant or his ox or his as or anything which be your neighbour 's . these word the lord say to all of you together on the mountain out of the heart of the fire out of the cloud and the dark with a great voice and he say no more he put them in write on the two stone of the law and give them to me . and after hear the voice which come out of the dark while the mountain be burn with fire all the head of your tribe and your chief come to me and say the lord have let u see his glory and his power and his voice have come to u out of the fire today we have see that a man may go on living even after hear the voice of god . why then be death to be our fate ? for if the voice of the lord our god come to u any more death will overtake u and we will be burn up in this great fire . for what man be there in all the earth who hear the voice of the living god a we have out of the heart of the fire have be keep from death ? do you go near and after hear everything which the lord our god have to say give u an account of all he have say to you and we will give ear and do it . then the lord hear your word to me say to me the word which this people have say to you have come to my ear what they have say be well say . if only they have such a heart in them at all time so that they might go in fear of me and keep my order and that it might be well for them and for their child for ever ! now say to them go back to your tent . but a for you keep your place here by me and i will give you all the order and the law and the decision which you be to make clear to them so that they may do them in the land which i be give them for their heritage . take care then to do whatever the lord your god have give you order to do let there be no turn away to the right hand or to the left . go on walking in the way order for you by the lord your god so that life may be yours and it may be well for you and your day may be long in the land of your heritage .now these be the order and the law and the decision which the lord your god give me for your teaching so that you might do them in the land of your heritage to which you be go so that living in the fear of the lord your god you may keep all his law and his order which i give you you and your son and your son 's son all the day of your life and so that your life may be long . so give ear o israel and take care to do this so that it may be well for you and you may be greatly increase a the lord the god of your father have give you his word in a land flow with milk and honey . give ear o israel the lord our god be one lord and the lord your god be to be love with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength . keep these word which i say to you this day deep in your heart teach them to your child with all care talk of them when you be at rest in your house or walking by the way when you go to sleep and when you get up . let them be fix a a sign on your hand and mark on your brow have them letter on the pillar of your house and over the door of your town . and when the lord your god have take you into the land which he give his oath to your father to abraham to isaac and to jacob that he would give you with great and fair town which be not of your building and house full of good thing not store up by you and place for store water which you do not make and vine garden and olive tree not of your planting and you have take food and be full then take care that you keep your heart true to the lord who take you out of the land of egypt out of the prison house . let the fear of the lord your god be in your heart and be his servant take your oath by his name . do not go after other god the god of the people round about you for the lord your god who be with you be a god who will not let his honour be give to another or the wrath of the lord will be burn against you cause your destruction from the face of the earth . do not put the lord your god to the test a you do in massah . keep with care the order of the lord your god and his rule and his law which he have give you and do what be upright and good in the eye of the lord your god so that it may be well for you and you may go in and take for your heritage that good land from which the lord undertook by an oath to your father to send out from before you all those who be against you . and when your son say to you in time to come what be the reason for these rule and law and decision which the lord our god have give you ? then you will say to your son we be servant under pharaoh 's yoke in egypt and the lord take u out of egypt with a strong hand and the lord do great sign and wonder against egypt and against pharaoh and all his house before our eye and he take u out from that place guide u here to give u this land a he say in his oath to our father . and the lord give u order to keep all these law in the fear of the lord our god so that it might be well for u for ever and that he might keep u from death a he have do to this day . and it will be our righteousness if we take care to keep all this order before the lord our god a he have give it to u .when the lord your god take you into the land where you be go which be to be your heritage and have send out the nation before you the hittite and the girgashites and the amorites and the canaanite and the perizzites and the hivites and the jebusites seven nation great and strong than you and when the lord have give them up into your hand and you have overcome them give them up to complete destruction make no agreement with them and have no mercy on them do not take wife or husband from among them do not give your daughter to their son or take their daughter for your son . for through them your son will be turn from me to the worship of other god and the lord will be move to wrath against you and send destruction on you quickly . but this be what you be to do to them their altar be to be pull down and their pillar break and their holy tree cut down and their image burn with fire . for you be a holy people to the lord your god mark out by the lord your god to be his special people out of all the nation on the face of the earth . the lord do not give you his love or take you for himself because you be more in number than any other people for you be the small of the nation but because of his love for you and in order to keep his oath to your father the lord take you out with the strength of his hand make you free from the prison house and from the hand of pharaoh king of egypt . be certain then that the lord your god be god whose faith and mercy be unchanging who keep his word through a thousand generation to those who have love for him and keep his law reward his hater to their face with destruction he will have no mercy on his hater but will give him open punishment . so keep the order and the law and the decision which i give you today and do them . and it will be that if you give attention to these decision and keep and do them then the lord will keep his agreement with you and his mercy a he say in his oath to your father . and he will give you his love blessing you and increase you he will send his blessing on the offspring of your body and the fruit of your land your grain and your wine and your oil the increase of your cattle and the young of your flock in the land which by his oath to your father he undertake to give you . you will have great blessing than any other people no male or female among you or among your cattle will be without offspring . and the lord will take away from you all disease and will not put on you any of the evil disease of egypt which you have see but will put them on your hater . and you be to send destruction on all the people which the lord your god give into your hand have no pity on them and do not give worship to their god for that will be a cause of sin to you . if you say in your heart these nation be great in number than we be how be we to take their land from them ? have no fear of them but keep well in mind what the lord your god do to pharaoh and to all egypt the great punishment which your eye saw and the sign and the wonder and the strong hand and the stretch out arm by which the lord your god take you out so will the lord your god do to all the people who be the cause of your fear . and the lord will send a hornet among them till all the rest who have keep themselves safe from you in secret place have be cut off . have no fear of them for the lord your god be with you a great god greatly to be fear . the lord your god will send out the nation before you little by little they be not to be root out quickly for fear that the beast of the field may be increase overmuch against you . but the lord your god will give them up into your hand overpower them till their destruction be complete . he will give their king into your hand and you will put their name out of existence under heaven there be not one of them who will not give way before you till their destruction be complete . the image of their god be to be burn with fire have no desire for the gold and silver on them and do not take it for yourselves for it will be a danger to you it be a thing disgusting to the lord your god and you may not take a disgusting thing into your house and so become cursed with it curse but keep yourselves from it turn from it with fear and hate for it be a cursed thing .take care to keep all the order which i give you today so that you may have life and be increase and go in and take a a heritage the land which the lord by his oath to your father undertake to give you . and keep in mind the way by which the lord your god have take you through the waste land these forty year so that he might make low your pride and put you to the test to see what be in your heart and if you would keep his order or not . and he make low your pride and let you be without food and give you manna for your food a thing new to you which your father never saw so that he might make it clear to you that bread be not man 's only need but his life be in every word which come out of the mouth of the lord . through all these forty year your clothing do not get old or your foot become tired . keep in mind this think that a a son be train by his father so you have be train by the lord your god . then keep the order of the lord your god fear him and walk in his way . for the lord your god be guide you into a good land a land of water spring of fountain and deep stream flow out from the valley and the hill a land of grain and vine and fig tree and fair fruit a land of oil give olive tree and honey where there will be bread for you in full measure and you will be in need of nothing a land where the very stone be iron and from whose hill you may get copper . and you will have food enough and be full praise the lord your god for the good land he have give you . then take care that you be not turn away from the lord your god and from keep his order and decision and law which i give you this day and when you have take food and be full and have make fair house for yourselves and be live in them and when your herd and your flock be increase and your store of silver and gold and you have wealth of every sort take care that your heart be not lift up in pride give no thought to the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt out of the prison house who be your guide through that great and cruel waste where there be poison snake and scorpion and a dry land without water who make water come out of the hard rock for you who give you manna for your food in the waste land a food which your father have never see so that your pride might be break and your heart test for your good in the end say not then in your heart my power and the strength of my hand have get me this wealth . but keep in mind the lord your god for it be he who give you the power to get wealth so that he may give effect to the agreement which he make by his oath with your father a at this day . and it be certain that if at any time you be turn away from the lord your god and go after other god to be their servant and to give them worship destruction will overtake you . like the nation which the lord be cut off before you so you will be cut off because you would not give ear to the voice of the lord your god .give ear o israel today you be to go over jordan to take the heritage of nation great and strong than yourselves and town of great size with wall as high a heaven a people great and tall the son of the anakim of whom you have knowledge and of whom it have be say all be force to give way before the son of anak . be certain then today that it be the lord your god who go over before you like an all burning fire he will send destruction on them crush them before you and you will send them in flight put an end to them quickly a the lord have say . and after the lord have send them in flight from before you say not in your heart because of my righteousness the lord have give me this land when it be because of their evil do that the lord be drive these nation out before you . not for your righteousness or because your heart be upright be you go in to take their land but because of the evil do of these nation the lord your god be drive them out from before you and to give effect to his oath to your father abraham isaac and jacob . be certain then that the lord your god be not give you this good land a a reward for your righteousness for you be a stiff necked people . keep well in mind how you make the lord your god angry in the waste land from the day when you go out of egypt till you come to this place you have go against the order of the lord . again in horeb you make the lord angry and in his wrath he would have put an end to you . when i have go up into the mountain to be give the stone on which be record the agreement which the lord make with you i be on the mountain for forty day and forty night without take food or drinking water . and the lord give me the two stone with write on them do by the finger of god on them be record all the word which the lord say to you on the mountain out of the heart of the fire on the day of the great meeting . then at the end of forty day and forty night the lord give me those stone the stone of the agreement . and the lord say to me get up now and go down quickly from this place for the people you have take out of egypt have give themselves over to evil they have quickly be turn from the way in which i give them order to go they have make themselves a metal image . and then the lord say to me i have see that this people be stiff necked let me send destruction on them till their very name be cut off and i will make of you a nation great and strong than they . so turning round i come down from the mountain and the mountain be burn with fire and the two stone of the agreement be in my hand . and i saw that you have do evil against the lord and have make for yourselves a metal image of a young ox you have quickly be turn from the way in which the lord have give you order to go . and i let the stone go from my hand and they be break before your eye . and i go down on my face before the lord a at the first for forty day and forty night without take food or drinking water because of all your sin in do evil in the eye of the lord and move him to wrath . for i be full of fear because of the wrath of the lord which be burn against you with your destruction in view . but again the lord 's ear be open to my prayer . and the lord in his wrath would have put aaron to death and i make prayer for aaron at the same time . and i take your sin the image which you have make and put it in the fire and have it hammer and crush very small till it be only dust and the dust i put in the stream flow down from the mountain . again at taberah and at massah and at kibroth hattaavah you make the lord angry . and when the lord send you from kadesh barnea say go up and take the land which i have give you you go against the order of the lord your god and have no faith in him and would not give ear to his voice . from the day when i first have knowledge of you you have go against the word of the lord . so i go down on my face in prayer before the lord for forty day and forty night a i do at first because the lord have say that he would put an end to you . and i make prayer to the lord and say o lord god do not send destruction on your people and your heritage to whom by your great power you have give salvation whom you have take out of egypt by the strength of your hand . keep in mind your servant abraham isaac and jacob not look at the hard heart of this people or their evil do and their sin or it may be say in the land from which you have take them because the lord be not able to take them into the land which he say he would give them and because of his hate for them he have take them out to put them to death in the waste land . but still they be your people and your heritage whom you take out by your great power and by your stretch out arm .at that time the lord say to me make two other stone cut like the first two and come up to me on the mountain and make an ark of wood . and i will put on the stone the word which be on the first stone which be break by you and you be to put them into the ark . so i make an ark of hard wood and have two stone cut like the others and go up the mountain with the stone in my hand . and he put on the stone a in the first write the ten rule which the lord give you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the great meeting and the lord give the stone to me . and turn round i come down from the mountain and put the stone in the ark which i have make and there they be a the lord give me order . and the child of israel go on from beeroth bene jaakan to moserah there death come to aaron and he be put to rest in the earth and eleazar his son take his place a priest . from there they go on to gudgodah and from gudgodah to jotbathah a land of stream of water . at that time the lord have the tribe of levi mark out to take up the ark of the lord 's agreement to be before the lord and to do his work and to give blessing in his name to this day . for this reason levi have no part or heritage for himself among his brother the lord be his heritage a the lord your god say to him . and i be in the mountain a at the first time for forty day and forty night and again the ear of the lord be open to my prayer and he do not send destruction on you . then the lord say to me get up and go on your journey before the people so that they may go in and take the land which i say in my oath to their father that i would give them . and now israel what would the lord your god have you do but to go in the fear of the lord your god walking in all his way and love him and do his pleasure with all your heart and all your soul do the order of the lord and keep his law which i give you this day for your good ? the lord your god be ruler of heaven of the heaven of heaven and of the earth with everything in it . but the lord have delight in your father and love for them mark out for himself their seed after them even you from all people a at this day . let your circumcision be of the heart and put away your pride . for the lord your god be god of god and lord of lord the great god strong in power and greatly to be fear who have no respect for any man 's position and take no reward judge uprightly in the cause of the widow and of the child who have no father and give food and clothing in his mercy to the man from a strange country . so be kind to the man from a strange country who be live among you for you yourselves be live in a strange country in the land of egypt . let the fear of the lord your god be before you give him worship and be true to him at all time take your oath in his name . he be your god the god of your praise your god who have do for you all these work of power which your eye have see . your father go down into egypt with seventy person and now the lord your god have make you like the star of heaven in number .so have love for the lord your god and give him worship and keep his law and his decision and his order at all time . and be certain in your mind this day for these word be not say to your child who have have no experience of the training of the lord your god and who have not see his great power or his strong hand and his stretch out arm or his sign and wonder which he do in egypt to pharaoh king of egypt and all his land and what he do to the army of egypt to their horse and their war carriages how he make the water of the red sea come up over them when they go after you and how the lord put an end to them even to this day and what he do for you in the waste land till you come to this place and what he do to dathan and abiram the son of eliab the son of reuben when they go down into the open mouth of the earth with their family and their tent and every living thing which be theirs before the eye of all israel but your eye have see all the great work of the lord which he have do . so keep all the order which i give you today so that you may be strong and go in and take the land which be to be your heritage and that your day may be long in the land which the lord give by an oath to your father and to their seed after them a land flow with milk and honey . for the land where you be go be not like the land of egypt from which you have come where you put in your seed water them with your foot like a plant garden but the land where you be go be a land of hill and valley drink in the rain of heaven a land care for by the lord your god the eye of the lord your god be on it at all time from one end of the year to the other . and it will be that if you truly give ear to the order which i put before you this day love the lord your god and worship him with all your heart and all your soul then i will send rain on your land at the right time the early rain and the late rain so that you may get in your grain and your wine and your oil . and i will give grass in your field for your cattle so that you may have food in full measure . but take care that your heart be not turn to false way so that you become servant and worshipper of other god for if you do so the wrath of the lord will be burn against you and the heaven will be shut up so that there be no rain and the land will give no fruit and in a very little time you will be cut off from the good land which the lord be give you . so keep these word deep in your heart and in your soul and have them fix on your hand for a sign and mark on your brow teach them to your child and talk of them when you be at rest in your house or walking by the way when you go to sleep and when you get up write them on the pillar of your house and over the door of your town so that your day and the day of your child may be long in the land which the lord by his oath to your father say he would give them like the day of the eternal heaven . for if you take care to keep all the order which i give you and to do them love the lord your god and walking in all his way and be true to him then the lord will send these nation in flight before you and you will take the land of nation great and strong than yourselves . every place where you put your foot will be yours from the waste land and lebanon from the river the river euphrates as far a the great sea will be the limit of your land . all people will give way before you for the lord your god will put the fear of you on all the land through which you go a he have say . today i put before you a blessing and a curse the blessing if you give ear to the order of the lord your god which i give you this day and the curse if you do not give ear to the order of the lord your god but let yourselves be turn from the way which i have put before you this day and go after other god which be not yours . and when the lord your god have take you into the land of your heritage you be to put the blessing on mount gerizim and the curse on mount ebal . be they not on the other side of jordan look west in the land of the canaanite live in the arabah opposite gilgal by the holy tree of moreh ? for you be about to go over jordan to take the heritage which the lord your god be give you and it will be your rest place . and you be to take care to keep all the law and the decision which i put before you today .these be the law and the decision which you be to keep with care in the land which the lord the god of your father have give you to be your heritage all the day of your life on earth . you be to give up to the curse all those place where the nation whom you be drive out give worship to their god on the high mountain and the hill and under every green tree their altar and their pillar be to be break down and their holy tree burn with fire and the image of their god cut down you be to take away their name out of that place . do not so to the lord your god . but let your heart be turn to the place which will be mark out by the lord your god among your tribe to put his name there and there you be to take your burn offering and other offering and the tenth part of your good and the offering to be lift up to the lord and the offering of your oath and those which you give freely from the impulse of your heart and the first birth among your herd and your flock there you and all your family be to make a feast before the lord your god with joy in everything to which you put your hand because the lord have give you his bless . you be not to do thing then in the way in which we now do them here every man a it seem right to him for you have not come to the rest and the heritage which the lord your god be give you . but when you have go over jordan and be live in the land which the lord your god be give you a your heritage and when he have give you rest from all those on every side who be fight against you and you be live there safely then there will be a place mark out by the lord your god a the rest place for his name and there you will take all the thing which i give you order to take your burn offering and other offering and the tenth part of your good and the offering to be lift up and the offering of your oath which you make to the lord and you will be glad before the lord your god you and your son and your daughter and your men servant and your woman servant and the levite who be with you in your house because he have no part or heritage among you . take care that you do not make your burn offering in any place you see but in the place mark out by the lord in one of your tribe there let your burn offering be offer and there do what i have give you order to do . only you may put to death animal such a the gazelle or the roe for your food in any of your town at the desire of your soul in keep with the blessing of the lord your god which he have give you the unclean and the clean may take of it . but you may not take the blood for food it be to be drain out on the earth like water . in your town you be not to take a food the tenth part of your grain or of your wine or your oil or the first birth of your herd or of your flock or anything offer under an oath or freely offer to the lord or give a a lifted offering but they will be your food before the lord your god in the place of his selection where you may make a feast of them with your son and your daughter and your man servant and your woman servant and the levite who be live with you and you will have joy before the lord your god in everything to which you put your hand . see that you do not give up care for the levite as long a you be live in your land . when the lord your god make wide the limit of your land a he have say and you say i will take flesh for my food because you have a desire for it then you may take whatever flesh you have a desire for . if the place mark out by the lord your god a the rest place for his name be far away from you then take from your herd and from your flock which the lord have give you a i have say and have a meal of it in the town where you may be live . it will be your food like the gazelle and the roe the unclean and the clean may take of it . but see that you do not take the blood for food for the blood be the life and you may not make use of the life a food with the flesh . do not take it for food but let it be drain out on the earth like water . do not take it for food so that it may be well for you and for your child after you while you do what be right in the eye of the lord . but the holy thing which you have and the offering of your oath you be to take to the place which will be mark out by the lord offer the flesh and the blood of your burn offering on the altar of the lord your god and the blood of your offering be to be drain out on the altar of the lord your god and the flesh will be your food . take note of all these order i be give you and give attention to them so that it may be well for you and for your child after you for ever while you do what be good and right in the eye of the lord your god . when the people of the land where you be go have be cut off before you by the lord your god and you have take their land and be live in it after their destruction take care that you do not go in their way and that you do not give thought to their god say how do these nation give worship to their god ? i will do a they do . do not so to the lord your god for everything which be disgust to the lord and hat by him they have do in honour of their god even burn their son and daughter in the fire to their god . you be to keep with care all the word i give you make no addition to them and take nothing from them .if ever you have among you a prophet or a dreamer of dream and he give you a sign or a wonder and the sign or the wonder take place and he say to you let u go after other god which be strange to you and give them worship then give no attention to the word of that prophet or that dreamer of dream for the lord your god be test you to see if all the love of your heart and soul be give to him . but keep on in the way of the lord your god fear him and keep his order and hear his voice worship him and be true to him . and that prophet or that dreamer of dream be to be put to death for his word be say with the purpose of turn you away from the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt and make you free from the prison house and of force you out of the way in which the lord your god have give you order to go . so you be to put away the evil from among you . if your brother the son of your mother or your son or your daughter or the wife of your heart or the friend who be as dear to you a your life work on you secretly say to you let u go and give worship to other god strange to you and to your father god of the people round about you near or far from one end of the earth to the other do not be guide by him or give attention to him have no pity on him or mercy and give him no cover but put him to death without question let your hand be the first stretch out against him to put him to death and then the hand of all the people . let him be stone with stone till he be dead because it be his purpose to make you false to the lord your god who take you out of the land of egypt out of the prison house . and all israel hearing of it will be full of fear and no one will again do such evil a this among you . and if word come to you in one of the town which the lord your god be give you for your rest place that good for nothing person have go out from among you turn the people of their town from the right way and say let u go and give worship to other god of whom you have no knowledge then let a full search be make and let question be put with care and if it be true and certain that such a disgust thing have be do among you then take up arm against the people of that town and give it up to the curse with all it cattle and everything in it . and take all the good into the middle of it open space burn the town and all it property with fire a an offering to the lord your god it be to be a waste for ever there be to be no more building there . keep not a thing of what be curse for yourselves so the lord may be turn away from the heat of his wrath and have mercy on you and give you increase a he say in his oath to your father so long a you give ear to the voice of the lord your god and keep all his order which i give you today and do what be right in the eye of the lord your god .you be the child of the lord your god you be not to make cut on your body or take off the hair on your brow in honour of the dead for you be a holy people to the lord your god and the lord have take you to be his special people out of all the nation on the face of the earth . no disgust thing may be your food . these be the beast which you may have for food the ox the sheep and the goat the hart the gazelle and the roe the mountain goat and the pygarg and the antelope and the mountain sheep . any beast which have a division in the horn of it foot and whose food come back into it mouth to be crush again may be use for food . but even among these there be some which may not be use for food such a the camel the hare and the coney which be unclean to you because though their food come back the horn of their foot be not part in two . and the pig be unclean to you because though it have a division in the horn of it foot it food do not come back their flesh may not be use for food or their dead body touch by you . and of the thing live in the water you may take all those who have wing for swim with and skin form of thin plate . but any which have no skin plat or wing for swim you may not take they be unclean for you . all clean bird may be use for food . but these bird you may not take the eagle and the gier eagle and the ospray the falcon and the kite and bird of that sort every raven and all bird of that sort and the ostrich and the night hawk and the sea hawk and bird of that sort the little owl and the great owl and the water hen and the pelican and the vulture and the cormorant the stork and the heron and bird of that sort and the hoopoe and the bat . every wing thing which go flat on the earth be unclean to you and may not be use a food . but all clean bird you may take . you may not have a food anything which have come to a natural death the man from another country who be live with you may take it for food or you may get a price for it from one of another nation for you be a holy people to the lord your god . the young goat be not to be cook in it mother 's milk . put on one side a tenth of all the increase of your seed produce year by year . and make a feast before the lord your god in the place which be to be mark out where his name will be for ever of the tenth part of your grain and your wine and your oil and the first birth of your herd and your flock so that you may have the fear of the lord your god in your heart at all time . and if the way be so long that you be not able to take these thing to the place mark out by the lord your god for his name when he have give you his blessing because it be far away from you then let these thing be exchange for money and take the money in your hand go to the place mark out by the lord your god for himself and with the money get whatever you have a desire for ox or sheep or wine or strong drink whatever your soul 's desire may be and make a feast there before the lord your god and be glad you and all your house and give a thought to the levite who be live among you for he have no part or heritage in the land . at the end of every three year take a tenth part of all your increase for that year and put it in store inside your wall and the levite because he have no part or heritage in the land and the man from a strange country and the child who have no father and the widow who be live among you will come and take food and have enough and so the blessing of the lord your god will be on you in everything you do .at the end of every seven year there be to be a general forgiveness of debt . this be how it be to be do every creditor be to give up his right to whatever he have let his neighbour have he be not to make his neighbour his countryman give it back because a general forgiveness have be order by the lord . a man of another nation may be force to make payment of his debt but if your brother have anything of yours let it go but there will be no poor among you for the lord will certainly give you his bless in the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage if only you give ear to the voice of the lord your god and take care to keep all these order which i give you today . for the lord your god will give you his bless a he have say you will let other nation have the use of your money but you will not make use of theirs you will be ruler over a number of nation but they will not be your ruler . if in any of your town in the land which the lord your god be give you there be a poor man one of your countryman do not let your heart be hard or your hand shut to him but let your hand be open to give him the use of whatever he be in need of . and see that there be no evil thought in your heart move you to say to yourself the seventh year the year of forgiveness be near and so look coldly on your poor countryman you give him nothing and he will make an outcry to the lord against you and it will be judge a sin in you . but it be right for you to give to him without grief of heart for because of this the blessing of the lord your god will be on all your work and on everything to which you put your hand . for there will never be a time when there be no poor in the land and so i give order to you let your hand be open to your countryman to those who be poor and in need in your land . if one of your countryman a hebrew man or woman become your servant for a price and do work for you six year in the seventh year let him go free . and when you make him free do not let him go away with nothing in his hand but give him freely from your flock and from your grain and your wine in the measure of the wealth which the lord your god have give you you be to give to him . and keep in mind that you yourself be a servant in the land of egypt and the lord your god make you free so i give you this order today . but if he say to you i have no desire to go away from you because you and your family be dear to him and he be happy with you then take a sharp pointed instrument drive it through his ear into the door and he will be your servant for ever . and you may do the same for your servant girl . let it not seem hard to you that you have to send him away free for he have be work for you for six year which be twice the regular time for a servant and the blessing of the lord your god will be on you in everything you do . all the first male to come to birth in your herd and your flock be to be holy to the lord your god the first birth of your ox be not to be use for work the wool of your first lamb be not to be cut . but year by year you and all your house be to take a meal of it before the lord in the place of his selection . but if it have any mark on it if it be blind or have damage leg or if there be anything wrong with it it may not be offer to the lord your god . it may be use for food in your house the unclean and the clean may take of it a of the gazelle and the roe . only do not take it blood for food but let it be drain out on the earth like water .take note of the month of abib and keep the passover to the lord your god for in the month of abib the lord your god take you out of egypt by night . the passover offering from your flock or your herd be to be give to the lord your god in the place mark out by him a the rest place of his name . take no leaven bread with it for seven day let your food be unleavened bread that be the bread of sorrow for you come out of the land of egypt quickly so the memory of that day when you come out of the land of egypt will be with you all your life . for seven day let no leaven be use through all your land and nothing of the flesh which be put to death in the evening of the first day be to be keep through the night till morning . the passover offering be not to be put to death in any of the town which the lord your god give you but in the place mark out by the lord your god a the rest place of his name there you be to put the passover to death in the evening at sundown at that time of the year when you come out of egypt . it be to be cook and take a food in the place mark out by the lord and in the morning you be to go back to your tent . for six day let your food be unleavened bread and on the seventh day there be to be a holy meeting to the lord your god no work be to be do . let seven week be number from the first day when the grain be cut . then keep the feast of week to the lord your god with an offering freely give to him from the wealth he have give you then you be to be glad before the lord your god you and your son and your daughter your man servant and your woman servant and the levite who be with you and the man from a strange country and the child without a father and the widow who be live among you in the place mark out by the lord your god a a rest place for his name . and you will keep in mind that you be a servant in the land of egypt and you will take care to keep all these law . you be to keep the feast of tent for seven day after you have get in all your grain and make your wine you be to keep the feast with joy you and your son and your daughter your man servant and your woman servant and the levite and the man from a strange country and the child without a father and the widow who be live among you . keep the feast to the lord your god for seven day in the place mark out by the lord because the blessing of the lord your god will be on all the produce of your land and all the work of your hand and you will have nothing but joy . three time in the year let all your male come before the lord your god in the place name by him at the feast of unleavened bread the feast of week and the feast of tent and they be not to come before the lord with nothing in their hand every man be to give a he be able in the measure of the blessing which the lord your god have give you . you be to make judge and overseer in all your town which the lord your god give you for every tribe and they be to be upright men judge the people in righteousness . you be not to be move in your judging by a man 's position you be not to take reward for reward make the eye of the wise man blind and the decision of the upright false . let righteousness be your guide so that you may have life and take for your heritage the land which the lord your god be give you . let no holy tree of any sort be plant by the altar of the lord your god which you will make . you be not to put up stone pillar for they be hat by the lord your god .no ox or sheep which have a mark on it or be damage in any way may be offer to the lord your god for that be disgust to the lord your god . if there be any man or woman among you in any of the town which the lord your god give you who do evil in the eye of the lord your god sin against his agreement by become a servant of other god and worship them or the sun or the moon or all the star of heaven against my order if word of this come to your ear then let this thing be look into with care and if there be no doubt that it be true and such evil have be do in israel then you be to take the man or woman who have do the evil to the public place of your town and they be to be stone with stone till they be dead . on the word of two or three witness a man may be give the punishment of death but he be not to be put to death on the word of one witness . the hand of the witness will be the first to put him to death and after them the hand of all the people . so you be to put away the evil from among you . if you be not able to give a decision a to who be responsible for a death or who be right in a cause or who give the first blow in a fight and there be a division of opinion about it in your town then go to the place mark out by the lord your god and come before the priest the levite or before him who be judge at the time and they will go into the question and give you a decision and you be to be guide by the decision they give in the place name by the lord and do whatever they say act in agreement with their teaching and the decision they give not turn to one side or the other from the word they have give you . and any man who in his pride will not give ear to the priest whose place be there before the lord your god or to the judge be to be put to death you be to put away the evil from israel . and all the people hearing of it will be full of fear and put away their pride . when you have come into the land which the lord your god be give you and have take it for a heritage and be live in it if it be your desire to have a king over you like the other nation round about you then see that you take a your king the man name by the lord your god let your king be one of your countryman not a man of another nation who be not one of yourselves . and he be not to get together a great army of horse for himself or make the people go back to egypt to get horse for him because the lord have say you will never again go back that way . and he be not to have a great number of wife for fear that his heart may be turn away or great wealth of silver and gold . and when he have take his place on the seat of his kingdom he be to make in a book a copy of this law from that which the priest the levite have in their care and it be to be with him for his read all the day of his life so that he may be train in the fear of the lord his god to keep and do all the word of this teaching and these law so that his heart may not be lift up over his countryman and he may not be turn away from the order to one side or the other but that his life and the life of his child may be long in his kingdom in israel .the priest the levite that be all the tribe of levi will have no part or heritage with israel their food and their heritage will be the offering of the lord make by fire . and they will have no heritage among their countryman the lord be their heritage a he have say to them . and this be to be the priest ' right those who make an offering of a sheep or an ox be to give to the priest the top part of the leg and the two side of the head and the stomach . and in addition you be to give him the first of your grain and wine and oil and the first wool cut from your sheep . for he and his son after him for ever have be mark out by the lord your god from all your tribe to do the work of priest in the name of the lord . and if a levite move by a strong desire come from any town in all israel where he be live to the place mark out by the lord then he will do the work of a priest in the name of the lord his god with all his brother the levite who be there before the lord . his food will be the same a theirs in addition to what have come to him a the price of his property . when you have come into the land which the lord your god be give you do not take a your example the disgust way of those nation . let there not be see among you anyone who make his son or his daughter go through the fire or anyone use secret art or a maker of strange sound or a reader of sign or any wonder worker or anyone use secret force on people or put question to a spirit or have secret knowledge or go to the dead for direction . for all who do such thing be disgust to the lord and because of these disgust thing the lord your god be drive them out before you . you be to be upright in heart before the lord your god . for these nation whose land you be take give attention to reader of sign and to those use secret art but the lord your god will not let you do so . the lord your god will give you a prophet from among your people like me you will give ear to him in answer to the request you make to the lord your god in horeb on the day of the great meeting when you say let not the voice of the lord my god come to my ear again and let me not see this great fire any more or death will overtake me . then the lord say to me what they have say be well say . i will give them a prophet from among themselves like you and i will put my word in his mouth and he will say to them whatever i give him order to say . and whoever do not give ear to my word which he will say in my name will be responsible to me . but the prophet who take it on himself to say word in my name which i have not give him order to say or who say anything in the name of other god will come to his death . and if you say in your heart how be we to be certain that the word do not come from the lord ? when a prophet make a statement in the name of the lord if what he say do not take place and his word do not come true then his word be not the word of the lord the word of the prophet be say in the pride of his heart and you be to have no fear of him .when the nation whose land the lord your god be give you have be cut off by him and you have take their place and be live in their town and in their house you be to have three town mark out in the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage . you be to make ready a way and see that the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage be mark out into three part to which any taker of life may go in flight . this be to be the rule for anyone who go in flight there after cause the death of his neighbour in error and not through hate for example if a man go into the wood with his neighbour for the purpose of cut down tree and when he take his axe to give a blow to the tree the head of the axe come off and fall on to his neighbour give him a wound cause his death then the man may go in flight to one of these town and be safe for if not he who have the right of punishment may go run after the taker of life in the heat of his wrath and overtake him because the way be long and give him a death blow though it be not right for him to be put to death because he be not move by hate . and so i be order you to see that three town be mark out for this purpose . and if the lord your god make wide the limit of your land a he say in his oath to your father and give you all the land which he undertake to give to your father if you keep and do all these order which i give you today love the lord your god and walk ever in his way then let three more town in addition to these three be mark out for you so that in all your land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage no man may be wrongly put to death for which you will be responsible . but if any man have hate for his neighbour and wait for him secretly make an attack on him and give him a blow cause his death and then go in flight to one of these town the responsible men of his town be to send and take him and give him up to the one who have the right of punishment to be put to death . have no pity on him so that israel may be clear from the crime of put a man to death without cause and it will be well for you . your neighbour 's landmark which be put in it place by the men of old time be not to be move or take away in the land of your heritage which the lord your god be give you . one witness may not make a statement against a man in relation to any sin or wrongdoing which he have do on the word of two or three witness a question be to be judge . if a false witness make a statement against a man say that he have do wrong then the two men between whom the argument have take place be to come before the lord before the priest and judge who be then in power and the judge will have the question look into with care and if the witness be see to be false and to have make a false statement against his brother then do to him what it be his purpose to do to his brother and so put away the evil from among you . and the rest of the people hearing of it will be full of fear and never again do such evil among you . have no pity let life be give for life eye for eye tooth for tooth hand for hand foot for foot .when you go out to war against other nation and come face to face with horse and war carriage and army great in number than yourselves have no fear of them for the lord your god be with you who take you up out of the land of egypt . and when you be on the point of attack let the priest come forward and say to the people give ear o israel today you be go forward to the fight let your heart be strong do not let uncontrolled fear overcome you because of those who be against you for the lord your god go with you fight for you to give you salvation from those who be against you . and let the overseer say to the people if there be any man who have make for himself a new house and have not go into it let him go back to his house so that in the event of his death in the fight another may not take his house for himself . or if any man have make a vine garden without take the first fruit of it let him go back to his house so that in the event of his death in the fight another may not be the first to make use of the fruit . or if any man be newly marry and have have no sex relation with his wife let him go back to his house so that in the event of his death in the fight another man may not take her . and let the overseer go on to say to the people if there be any man whose heart be feeble with fear let him go back to his house before he make the heart of his countryman feeble . then after say these word to the people let the overseer put captain over the army . when you come to a town before attack it make an offer of peace . and if it give you back an answer of peace open it door to you then all the people in it may be put to force work a your servant . if however it will not make peace with you but war then let it be shut in on all side and when the lord your god have give it into your hand let every male in it be put to death without mercy . but the woman and the child and the cattle and everything in the town and all it wealth you may take for yourselves the wealth of your hater which the lord your god have give you will be your food . so you be to do to all the town far away which be not the town of these nation . but in the town of these people whose land the lord your god be give you for your heritage let no living thing be keep from death give them up to the curse the hittite the amorite the canaanite the perizzite the hivite and the jebusite a the lord your god have give you order so that you may not take them a your example and do all the disgusting thing which they do in the worship of their god so sin against the lord your god . if in war a town be shut in by your army for a long time do not let it tree be cut down and make waste for their fruit will be your food be the tree of the countryside men for you to take up arm against them ? only those tree which you be certain be not use for food may be cut down and put to destruction and you be to make wall of attack against the town till it be take .if in the land which the lord your god be give you you come across the dead body of a man in the open country and you have no idea who have put him to death then your responsible men and your judge be to come out and give order for the distance from the dead body to the town round about it to be measure and whichever town be near to the body the responsible men of that town be to take from the herd a young cow which have never be use for work or put under the yoke and they be to take the cow into a valley where there be flow water and which be not plough or plant and there the neck of the cow be to be break then the priest the son of levi be to come near for they have be mark out by the lord your god to be his servant and to give blessing in the name of the lord and by their decision every argument and every blow be to be judge and all the responsible men of that town which be near to the dead man wash their hand over the cow whose neck be break in the valley will say this death be not the work of our hand and our eye have not see it . have mercy o lord on your people israel whom you have make free and take away from your people the crime of a death without cause . then they will no longer be responsible for the man 's death . so you will take away the crime of a death without cause from among you when you do what be right in the eye of the lord . when you go out to war against other nation and the lord your god give them up into your hand and you take them a prisoner if among the prisoner you see a beautiful woman and it be your desire to make her your wife then take her back to your house and let her hair and her nail be cut and let her take off the dress in which she be make prisoner and go on living in your house and weep for her father and mother for a full month and after that you may go in to her and be her husband and she will be your wife . but if you have no delight in her you be to let her go wherever she will you may not take a price for her a if she be your property for you have make use of her for your pleasure . if a man have two wife one greatly love and the other hated and the two of them have have child by him and if the first son be the child of the hated wife then when he give his property to his son for their heritage he be not to put the son of his loved one in the place of the first son the son of the hated wife but he be to give his first son his birthright and twice as great a part of his property for he be the first fruit of his strength and the right of the first son be his . if a man have a son who be hard hearted and uncontrolled who give no attention to the voice of his father and mother and will not be rule by them though they give him punishment then let his father and mother take him to the responsible men of the town to the public place and say to them this son of ours be hard hearted and uncontrolled he will not give attention to u he give himself up to pleasure and strong drink . then he be to be stone to death by all the men of the town so you be to put away the evil from among you and all israel hearing of it will be full of fear . if a man do a crime for which the punishment be death and he be put to death by hang him on a tree do not let his body be on the tree all night but put it to rest in the earth the same day for the man who undergo hanging be curse by god so do not make unclean the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage .if you see your brother 's ox or his sheep wandering do not go by without help but take them back to your brother . if their owner be not near or if you be not certain who he be then take the beast to your house and keep it till it owner come in search of it and then you be to give it back to him . do the same with his as or his robe or anything which have go from your brother 's keep and which you have come across do not keep it to yourself . if you see your brother 's ox or his as fall down on the road do not go by without give him help in lift it up again . it be not right for a woman to be dress in man 's clothing or for a man to put on a woman 's robe whoever do such thing be disgust to the lord your god . if by chance you see a place which a bird have make for itself in a tree or on the earth with young one or egg and the mother bird seat on the young one or on the egg do not take the mother bird with the young see that you let the mother bird go but the young one you may take so it will be well for you and your life will be long . if you be build a house make a railing for the roof so that the blood of any man fall from it will not come on your house . do not have your vine garden plant with two sort of seed or all of it may become a loss the seed you have put in as well a the increase . do not do your plough with an ox and an as yoke together . do not have clothe make of two sort of thread wool and linen together . on the four edge of your robe with which your body be cover put ornament of twisted thread . if any man take a wife and have have connection with her have no delight in her and say evil thing about her and give her a bad name say i take this woman and when i have connection with her it be clear to me that she be not a virgin then let the girl 's father and mother put before the responsible men of the town in the public place sign that the girl be a virgin and let the girl 's father say to the responsible men i give my daughter to this man for his wife but he have no love for her and now he have put shame on her say that she be not a virgin but here be the sign that she be a virgin . then they be to put her clothing before the responsible men of the town . then the responsible men of the town be to give the man his punishment they will take from him a hundred shekel of silver which be to be give to the father of the girl because he have give an evil name to a virgin of israel she will go on be his wife he may never put her away all his life . but if what he have say be true and she be see to be not a virgin then they be to make the girl come to the door of her father 's house and she will be stone to death by the men of the town because she have do evil and put shame on israel by act a a loose woman in her father 's house so you be to put away evil from among you . if a man be take in the act of go in to a marry woman the two of them the man as well a the woman be to be put to death so you be to put away the evil from israel . if a young virgin have give her word to be marry to a man and another man meet her in the town have connection with her then you be to take the two of them to the doorway of the town and have them stone to death the young virgin because she give no cry for help though it be in the town and the man because he have put shame on his neighbour 's wife so you be to put away evil from among you . but if the man meeting such a virgin in the open country take her by force then only the man be to be put to death nothing be to be do to the virgin because there be no cause of death in her it be the same a if a man make an attack on his neighbour and put him to death for he come across her in the open country and there be no one to come to the help of the virgin in answer to her cry . if a man see a young virgin who have not give her word to be marry to anyone and he take her by force and have connection with her and discovery be make of it then the man will have to give the virgin 's father fifty shekel of silver and make her his wife because he have put shame on her he may never put her away all his life . a man may not take his father 's wife or have sex relation with a woman who be his father 's .no man whose private part have be wound or cut off may come into the meeting of the lord 's people . one whose father and mother be not marry may not come into the meeting of the lord 's people or any of his family to the tenth generation . no ammonite or moabite or any of their people to the tenth generation may come into the meeting of the lord 's people because they give you no bread or water on your way when you come out of egypt and they get balaam the son of peor from pethor in aram naharaim to put curse on you . but the lord your god would not give ear to balaam but let the curse be change into a blessing to you because of his love for you . do nothing for their peace or well be for ever . but have no hate for an edomite because he be your brother or for an egyptian for you be live in his land . their child in the third generation may come into the meeting of the lord 's people . when you go out to war and put your tent in position keep from every evil thing . if any man among you become unclean through anything which have take place in the night he be to go out from the tent circle and keep outside it but when even come near let him take a bath and after sundown he may come back to the tent . let there be a place outside the tent circle to which you may go and have among your arm a spade and when you have be to that place let that which come from you be cover up with earth for the lord your god be walk among your tent to keep you safe and to give up into your hand those who be fight against you then let your tent be holy so that he may see no unclean thing among you and be turn away from you . do not give back to his master a servant who have go in flight from his master and come to you let him go on living among you in whatever place be most pleasing to him do not be hard on him . no daughter of israel be to let herself be use a a loose woman for a strange god and no son of israel be to give himself to a man . do not take into the house of the lord your god a an offering for an oath the price of a loose woman or the money give to one use for sex purpose in the worship of the god for these two thing be disgust to the lord your god . do not take interest from an israelite on anything money or food or any other good which you let him have from men of other nation you may take interest but not from an israelite so that the blessing of the lord your god may be on everything to which you put your hand in the land which you be about to take a your heritage . when you take an oath to the lord do not be slow to give effect to it for without doubt the lord your god will make you responsible and will put it to your account a sin . but if you take no oath there will be no sin . whatever your lip have say see that you do it for you give your word freely to the lord your god . when you go into your neighbour 's vine garden you may take of his grape at your pleasure but you may not take them away in your vessel . when you go into your neighbour 's field you may take the head of grain with your hand but you may not put your blade to his grain .if a man take a wife and after they be married she be unpleasing to him because of some bad quality in her let him give her a statement in writing and send her away from his house . and when she have go away from him she may become another man 's wife . and if the second husband have no love for her and give her a statement in write sends her away or if death come to the second husband to whom she be marry her first husband who have send her away may not take her back after she have be wife to another for that be disgust to the lord and you be not to be a cause of sin in the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage . a newly marry man will not have to go out with the army or undertake any business but may be free for one year living in his house for the comfort of his wife . no one be to take on account of a debt the stone with which grain be crush for in do so he take a man 's living . if a man take by force one of his countryman the child of israel use him a his property or get a price for him that thief be to be put to death so you be to put away evil from among you . in connection with the leper 's disease take care to keep and do every detail of the teaching of the priest the levite a i give them order so you be to do . keep in mind what the lord your god do to miriam on the way when you come out of egypt . if you let your brother have the use of anything which be yours do not go into his house and take anything of his a a sign of his debt but keep outside till he come out and give it to you . if he be a poor man do not keep his property all night but be certain to give it back to him when the sun go down so that he may have his clothing for sleep in and will give you his blessing and this will be put to your account a righteousness before the lord your god . do not be hard on a servant who be poor and in need if he be one of your countryman or a man from another nation live with you in your land . give him his payment day by day not keep it back over night for he be poor and his living be dependent on it and if his cry against you come to the ear of the lord it will be judge a sin in you . father be not to be put to death for their child or child for their father every man be to be put to death for the sin which he himself have do . be upright in judge the cause of the man from a strange country and of him who have no father do not take a widow 's clothing on account of a debt but keep in mind that you be a servant in the land of egypt and the lord your god make you free for this be why i give you order to do this . when you get in the grain from your field if some of the grain have be drop by chance in the field do not go back and get it but let it be for the man from a strange land the child without a father and the widow so that the blessing of the lord your god may be on all the work of your hand . when you be shake the fruit from your olive tree do not go over the branch a second time let some be for the man from a strange land the child without a father and the widow . when you be pull the grape from your vine do not take up those which have be drop let them be for the man from a strange land the child without a father and the widow . keep in mind that you be a servant in the land of egypt for this be why i give you order to do this .if there be an argument between men and they go to law with one another let the judge give their decision for the upright and against the wrongdoer . and if the wrongdoer be to undergo punishment by whip the judge will give order for him to go down on his face and be whip before him the number of the blow be in relation to his crime . he may be give forty blow not more for if more be give your brother may be sham before you . do not keep the ox from take the grain when he be crush it . if brother be live together and one of them at his death have no son the wife of the dead man be not to be marry outside the family to another man let her husband 's brother go in to her and make her his wife do a it be right for a brother in law to do . then the first male child she have will take the right of the brother who be dead so that his name may not come to an end in israel . but if the man say he will not take his brother 's wife then let the wife go to the responsible men of the town and say my husband 's brother will not keep his brother 's name living in israel he will not do what it be right for a husband 's brother to do . then the responsible men of the town will send for the man and have talk with him and if he still say i will not take her then his brother 's wife be to come to him before the responsible men of the town and take his shoe off his foot and put shame on him and say so let it be do to the man who will not take care of his brother 's name . and his family will be name in israel the house of him whose shoe have be take off . if two men be fight and the wife of one of them come to the help of her husband take the other by the private part her hand be to be cut off have no pity on her . do not have in your bag different weight a great and a small or in your house different measure a great and a small . but have a true weight and a true measure so that your life may be long in the land which the lord your god be give you . for all who do such thing and all whose way be not upright be disgust to the lord your god . keep in mind what amalek do to you on your way from egypt how meeting you on the way he make an attack on you when you be tire and without strength cut off all the feeble one at the end of your line and the fear of god be not in him . so when the lord your god have give you rest from all who be against you on every side in the land which the lord your god be give you for your heritage see to it that the memory of amalek be cut off from the earth keep this in mind .now when you have come into the land which the lord be give you for your heritage and you have make it yours and be live in it you be to take a part of the first fruit of the earth which you get from the land which the lord your god be give you and put it in a basket and go to the place mark out by the lord your god a the rest place of his name . and you be to come to him who be priest at that time and say to him i give witness today before the lord your god that i have come into the land which the lord make an oath to our father to give u . then the priest will take the basket from your hand and put it down in front of the altar of the lord your god . and these be the word which you will say before the lord your god my father be a wandering aramaean and he go down with a small number of people into egypt there he become a great and strong nation and the egyptian be cruel to u crush u under a hard yoke and our cry go up to the lord the god of our father and the lord 's ear be open to the voice of our cry and his eye take note of our grief and the crush weight of our work and the lord take u out of egypt with a strong hand and a stretch out arm with work of power and sign and wonder and he have be our guide to this place and have give u this land a land flow with milk and honey . so now i have come here with the first of the fruit of the earth which you o lord have give me . then you will put it down before the lord your god and give him worship and you will have joy in every good thing which the lord your god have give to you and to your family and the levite and the man from a strange land who be with you will take part in your joy . when you have take out a tenth from the tenth of all your produce in the third year which be the year when this have to be do give it to the levite and the man from a strange land and the child without a father and the widow so that they may have food in your town and be full and say before the lord your god i have take all the holy thing out of my house and have give them to the levite and the man from a strange land and him who have no father and the widow a you have give me order i have keep in mind all your order in nothing have i go against them no part of these thing have be use for food in a time of weep or put away when i be unclean or give for the dead i have give ear to the voice of the lord my god and have do all you have give me order to do . so look down from your holy place in heaven send your bless on your people israel and on the land which you have give u a you say in your oath to our father a land flow with milk and honey . today the lord your god give you order to keep all these law and decision so then keep and do them with all your heart and all your soul . today you have give witness that the lord be your god and that you will go in his way and keep his law and his order and his decision and give ear to his voice and the lord have make it clear this day that you be a special people to him a he give you his word and that you be to keep all his order and that he will make you high over all the nation he have make in praise in name and in honour and that you be to be a holy people to the lord your god a he have say .then moses and the responsible men of israel give the people these order keep all the order which i have give you this day and on the day when you go over jordan into the land which the lord your god be give you put up great stone coat them with building paste and write on them all the word of this law after you have go over so that you may take the heritage which the lord your god be give you a land flow with milk and honey a the lord the god of your father have say . and when you have go over jordan you be to put up these stone a i have say to you today in mount ebal and have them coat with building paste . there you be to make an altar to the lord your god of stone on which no iron instrument have be use . you be to make the altar of the lord your god of uncut stone offer on it burn offering to the lord your god and you be to make your peace offering feast there with joy before the lord your god . and put on the stone all the word of this law write them very clearly . then moses and the priest the levite say to all israel be quiet and give ear o israel today you have become the people of the lord your god . for this cause you be to give ear to the voice of the lord your god and do his order and his law which i give you this day . that same day moses say to the people these be to take their place on mount gerizim for bless the people when you have go over jordan simeon and levi and judah and issachar and joseph and benjamin and these be to be on mount ebal for the curse reuben gad and asher and zebulun dan and naphtali . then the levite be to say in a loud voice to all the men of israel curse be the man who make any image of wood or stone or metal disgusting to the lord the work of man 's hand and put it up in secret . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who do not give honour to his father or mother . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who take his neighbour 's landmark from it place . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he by whom the blind be turn out of the way . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who give a wrong decision in the cause of a man from a strange land or of one without a father or of a widow . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who have sex relation with his father 's wife for he have put shame on his father . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who have sex relation with any sort of beast . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who have sex relation with his sister the daughter of his father or of his mother . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who have sex relation with his mother in law . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who take his neighbour 's life secretly . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who for a reward put to death one who have do no wrong . and let all the people say so be it . curse be he who do not take this law to heart to do it . and let all the people say so be it .now if you give ear to the voice of the lord your god and keep with care all these order which i have give you today then the lord your god will put you high over all the nation of the earth and all these blessing will come on you and overtake you if your ear be open to the voice of the lord your god . a blessing will be on you in the town and a blessing in the field . a blessing will be on the fruit of your body and on the fruit of your land on the fruit of your cattle the increase of your herd and the young of your flock . a blessing will be on your basket and on your bread basin . a blessing will be on your come in and on your go out . by the power of the lord those who take arm against you will be overcome before you they will come out against you one way and will go in flight from you seven way . the lord will send his bless on your store house and on everything to which you put your hand his blessing will be on you in the land which the lord your god be give you . the lord will keep you a a people holy to himself a he have say to you in his oath if you keep the order of the lord your god and go on walking in his way . and all the people of the earth will see that the name of the lord be on you and they will go in fear of you . and the lord will make you fertile in every good thing in the fruit of your body and the fruit of your cattle and the fruit of your field in the land which the lord by his oath to your father say he would give you . open his store house in heaven the lord will send rain on your land at the right time bless all the work of your hand other nation will make use of your wealth and you will have no need of theirs . the lord will make you the head and not the tail and you will ever have the high place if you give ear to the order of the lord your god which i give you today to keep and to do them not turn away from any of the order which i give you today to the right hand or to the left or go after any other god to give them worship . but if you do not give ear to the voice of the lord your god and take care to do all his order and his law which i give you today then all these curse will come on you and overtake you you will be curse in the town and curse in the field . a curse will be on your basket and on your bread basin . a curse will be on the fruit of your body and on the fruit of your land on the increase of your cattle and the young of your flock . you will be curse when you come in and curse when you go out . the lord will send on you curse and trouble and punishment in everything to which you put your hand till sudden destruction overtakes you because of your evil way in which you have be false to me . the lord will send disease after disease on you till you have be cut off by death from the land to which you be go . the lord will send waste disease and burning pain and flame heat against you keep back the rain till your land be waste and dead so will it be till your destruction be complete . and the heaven over your head will be brass and the earth under you hard a iron . the lord will make the rain of your land powder and dust send it down on you from heaven till your destruction be complete . the lord will let you be overcome by your hater you will go out against them one way and you will go in flight before them seven way you will be the cause of fear among all the kingdom of the earth . your body will be meat for all the bird of the air and the beast of the earth there will be no one to send them away . the lord will send on you the disease of egypt and other sort of skin disease which nothing will make well . he will make your mind diseased and your eye blind and your heart waste with fear you will go feel your way when the sun be high like a blind man for whom all be dark and nothing will go well for you you will be crush and make poor for ever and you will have no saviour . you will take a wife but another man will have the use of her the house which your hand have make will never be your rest place you will make a vine garden and never take the fruit of it . your ox will be put to death before your eye but it flesh will not be your food your as will be violently take away before your face and will not be give back to you your sheep will be give to your hater and there will be no saviour for you . your son and your daughter will be give to another people and your eye will be waste away with look and weep for them all the day and you will have no power to do anything . the fruit of your land and all the work of your hand will be food for a nation which be strange to you and to your father you will only be crush down and keep under for ever so that the thing which your eye have to see will send you out of your mind . the lord will send a skin disease attack your knee and your leg burst out from your foot to the top of your head so that nothing will make you well . and you and the king whom you have put over you will the lord take away to a nation strange to you and to your father there you will be servant to other god of wood and stone . and you will become a wonder and a name of shame among all the nation where the lord will take you . you will take much seed out into the field and get little in for the locust will get it . you will put in vine and take care of them but you will get no wine or grape from them for they will be food for worm . your land will be full of olive tree but there will be no oil for the comfort of your body for your olive tree will give no fruit . you will have son and daughter but they will not be yours for they will go away prisoner into a strange land . all your tree and the fruit of your land will be the locust 's . the man from a strange land who be live among you will be lift up high and high over you while you go down lower and low . he will let you have his wealth at interest and will have no need of yours he will be the head and you the tail . and all these curse will come after you and overtake you till your destruction be complete because you do not give ear to the voice of the lord your god or keep his law and his order which he give you these thing will come on you and on your seed to be a sign and a wonder for ever because you do not give honour to the lord your god worship him gladly with joy in your heart on account of all your wealth of good thing for this cause you will become servant to those whom the lord your god will send against you without food and drink and clothing and in need of all thing and he will put a yoke of iron on your neck till he have put an end to you . the lord will send a nation against you from the farthest end of the earth come with the flight of an eagle a nation whose language be strange to you a hard face nation who will have no respect for the old or mercy for the young he will take the fruit of your cattle and of your land till death put an end to you he will let you have nothing of your grain or wine or oil or any of the increase of your cattle or the young of your flock till he have make your destruction complete . your town will be shut in by his army till your high wall in which you put your faith have come down his army will be round your town through all your land which the lord your god have give you . and your food will be the fruit of your body the flesh of the son and daughter which the lord your god have give you because of your bitter need and the cruel grip of your hater . that man among you who be soft and use to comfort will be hard and cruel to his brother and to his dear wife and to of those his child who be still live and will not give to any of them the flesh of his child which will be his food because he have no other in the cruel grip of your hater on all your town . the most soft and delicate of your woman who would not so much a put her foot on the earth so delicate be she will be hard hearted to her husband and to her son and to her daughter and to her baby newly come to birth and to the child of her body for have no other food she will make a meal of them secretly because of her bitter need and the cruel grip of your hater on all your town . if you will not take care to do all the word of this law record in this book honour that name of glory and of fear the lord your god then the lord your god will make your punishment and the punishment of your seed a thing to be wonder at great punishment and cruel disease stretch on through long year . he will send on you again all the disease of egypt which be a cause of fear to you and they will take you in their grip . and all the disease and the pain not record in the book of this law will the lord send on you till your destruction be complete . and you will become a very small band though your number be like the star of heaven because you do not give ear to the voice of the lord your god . and a the lord take delight in do you good and increase you so the lord will take pleasure in cut you off and cause your destruction and you will be uproot from the land which you be about to take a your heritage . and the lord will send you wander among all people from one end of the earth to the other there you will be servant to other god of wood and stone god of which you and your father have no knowledge . and even among these nation there will be no peace for you and no rest for your foot but the lord will give you there a shaking heart and waste eye and weariness of soul your very life will be hang in doubt before you and day and night will be dark with fear and nothing in life will be certain in the morning you will say if only it be even ! and at even you will say if only morning would come ! because of the fear in your heart and the thing which your eye will see . and the lord will take you back to egypt again in ship by the way of which i say to you you will never see it again there you will be offer yourselves a men servant and woman servant to your hater for a price and no man will take you .these be the word of the agreement which moses be order by the lord to make with the child of israel in the land of moab in addition to the agreement which he make with them in horeb . and moses say in the hearing of all israel you have see all the lord do before your eye in the land of egypt to pharaoh and to all his servant and all his land the great test which your eye saw and the sign and wonder but even to this day the lord have not give you a mind open to knowledge or see eye or hear ear . for forty year i have be your guide through the waste land your clothing have not become old on your back or your shoe on your foot . you have have no bread or wine or strong drink so that you might see that i be the lord your god . when you come to this place sihon king of heshbon and og king of bashan come out to make war against u and we overcome them and we take their land and give it to the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh for their heritage . so keep the word of this agreement and do them so that it may be well for you in everything you do . you have come here today all of you before the lord your god the head of your tribe the overseer and those who be in authority over you with all the men of israel and your little one your wife and the men of other land who be with you in your tent down to the wood cutter and the servant who get water for you with the purpose of take part in the agreement of the lord your god and his oath which he make with you today and so that he may make you his people today and be your god a he have say to you and a he make an oath to your father abraham isaac and jacob . and not with you only do i make this agreement and this oath but with everyone who be here with u today before the lord our god as well a with those who be not here for you have in mind how we be live in the land of egypt and how we come through all the nation which be on your way and you have see their disgusting doings and the image of wood and stone and silver and gold which be among them so that there may not be among you any man or woman or family or tribe whose heart be turn away from the lord our god today to go after other god and give them worship or any root among you whose fruit be poison and bitter sorrow if such a man hear the word of this oath take comfort in the thought that he will have peace even if he go on in the pride of his heart take whatever chance may give him the lord will have no mercy on him but the wrath of the lord will be burn against that man and all the curse record in this book will be wait for him and the lord will take away his name completely from the earth . he will be mark out by the lord from all the tribe of israel for an evil fate in keep with all the curse of the agreement record in this book of the law . and future generation your child come after you and traveller from far country will say when they see the punishment of that land and the disease which the lord have send on it and that all the land be a salt and smoking waste not plant or give fruit or clothe with grass but waste like sodom and gomorrah admah and zeboiim on which the lord send destruction in the heat of his wrath truly all the nation will say why have the lord do so to this land ? what be the reason for this great and burn wrath ? then men will say because they give up the agreement of the lord the god of their father which he make with them when he take them out of the land of egypt and they go after other god and give them worship god who be strange to them and whom he have not give them and so the wrath of the lord be move against this land to send on it all the curse record in this book root them out of their land in the heat of his wrath and passion and drive them out into another land as at this day . the secret thing be the lord our god 's but the thing which have be make clear be ours and our child 's for ever so that we may do all the word of this law .now when all these thing have come on you the blessing and the curse which i have put before you if the thought of them come back to your mind when you be live among the nation where the lord your god have send you and your heart be turn again to the lord your god and you give ear to his word which i give you today you and your child with all your heart and with all your soul then the lord will have pity on you change your fate and take you back again from among all the nation where you have be force to go . even if those who have be force out be live in the farthest part of heaven the lord your god will go in search of you and take you back place you again in the land of your father a your heritage and he will do you good increase you till you be more in number than your father be . and the lord your god will give to you and to your seed a circumcision of the heart so that love him with all your heart and all your soul you may have life . and the lord your god will put all these curse on those who be against you and on your hater who put a cruel yoke on you . and you will again give ear to the voice of the lord and do all his order which i have give you today . and the lord your god will make you fertile in all good thing bless the work of your hand and the fruit of your body and the fruit of your cattle and the fruit of your land for the lord will have joy in you a he have in your father if you give ear to the voice of the lord your god keep his order and his law which be record in this book of the law and turn to the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul . for these order which i have give you today be not strange and secret and be not far away . they be not in heaven for you to say who will go up to heaven for u and give u knowledge of them so that we may do them ? and they be not across the sea for you to say who will go over the sea for u and give u news of them so that we may do them ? but the word be very near you in your mouth and in your heart so that you may do it . see i have put before you today life and good and death and evil in give you order today to have love for the lord your god to go in his way and keep his law and his order and his decision so that you may have life and be increase and that the blessing of the lord your god may be with you in the land where you be go the land of your heritage . but if your heart be turn away and your ear be shut and you go after those who would make you servant and worshipper of other god i give witness against you this day that destruction will certainly be your fate and your day will be cut short in the land where you be go the land of your heritage on the other side of jordan . let heaven and earth be my witness against you this day that i have put before you life and death a blessing and a curse so take life for yourselves and for your seed in love the lord your god hear his voice and be true to him for he be your life and by him will your day be long so that you may go on living in the land which the lord give by an oath to your father abraham isaac and jacob .so moses say all these thing to israel . then he say to them i be now a hundred and twenty year old i be no longer able to go out and come in and the lord have say to me you be not to go over jordan . the lord your god he will go over before you he will send destruction on all those nation and you will take their land a your heritage and joshua will go over at your head a the lord have say . the lord will do to them a he do to sihon and to og the king of the amorites and to their land whom he put to destruction . the lord will give them up into your hand and you be to do to them a i have give you order . be strong and take heart and have no fear of them for it be the lord your god who be go with you he will not take away his help from you . then moses sent for joshua and before the eye of all israel say to him be strong and take heart for you be to go with this people into the land which the lord by his oath to their father have give them by your help they will take it for their heritage . it be the lord who go before you he will be with you he will not take away his help from you or give you up so have no fear . then moses put all this law in write and give it to the priest the son of levi who take up the ark of the lord 's agreement and to all the responsible men of israel . and moses say to them at the end of every seven year at the time fix for the end of debt at the feast of tent when all israel have come before the lord your god in the place name by him let a reading be give of this law in the hearing of all israel . make all the people come together men and woman and child and anyone from another country who be with you so that hear they may become wise in the fear of the lord your god and take care to do all the word of this law and so that your child to whom it be new may give ear and be train in the fear of the lord your god while you be live in the land which you be go over jordan to take for your heritage . at that time the lord say to moses the day of your death be near send for joshua and come to the tent of meeting so that i may give him his order . so moses and joshua go to the tent of meeting . and the lord be see in the tent in a pillar of cloud resting by the door of the tent . and the lord say to moses now you be go to rest with your father and this people will be false to me unite themselves to the strange god of the land where they be go they will be turn away from me and will not keep the agreement i have make with them . in that day my wrath will be move against them and i will be turn away from them veil my face from them and destruction will overtake them and unnumbered evil and trouble will come on them so that in that day they will say have not these evil come on u because our god be not with u ? truly my face will be turn away from them in that day because of all the evil they have do in go after other god . make then this song for yourselves teach it to the child of israel put it in their mouth so that this song may be a witness for me against the child of israel . for when i have take them into the land name in my oath to their father a land flow with milk and honey and they have make themselves full of food and be fat then they will be turn to other god and will give them worship no longer honour me or keep my agreement . then when evil and trouble without number have overtake them this song will be a witness to them for the word of it will be clear in the memory of their child for i see the thought which be move in their heart even now before i have take them into the land of my oath . so that same day moses make this song teach it to the child of israel . then he give order to joshua the son of nun say to him be strong and take heart for you be to go at the head of the child of israel into the land which i make an oath to give them and i will be with you . now after write all the word of this law in a book till the record of them be complete moses say to the levite who be responsible for take up the ark of the lord 's agreement take this book of the law and put it by the ark of the lord 's agreement so that it may be a witness against you . for i have knowledge of your hard and uncontrolled heart even now while i be still live you will not be rule by the lord how much less after my death ? get together before me all those who be in authority in your tribe and your overseer so that i may say these thing in their hearing and make heaven and earth my witness against them . for i be certain that after my death you will give yourselves up to sin wander from the way which i have give you and evil will overtake you in the end because you will do evil in the eye of the lord move him to wrath by the work of your hand . then in the hearing of all the meeting of israel moses say the word of this song to the end .give ear o heavens to my voice let the earth take note of the word of my mouth my teaching be drop like rain come down like dew on the field like rain on the young grass and shower on the garden plant for i will give honour to the name of the lord let our god be name great . he be the rock complete be his work for all his way be righteousness a god without evil who keep faith true and upright be he . they have become false they be not his child the mark of sin be on them they be an evil and hard hearted generation . be this your answer to the lord o foolish people and unwise ? be he not your father who have give you life ? he have make you and give you your place . keep in mind the day of the past give thought to the year of generation go by go to your father and he will make it clear to you to the old men and they will give you the story . when the most high give the nation their heritage separate into group the child of men he have the limit of the people mark out keep in mind the number of the child of israel . for the lord 's wealth be his people jacob be the land of his heritage . he come to him in the waste land in the unpeopled waste of sand put his arm round him and care for him he keep him a the light of his eye . a an eagle teach her young to make their flight with her wing outstretched over them take them up on her strong feather so the lord only be his guide no other god be with him . he put him on the high place of the earth his food be the increase of the field honey he give him out of the rock and oil out of the hard rock butter from his cow and milk from his sheep with fat of lamb and sheep of bashan and goat and the heart of the grain and for your drink wine from the blood of the grape . but jeshurun become fat and would not be control you have become fat you be thick and full of food then he be untrue to the god who make him give no honour to the rock of his salvation . the honour which be his they give to strange god by their disgusting way he be move to wrath . they make offering to evil spirit which be not god to god who be strange to them which have newly come up not fear by your father . you have no thought for the rock your father you have no memory of the god who give you birth . and the lord saw with disgust the evil do of his son and daughter . and he say my face will be veil from them i will see what their end will be for they be an uncontrolled generation child in whom be no faith . they have give my honour to that which be not god move me to wrath with their false worship i will give their honour to those who be not a people move them to wrath by a foolish nation for my wrath be a flaming fire burning to the deep part of the underworld burn up the earth with her increase and fire the deep root of the mountain . i will send a rain of trouble on them my arrow will be shower on them . they will be waste from need of food and overcome by burn heat and bitter destruction and the teeth of beast i will send on them with the poison of the worm of the dust . outside they will be cut off by the sword and in the inner room by fear death will take the young man and the virgin the baby at the breast and the grey haired man . i say i would send them wander far away i would make all memory of them go from the mind of men but for the fear that their hater uplift in their pride might say our hand be strong the lord have not do all this . for they be a nation without wisdom there be no sense in them . if only they be wise if only this be clear to them and they would give thought to their future ! how would it be possible for one to overcome a thousand and two to send ten thousand in flight if their rock have not let them go if the lord have not give them up ? for their rock be not like our rock even our hater themselves be judge . for their vine be the vine of sodom from the field of gomorrah their grape be the grape of evil and the berry be bitter their wine be the poison of dragon the cruel poison of snake . be not this among my secret keep safe in my store house ? punishment be mine and reward at the time of the slipping of their foot for the day of their downfall be near sudden will be their fate . for the lord will be judge of his people he will have pity for his servant when he see that their power be go there be no one shut up or free . and he will say where be their god the rock in which they put their faith ? who take the fat of their offering and the wine of their drink offering ? let them now come to your help let them be your salvation . see now i myself be he there be no other god but me giver of death and life wounding and make well and no one have power to make you free from my hand . for lift up my hand to heaven i say by my unending life if i make sharp my shin sword and my hand be outstretched for judge i will give punishment to those who be against me and their right reward to my hater . i will make my arrow red with blood my sword will be feast on flesh with the blood of the dead and the prisoner of the long haired head of my hater . be glad o you his people over the nation for he will take payment for the blood of his servant and will give punishment to his hater and take away the sin of his land for his people . so moses say all the word of this song in the hearing of the people he and hoshea the son of nun . and after say all this to the people moses say to them let the word which i have say to you today go deep into your heart and give order to your child to do every word of this law . and this be no small thing for you but it be your life and through this you may make your day long in the land which you be go over jordan to take for your heritage . that same day the lord say to moses go up into this mountain of abarim to mount nebo in the land of moab opposite jericho there you may see the land of canaan which i be give to the child of israel for their heritage and let death come to you on the mountain where you be go and be put to rest with your people a death come to aaron your brother on mount hor where he be put to rest with his people because of your sin against me before the child of israel at the water of meribath kadesh in the waste land of zin because you do not keep my name holy among the child of israel . so you will see the land before you but you will not go into the land which i be give to the child of israel .now this be the blessing which moses the man of god give to the child of israel before his death . he say the lord come from sinai dawn on them from seir shin out from mount paran come from meribath kadesh from his right hand go flame of fire his wrath make waste the people . all his holy one be at his hand they go at his foot they be lift up on his wing . moses give u a law a heritage for the people of jacob . and there be a king in jeshurun when the head of the people and the tribe of israel come together . let life not death be reuben 's let not the number of his men be small . and this be the blessing of judah he say give ear o lord to the voice of judah and make him one with his people let your hand take up his cause and be his help against his attacker . and of levi he say give your thummim to levi and let the urim be with your loved one whom you put to the test at massah with whom you be angry at the water of meribah who say of his father who be he ? and of his mother i have not see her he keep himself separate from his brother and have no knowledge of his child for they have give ear to your word and keep your agreement . they will be the teacher of your decision to jacob and of your law to israel the burning of perfume before you will be their right and the ordering of burned offering on your altar . let your bless o lord be on his substance may the work of his hand be please to you may those who take up arm against him and all who have hate for him be wound through the heart never to be lift up again . and of benjamin he say benjamin be the loved one of the lord he will be keep safe at all time he will be cover by the most high resting between his arm . and of joseph he say let the blessing of the lord be on his land for the good thing of heaven on high and the deep water flow under the earth and the good thing of the fruit of the sun and the good thing of the growth of the moon and the chief thing of the old mountain and the good thing of the eternal hill the good thing of the earth and all it wealth the good pleasure of him who be see in the burning tree may they come on the head of joseph on the head of him who be prince among his brother . he be a young ox glory be his his horn be the horn of the mountain ox with which all people will be wound even to the end of the earth they be the ten thousand of ephraim and the thousand of manasseh . and of zebulun he say be glad zebulun in your go out and issachar in your tent . they will send out the word for the people to come to the mountain take there the offering of righteousness for the store of the sea will be theirs and the secret wealth of the sand . of gad he say a blessing be on him who make wide the limit of gad he take his rest like a she lion take for himself the arm and the crown of the head . he keep for himself the first part for his be the ruler 's right he put in force the righteousness of the lord and his decision for israel . and of dan he say dan be a young lion spring out from bashan . and of naphtali he say o naphtali make glad with grace and full of the blessing of the lord the sea and it fish will be his . and of asher he say let asher have the blessing of child may he be please to his brother and let his foot be wet with oil . your shoe will be iron and brass and a your day so may your work be . no other be like the god of jeshurun come on the heaven to your help and let his glory be see in the sky . the god of your father be your safe resting place and under you be his eternal arm drive out the force of your hater from before you he say let destruction overtake them . and israel be live in peace the fountain of jacob by himself in a land of grain and wine with dew drop from the heaven . happy be you o israel who be like you a people whose saviour be the lord whose help be your cover whose sword be your strength ! all those who be against you will put themselves under your rule and your foot will be plant on their high place .and moses go up from the table land of moab to mount nebo to the top of pisgah which be face jericho . and the lord let him see all the land the land of gilead as far a dan and all naphtali and the land of ephraim and manasseh and all the land of judah as far a the great sea of the west and the south and the circle of the valley of jericho the town of palm tree as far a zoar . and the lord say to him this be the land about which i make an oath to abraham isaac and jacob say i will give it to your seed now i have let you see it with your eye but you will not go in there . so death come to moses the servant of the lord there in the land of moab a the lord have say . and the lord put him to rest in the valley in the land of moab opposite beth peor but no man have knowledge of his rest place to this day . and moses at his death be a hundred and twenty year old his eye have not become cloud or his natural force become feeble . for thirty day the child of israel be weep for moses in the table land of moab till the day of weep and sorrow for moses be end . and joshua the son of nun be full of the spirit of wisdom for moses have put his hand on him and the child of israel give ear to him and do a the lord have give order to moses . there have never be another prophet in israel like moses whom the lord have knowledge of face to face in all the sign and wonder which the lord send him to do in the land of egypt to pharaoh and to all his servant and all his land and in all the act of power and fear which moses do before the eye of all israel .now after the death of moses the servant of the lord the word of the lord come to joshua the son of nun moses ' helper say moses my servant be dead so now get up ! go over jordan you and all this people into the land which i be give to them to the child of israel . every place on which you put your foot i have give to you a i say to moses . from the waste land and this mountain lebanon as far a the great river the river euphrates and all the land of the hittite to the great sea in the west will be your country . while you be live all will give way before you a i be with moses so i will be with you i will not take away my help from you or give you up . take heart and be strong for you will give to this people for their heritage the land which i give by an oath to their father . only take heart and be very strong take care to do all the law which moses my servant give you not turn from it to the right hand or to the left so that you may do well in all your undertaking . let this book of the law be ever on your lip and in your thought day and night so that you may keep with care everything in it then a blessing will be on all your way and you will do well . have i not give you your order ? take heart and be strong have no fear and do not be trouble for the lord your god be with you wherever you go then joshua give their order to those who be in authority over the people say go through the tent and give order to the people say get ready a store of food for in three day you be to go over this river jordan and take for your heritage the land which the lord your god be give you . and to the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh joshua say keep in mind what moses the servant of the lord say to you the lord your god be send you rest and will give you this land . your wife your little one and your cattle will be keep here in the land which moses give you on this side of jordan but you the fight men be to go over before your brother arm to give them help till the lord have give your brother rest a he have give it to you and they have take their heritage in the land which the lord your god be give them then you will go back to the land of your heritage which moses the servant of the lord give you on the east side of jordan . then they say to joshua in answer whatever you say to u we will do and wherever you send u we will go . a we give attention to moses in all thing so we will give attention to you and may the lord your god be with you a he be with moses . whoever go against your order and do not give attention to all your word will be put to death only take heart and be strong .then joshua the son of nun send two men from shittim secretly with the purpose of search out the land and jericho . so they go and come to the house of a loose woman of the town name rahab where they take their rest for the night . and it be say to the king of jericho see some men have come here tonight from the child of israel with the purpose of search out the land . then the king of jericho send to rahab say send out the men who have come to you and be in your house for they have come with the purpose of search out all the land . and the woman take the two men and put them in a secret place then she say yes the men come to me but i have no idea where they come from and when it be the time for shut the door at dark they go out i have no idea where the men go but if you go after them quickly you will overtake them . but she have take them up to the roof cover them with the stem of flax which she have put out in order there . so the men go after them on the road to jordan as far a the river crossing and when they have go out after them the door into the town be shut . and before the men go to rest she come up to them on the roof and say to them it be clear to me that the lord have give you the land and that the fear of you have come on u for we have have news of how the lord make the red sea dry before you when you come out of egypt and what you do to the two king of the amorites on the other side of jordan to sihon and og whom you give up to the curse . and because of this news our heart become like water and there be no more spirit in any of u because of you for the lord your god be god in heaven on high and here on earth . so now will you give me your oath by the lord that because i have be kind to you you will be kind to my father 's house and that you will keep safe my father and mother and my brother and sister and all they have so that death may not come on u ? and the men say to her our life for yours if you keep our business secret and when the lord have give u the land we will keep faith and be kind to you . then she let them down from the window by a cord for the house where she be live be on the town wall . and she say to them get away into the hill country or the men who have go after you will overtake you keep yourselves safe there for three day till the searcher have come back and then go on your way . and the men say to her we will only be responsible for this oath which you have make u take if when we come into the land you put this cord of bright red thread in the window from which you let u down and get your father and mother and your brother and all your family into the house then if anyone go out of your house into the street his blood will be on his head we will not be responsible but if any damage come to anyone in the house his blood will be on our head . but if you say anything about our business here then we will be free from the oath you have make u take . and she say let it be a you say . then she send them away and they go and she put the bright red cord in the window . and they go into the hill country and be there three day till the men who have go after them have come back and those who go after them be search for them everywhere without come across them . then the two men come down from the hill country and go over and come back to joshua the son of nun and they give him a complete account of what have take place . and they say to joshua truly the lord have give all the land into our hand and all the people of the land have become like water because of u .then joshua get up early in the morning and move on from shittim he and all the child of israel come to jordan and be there for the night before go over . and at the end of three day the men in authority over the people go through the tent give the people their order and say when you see the ark of the agreement of the lord your god lift up by the priest the levite then get up from your place and go after it but let there be a space between you and it of about two thousand cubit come no nearer to it so that you may see the way you have to go for you have not be over this way before . and joshua say to the people make yourselves holy for tomorrow the lord will do work of wonder among you . then joshua say to the priest take up the ark of the agreement and go over in front of the people . so they take up the ark of the agreement and go in front of the people . and the lord say to joshua from now on i will give you glory in the eye of all israel so that they may see that a i be with moses so i will be with you . and you be to give order to the priest who take up the ark of the agreement and say when you come to the edge of the water of jordan go no far . and joshua say to the child of israel come to me here and give ear to the word of the lord your god . and joshua say by this you will see that the living god be among you and that he will certainly send out from before you the canaanite and the hittite and the hivite and the perizzite and the girgashite and the amorite and the jebusite . see the ark of the agreement of the lord of all the earth be go over before you into jordan . so take twelve men out of the tribe of israel a man from every tribe . and when the foot of the priest who take up the ark of the lord the lord of all the earth come to rest in the water of jordan the water of jordan will be cut off all the water flow down from high up and will come together in a mass . so when the people go out from their tent to go over jordan the priest who take up the ark of the agreement be in front of the people and when those who take up the ark come to jordan and the foot of the priest who take up the ark be touch the edge of the water for the water of jordan be overflow all through the time of the grain cut then the water flow down from high up be stop and come together in a mass a long way back at adam a town near zarethan and the water flow down to the sea of the arabah the salt sea be cut off and the people go across opposite jericho . and the priest who take up the ark of the agreement of the lord keep their place with their foot on dry land in the middle of jordan while all israel go over on dry land till all the nation have go over jordan .now when all the nation have come to the other side of jordan the lord say to joshua take twelve men from the people a man for every tribe and say to them take up from the middle of jordan from the place where the foot of the priest be rest twelve stone and take them over with you and put them down in the place where you take your rest tonight . so joshua sent for the twelve men whom he have ready one man out of every tribe of the child of israel and he say to them go over before the ark of the lord your god into the middle of jordan and let every one of you take up a stone on his back one for every tribe of the child of israel so that this may be a sign among you when your child say to you in time to come what be the reason for these stone ? then you will say to them because the water of jordan be cut off before the ark of the lord 's agreement when it go over jordan the water of jordan be cut off and these stone will be a sign for the child of israel keep it in their memory for ever . so the child of israel do a joshua give them order and take twelve stone from the middle of jordan a the lord have say to joshua one for every tribe of the child of israel these they take across with them to their night 's rest place and put them down there . and joshua put up twelve stone in the middle of jordan where the foot of the priest who take up the ark of the agreement have be place and there they be to this day . for the priest who take up the ark keep there in the middle of jordan till all the order give to joshua by moses from the lord have be do then the people go over quickly . and when all the people have come to the other side the ark of the lord go over and the priest before the eye of the people . and the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh go over arm before the child of israel a moses have say to them about forty thousand arm for war go over before the lord to the fight to the lowland of jericho . that day the lord make joshua great in the eye of all israel and all the day of his life they go in fear of him a they have go in fear of moses . then the lord say to joshua give order to the priest who take up the ark of witness to come up out of jordan . so joshua give order to the priest say come up now out of jordan . and when the priest who take up the ark of the lord 's agreement come up out of jordan and their foot come out on to dry land the water of jordan go back to their place overflow it edge a before . so on the tenth day of the first month the people come up out of jordan and put up their tent in gilgal on the east side of jericho . and the twelve stone which they take out of jordan joshua put up in gilgal . and he say to the child of israel when your child say to their father in time to come what be the reason for these stone ? then give your child the story and say israel come over this river jordan on dry land . for the lord your god make the water of jordan dry before you till you have go across a he do to the red sea dry it up before u till we have go across so that all the people of the earth may see that the hand of the lord be strong and that they may go in fear of the lord your god for ever .now when the news come to all the king of the amorites on the west side of jordan and all the king of the canaanite live by the sea how the lord have make the water of jordan dry before the child of israel till they have go across their heart become like water and there be no more spirit in them because of the child of israel . at that time the lord say to joshua make yourself stone knife and give the child of israel circumcision a second time . so joshua make stone knife and give the child of israel circumcision at gibeath ha araloth . and this be the reason why joshua do so all the male of the people who come out of egypt all the fight men have be overtake by death in the waste land on the way after they come out of egypt . all the people who come out have undergone circumcision but all the people whose birth have take place in the waste land on their journey from egypt have not . for the child of israel be wander in the waste land for forty year till all the nation that be all the fight men who have come out of egypt be dead because they do not give ear to the voice of the lord to whom the lord say with an oath that he would not let them see the land which the lord have give his word to their father to give u a land flow with milk and honey . and their child who come up in their place now underwent circumcision by the hand of joshua not have have it before for there have be no circumcision on the journey . so when all the nation have undergone circumcision they keep in their tent till they be well again . and the lord say to joshua today the shame of egypt have be roll away from you . so that place be name gilgal to this day . so the child of israel put up their tent in gilgal and they keep the passover on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening in the lowland of jericho . and on the day after the passover they have for their food the produce of the land unleavened cake and dry grain on the same day . and there be no more manna from the day after they have for their food the produce of the land the child of israel have manna no longer but that year the produce of the land of canaan be their food . now when joshua be near jericho lift up his eye he saw a man in front of him with his sword uncover in his hand and joshua go up to him and say be you for u or against u ? and he say no but i have come a captain of the army of the lord . then joshua fall down with his face to the earth in worship say what have my lord to say to his servant ? and the captain of the lord 's army say to joshua take off your shoe from your foot for the place where you be be holy . and joshua do so .now jericho be all shut up because of the child of israel there be no go out or come in . and the lord say to joshua see i have give into your hand jericho with it king and all it men of war . now let all your fight men make a circle round the town go all round it once . do this for six day . and let seven priest go before the ark with seven loud sound horn in their hand on the seventh day you be to go round the town seven time the priest blow their horn . and at the sound of a long note on the horn let all the people give a loud cry and the wall of the town will come down flat and all the people be to go straight forward . then joshua the son of nun sent for the priest and say to them take up the ark of the agreement and let seven priest take seven horn in their hand and go before the ark of the lord . and he say to the people go forward circle the town and let the armed men go before the ark of the lord . so after joshua have say this to the people the seven priest with their seven horn go forward before the lord blow on their horn and the ark of the lord 's agreement go after them . and the arm men go before the priest who be blow the horn and the mass of the people go after the ark blow their horn . and to the people joshua give an order say you will give no cry and make no sound and let no word go out of your mouth till the day when i say give a loud cry then give a loud cry . so he make the ark of the lord go all round the town once then they go back to the tent for the night . and early in the morning joshua get up and the priest take up the ark of the lord . and the seven priest with their seven horn go on before the ark of the lord blow their horn the arm men go before them and the mass of the people go after the ark of the lord blow their horn . the second day they go all round the town once and then go back to their tent and so they do for six day . then on the seventh day they get up early at the dawn of the day and go round the town in the same way but that day they go round it seven time . and the seventh time at the sound of the priest ' horn joshua say to the people now give a loud cry for the lord have give you the town . and the town will be put to the curse and everything in it will be give to the lord only rahab the loose woman and all who be in the house with her will be keep safe because she keep secret the men we send . and a for you keep yourselves from the cursed thing for fear that you may get a desire for it and take some of it for yourselves and so be the cause of a curse and great trouble on the tent of israel . but all the silver and gold and the vessel of brass and iron be holy to the lord they be to come into the store house of the lord . so the people give a loud cry and the horn be sound and on hear the horn the people give a loud cry and the wall come down flat so that the people go up into the town every man go straight before him and they take the town . and they put everything in the town to the curse men and woman young and old ox and sheep and as they put to death without mercy . then joshua say to the two men who have be send to make a search through the land go into the house of the loose woman and get her out and all who be with her a you give her your oath . so the searcher go in and get out rahab and her father and mother and her brother and all she have and they get out all her family and they take them outside the tent of israel . then after burn up the town and everything in it they put the silver and gold and the vessel of brass and iron into the store house of the lord 's house . but joshua keep rahab the loose woman and her father 's family and all she have from death and so she get a living place among the child of israel to this day because she keep safe the men whom joshua have send to make a search through the land . then joshua give the people order with an oath say let that man be curse before the lord who put his hand to the building up of this town with the loss of his first son will he put the first stone of it in place and with the loss of his young son he will put up it door . so the lord be with joshua and news of him go through all the land .but the child of israel do wrong about the cursed thing for achan the son of carmi the son of zabdi the son of zerah of the family of judah take of the cursed thing move the lord to wrath against the child of israel . now joshua send men from jericho to ai which be by the side of beth aven on the east side of beth el and say to them go up and make a search through the land . and the men go up and saw how ai be place . then they come back to joshua and say to him do not send all the people up but let about two or three thousand men go up and make an attack on ai there be no need for all the people to be tire with the journey there for it be only a small town . so about three thousand of the people go up and be send in flight by the men of ai . the men of ai put to death about thirty six of them drive them from before the town as far a the stonework and overcome them on the way down and the heart of the people become like water . then joshua in great grief go down on the earth before the ark of the lord till the evening and all the chief of israel with him and they put dust on their head . and joshua say o lord god why have you take u over jordan only to give u up into the hand of the amorites for our destruction ? if only it have be enough for u to keep on the other side of jordan ! o lord what be i to say now that israel have give way before their attacker ? for when the news come to the canaanite and all the people of the land they will come up shut u in and cut off our name from the earth and what will you do for the honour of your great name ? then the lord say to joshua get up what be you do with your face to the earth ? israel have do wrong sin against the agreement which i make with them they have even take of the cursed thing act falsely like thief they have put it among their good . for this reason the child of israel have give way turn their back in flight before their attacker because they be curse i will no longer be with you if you do not put the cursed thing away from among you . up ! make the people holy say to them make yourselves holy before tomorrow for the lord the god of israel have say there be a cursed thing among you o israel and you will give way before your attacker in the fight till the cursed thing have be take away from among you . so in the morning you be to come near tribe by tribe and the tribe mark out by the lord be to come near family by family and the family mark out by the lord be to come near house by house and the house mark out by the lord be to come near man by man . then the man who be take with the cursed thing be to be burn with everything which be his because he have go against the agreement of the lord and have do an act of shame in israel . so joshua get up early in the morning and make israel come before him by their tribe and the tribe of judah be take then he make judah come forward and the family of the zerahites be take and he make the family of the zerahites come forward man by man and zabdi be take then the house of zabdi come forward man by man and achan the son of carmi the son of zabdi the son of zerah of the tribe of judah be take . and joshua say to achan my son give glory and praise to the lord the god of israel give me word now of what you have do and keep nothing back from me . and achan answering say to joshua truly i have do wrong against the lord the god of israel and this be what i have do when i saw among their good a fair robe of babylon and two hundred shekel of silver and a mass of gold fifty shekel in weight i be overcome by desire and take them and they be put away in the earth in my tent and the silver be under it . so joshua send men quickly and look in his tent they saw where the robe have be put away secretly with the silver under it . and they take them from the tent and come back with them to joshua and the child of israel and put them before the lord . then joshua and all israel take achan the son of zerah and the silver and the robe and the mass of gold and his son and his daughter and his ox and his ass and his sheep and his tent and everything he have and they take them up into the valley of achor . and joshua say why have you be a cause of trouble to u ? today the lord will send trouble on you . and all israel take part in stone him they have him stone to death and then burn with fire . and over him they put a great mass of stone which be there to this day then the heat of the lord 's wrath be turn away . so that place be name the valley of achor to this day .then the lord say to joshua have no fear and do not be troubled take with you all the fight men and go up against ai for i have give into your hand the king of ai and his people and his town and his land and you be to do to ai and it king a you do to jericho and it king but their good and their cattle you may take for yourselves let a secret force be station to make a surprise attack on the town from the back . so joshua and the fight men get ready to go up against ai and joshua take thirty thousand men of war and send them out by night . and he give them their order say go and take up your position secretly at the back of the town do not go very far away and let all of you be ready and i and all the people with me will come near the town and when they come out against u a they do before we will go in flight from them and they will come out after u till we have get them away from the town for they will say they have go in flight from u a before so we will go in flight before them then you will get up from your secret position and take the town for the lord your god will give it up into your hand . and when you have take the town put fire to it a the lord have say see i have give you your order . so joshua send them out and they take up a secret position between beth el and ai on the west side of ai but joshua keep with the people that night . and early in the morning joshua get up and put the people in order and he and the chief of israel go up before the people to ai . and all the fight men who be with him go up and come near the town and take up a position on the north side of ai face the town with a valley between him and the town . and take about five thousand men he put them in position for a surprise attack on the west side of ai between beth el and ai . so all the people be in their place the army on the north side of the town and the secret force on the west and that night joshua go down into the valley . now when the king of ai saw it he get up quickly and go out to war against israel he and all his people to the slope go down to the valley but he have no idea that a secret force be wait at the back of the town . then joshua and all israel acting a if they be overcome before them go in flight by way of the waste land . and all the people in ai come together to go after them and they go after joshua move away from the town . there be not a man in ai and beth el who do not go out after israel and the town be open and unwatched while they go after israel . and the lord say to joshua let your spear be stretch out against ai for i will give it into your hand . so joshua take up his spear stretch it out in the direction of the town . then the secret force come quickly from their place and run forward when they saw his hand stretch out go into the town and take it and put fire to it straight away . then the men of ai look back saw the smoke of the town go up to heaven and be unable to go this way or that and the people who have go in flight to the waste land be turn back on those who be come after them . and when joshua and all israel saw that the town have be take by the surprise attack and that the smoke of the town have go up turn round they overcome the men of ai . then the other force come out of the town against them so that they be be attack on this side and on that and israel overcame them and let not one of them get away with his life . but the king of ai they make prisoner and take him to joshua . then after the destruction of all the people of ai in the field and in the waste land where they go after them and when all the people have be put to death without mercy all israel go back to ai and put to death all who be in it without mercy . on that day twelve thousand be put to death men and woman all the people of ai . for joshua do not take back his hand with the outstretched spear till the destruction of the people of ai be complete . but the cattle and the good from that town israel take for themselves a the lord have give order to joshua . so joshua give ai to the flame and make it a waste mass of stone for ever a it be to this day . and he put the king of ai to death hang him on a tree till even and when the sun go down joshua give them order to take his body down from the tree and put it in the public place of the town cover it with a great mass of stone which be there to this day . then joshua put up an altar to the lord the god of israel in mount ebal in the way order by moses the servant of the lord a it be record in the book of the law of moses an altar of uncut stone untouched by any iron instrument and on it they make burn offering and peace offering to the lord . and he make there on the stone a copy of the law of moses write it before the eye of the child of israel . and all israel those who be israelite by birth as well a the men from other land live with them and their responsible men and their overseer and judge take their place round the ark in front of the priest the levite whose work it be to take up the ark of the lord 's agreement half of them be station in front of mount gerizim and half in front of mount ebal in agreement with the order for the blessing of the child of israel which moses the servant of the lord have give . and after he give them all the word of the law the blessing and the curse a it be all record in the book of the law reading to all the meeting of israel with the woman and the child and the men from other land who be live among them every word of the order which moses have give .now on hear the news of these thing all the king on the west side of jordan in the hill country and the lowland and by the great sea in front of lebanon the hittite and the amorites the canaanite the perizzites the hivites and the jebusites come together with one purpose to make war against joshua and israel . and the men of gibeon hear what joshua have do to jericho and ai act with deceit get food together a if for a long journey and take old food bag for their ass and old and cracked wine skin keep together with cord and put old stitch up shoe on their foot and old clothing on their back and all the food they have with them be dry and break up . and they come to joshua to the tent circle at gilgal and say to him and to the men of israel we have come from a far country so now make an agreement with u . and the men of israel say to the hivites it may be that you be live among u how then may we make an agreement with you ? and they say to joshua we be your servant . then joshua say to them who be you and where do you come from ? and they say to him your servant have come from a very far country because of the name of the lord your god for the story of his great name and of all he do in egypt have come to our ear and what he do to the two king of the amorites east of jordan to sihon king of heshbon and to og king of bashan at ashtaroth . so the responsible men and all the people of our country say to u take food with you for the journey and go to them and say to them we be your servant so now make an agreement with u . this bread which we have with u for our food we take warm and new from our house when start on our journey to you but now see it have become dry and break up . and these wine skin be new when we put the wine in them and now they be crack a you see and our clothing and our shoe have become old because of our very long journey here . and the men take some of their food without request direction from the lord . so joshua make peace with them and make an agreement with them that they be not to be put to death and the chief of the people take an oath to them . now three day after when they have make this agreement with them they have word that these men be their neighbour live near them . and the child of israel go forward on their journey and on the third day come to their town . now their town be gibeon and chephirah and beeroth and kiriath jearim . and the child of israel do not put them to death because the chief of the people have take an oath to them by the lord the god of israel . and all the people make an outcry against the chief . but all the chief say to the people we have take an oath to them by the lord the god of israel and so we may not put our hand on them . this be what we will do to them we will not put them to death for fear that wrath may come on u because of our oath to them . keep them live and let them be servant cut wood and get water for all the people . and all the people do a the chief have say to them . then joshua sent for them and say to them why have you be false to u say we be very far from you when you be live among u ? now because of this you be curse and you will for ever be our servant cut wood and get water for the house of my god . and answer joshua they say because it come to the ear of your servant that the lord your god have give order to his servant moses to give you all this land and to send destruction on all the people live in it because of you so fear greatly for our life because of you we have do this . and now we be in your hand do to u whatever seem good and right to you . so he keep them safe from the child of israel and do not let them be put to death . and that day joshua make them servant cut wood and get water for the people and for the altar of the lord in the place mark out by him to this day .now when it come to the ear of adoni zedek king of jerusalem that joshua have take ai and have give it up to the curse for a he have do to jericho and it king so he have do to ai and it king and that the people of gibeon have make peace with israel and be live among them he be in great fear because gibeon be a great town like one of the king 's town great than ai and all the men in it be men of war . so adoni zedek king of jerusalem send to hoham king of hebron and to piram king of jarmuth and to japhia king of lachish and to debir king of eglon say come up to me and give me help and let u make an attack on gibeon for they have make peace with joshua and the child of israel . so the five king of the amorites the king of jerusalem the king of hebron the king of jarmuth the king of lachish and the king of eglon be band together and go up with all their army and take up their position before gibeon and make war against it . and the men of gibeon send to joshua to the tent circle at gilgal say be not slow to send help to your servant come up quickly to our support and keep u safe for all the king of the amorites from the hill country have come together against u . so joshua go up from gilgal with all his army and all his men of war . and the lord say to joshua have no fear of them for i have give them into your hand they will all give way before you . so joshua have come up from gilgal all night make a sudden attack on them . and the lord make them full of fear before israel and they put great number of them to death at gibeon and go after them by the way go up to beth horon drive them back to azekah and makkedah and in their flight before israel on the way down from beth horon the lord send down great stone from heaven on them all the way to azekah cause their death those whose death be cause by the stone be more than those whom the child of israel put to death with the sword . it be on the day when the lord give up the amorites into the hand of the child of israel that joshua say to the lord before the eye of israel sun be at rest over gibeon and you o moon in the valley of aijalon . and the sun be at rest and the moon keep it place till the nation have give punishment to their attacker . be it not record in the book of jashar ? so the sun keep it place in the middle of the heaven and be wait and do not go down for the space of a day . and there be no day like that before it or after it when the lord give ear to the voice of a man for the lord be fight for israel . and joshua with all israel go back to the tent circle at gilgal . but these five king go in flight secretly to a hole in the rock at makkedah . and word be give to joshua that the five king have be take in a hole in the rock at makkedah . and joshua say let great stone be roll against the mouth of the hole and let men keep watch by it but do you without wait go after their army attack them from the back do not let them get into their town for the lord your god have give them into your hand . now when joshua and the child of israel have come to the end of their war of complete destruction and have put to death all but a small band who have get safely into the walled town all the people go back to joshua to the tent circle at makkedah in peace and no one say a word against the child of israel . then joshua say take away the stone from the mouth of the hole in the rock and make those five king come out to me . and they do so and make those five king come out of the hole to him the king of jerusalem the king of hebron the king of jarmuth the king of lachish and the king of eglon . and when they have make those king come out to joshua joshua send for all the men of israel and say to the chief of the men of war who have go with him come near and put your foot on the neck of these king . so they come near and put their foot on their neck . and joshua say to them have no fear and do not be trouble be strong and take heart for so will the lord do to all against whom you make war . then joshua have them put to death hang them on five tree where they be till even . and when the sun go down they be take down from the tree by joshua 's order and put into the hole where they have go to be safe and great stone be place at the mouth of the hole where they be to this day . that day joshua take makkedah and put it and it king to the sword every soul in it he give up to the curse without mercy and he do to the king of makkedah a he have do to the king of jericho . then joshua and all israel with him go on from makkedah and come to libnah and make an attack on it and again the lord give it and it king into the hand of israel and he put it and every person in it to the sword till their destruction be complete and he do to it king a he have do to the king of jericho . then joshua and all israel with him go on from libnah to lachish and take up their position against it and make an attack on it and the lord give lachish into the hand of israel and on the second day he take it put it and every person in it to the sword without mercy a he have do to libnah . then horam king of gezer come up to the help of lachish and joshua overcame him and his people put all of them to death . and joshua and all israel with him go on from lachish to eglon and they take up their position against it and make an attack on it and that day they take it put it and every person in it to the sword a he have do to lachish . and joshua and all israel with him go up from eglon to hebron and make an attack on it and take it overcome it and put it and it king and it town and every person in it to the sword a he have do to eglon he put them all to death and give it up to the curse with every person in it . and joshua and all israel with him go on to make an attack on debir and he take it with it king and all it town and he put them to the sword give every person in it to the curse all be put to death a he have do to hebron so he do to debir and it king . so joshua overcame all the land the hill country and the south and the lowland and the mountain slope and all their king all be put to death and every living thing he give up to the curse a the lord the god of israel have give him order . joshua overcome them from kadesh barnea to gaza and all the land of goshen as far a gibeon . and all these king and their land joshua take at the same time because the lord the god of israel be fight for israel . then joshua and all israel with him go back to their tent at gilgal .now jabin king of hazor hearing of these thing send to jobab king of madon and to the king of shimron and to the king of achshaph and to the king on the north in the hill country and in the arabah south of chinneroth and in the lowland and in the highland of dor on the west and to the canaanite on the east and on the west and to the amorites and the hittite and the perizzites and the jebusites in the hill country and the hivites under hermon in the land of mizpah . and they go out they and all their army with them a great people in number like the sand on the seaside with horse and war carriage in great number . and all these king come together and put their force in position at the water of merom to make war on israel . and the lord say to joshua have no fear of them for tomorrow at this time i will give them all up dead before israel you be to have the leg muscle of their horse cut and their war carriage burn with fire . so joshua and all the men of war with him come against them suddenly at the water of merom and make an attack on them . and the lord give them up into the hand of israel and they overcome them drive them back to great zidon and to misrephoth maim and into the valley of mizpeh to the east and they put them all to death no man get away safely . and joshua do to them a the lord have say to him he have the leg muscle of their horse cut and their war carriage burn with fire . at that time joshua go on to take hazor and put it king to the sword for in early time hazor be the chief of all those kingdom . and they put every person in it to death without mercy give every living thing up to the curse and burning hazor . and all the town of these king and all the king joshua take and put them to the sword he give them up to the curse a moses the servant of the lord have say . a for the town make on hill of earth not one be burn by israel but hazor which be burn by joshua . and all the good take from these town and their cattle the child of israel kept for themselves but every man they put to death without mercy till their destruction be complete and there be no one living . a the lord have give order to moses his servant so moses give order to joshua and so joshua do every order which the lord have give to moses be do . so joshua take all that land the hill country and all the south and all the land of goshen and the lowland and the arabah the hill country of israel and it lowland from mount halak which go up to seir as far a baal gad in the valley of lebanon under mount hermon and all their king he overcame and put to death . for a long time joshua make war on all those king . not one town make peace with the child of israel but only the hivites of gibeon they take them all in war . for the lord make them strong in heart to go to war against israel so that he might give them up to the curse without mercy and that destruction might come on them a the lord have give order to moses . and joshua come at that time and put an end to the anakim in the hill country in hebron in debir in anab and in all the hill country of judah and israel joshua give them and their town to the curse . not one of the anakim be to be see in the land of the child of israel only in gaza in gath and in ashdod some be still live . so joshua take all the land a the lord have say to moses and joshua give it to the child of israel a their heritage make division of it among them by their tribe . and the land have rest from war .now these be the king of the land whom the child of israel overcame take a their heritage their land on the east side of jordan from the valley of the arnon to mount hermon and all the arabah to the east sihon king of the amorites who be live in heshbon ruling from aroer which be on the edge of the valley of the arnon and the town in the middle of the valley and half gilead as far a the river jabbok the limit of the child of ammon and the arabah to the sea of chinneroth to the east and to the sea of the arabah that be the salt sea to the east the way to beth jeshimoth and on the south under the slope of pisgah and the land of og king of bashan of the rest of the rephaim who be live at ashtaroth and at edrei ruling in the mountain of hermon and in salecah and in all bashan as far a the limit of the geshurites and the maacathites and half gilead to the land of sihon king of heshbon . moses the servant of the lord and the child of israel overcome them and moses the servant of the lord give their land for a heritage to the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh . and these be the king of the land whom joshua and the child of israel overcame on the west side of jordan from baal gad in the valley of lebanon to mount halak which go up to seir and joshua give the land to the tribe of israel for a heritage in keep with their division in the hill country and in the lowland and in the arabah and on the mountain slope and in the waste land and in the south the hittite the amorites and the canaanite the perizzites the hivites and the jebusites . the king of jericho one the king of ai which be near beth el one the king of jerusalem one the king of hebron one the king of jarmuth one the king of lachish one the king of eglon one the king of gezer one the king of debir one the king of geder one the king of hormah one the king of arad one the king of libnah one the king of adullam one the king of makkedah one the king of beth el one the king of tappuah one the king of hepher one the king of aphek one the king of lassharon one the king of madon one the king of hazor one the king of shimron meron one the king of achshaph one the king of taanach one the king of megiddo one the king of kedesh one the king of jokneam in carmel one the king of dor on the hill of dor one the king of goiim in gilgal one the king of tirzah one all the king together be thirty one .now joshua be old and full of year and the lord say to him you be old and full of year and there be still very much land to be take . this be the land which be still to be take all the country of the philistine and all the geshurites from the shihor which be before egypt to the edge of ekron to the north which be take to be canaanite property the five chief of the philistine the gazites and the ashdodites the ashkelonites the gittites and the ekronites as well a the avvim on the south all the land of the canaanite and mearah which be the property of the zidonians to aphek as far a the limit of the amorites and the land of the gebalites and all lebanon look east from baal gad under mount hermon as far a hamath all the people of the hill country from lebanon to misrephoth maim all the zidonians them will i send out from before the child of israel only make division of it to israel for a heritage a i have give you order to do . so now make division of this land for a heritage to the nine tribe and the half tribe of manasseh . with him the reubenites and the gadites have be give their heritage which moses give them on the east side of jordan a moses the servant of the lord give them from aroer on the edge of the valley of the arnon and the town in the middle of the valley and all the table land from medeba to dibon and all the town of sihon king of the amorites who be rule in heshbon to the limit of the child of ammon and gilead and the land of the geshurites and the maacathites and all mount hermon and all bashan to salecah all the kingdom of og in bashan who be rule in ashtaroth and in edrei he be one of the last of the rephaim these do moses overcome drive them out of their country . however the people of israel do not send out the geshurites or the maacathites but geshur and maacath be live among israel to this day . only to the tribe of levi he give no heritage the offering of the lord the god of israel make by fire be his heritage a he say to him . and moses give their heritage to the tribe of reuben by their family . their limit be from aroer on the edge of the valley of the arnon and the town in the middle of the valley and all the table land by medeba heshbon and all her town in the table land dibon and bamoth baal and beth baal meon and jahaz and kedemoth and mephaath and kiriathaim and sibmah and zereth shahar in the mountain of the valley and beth peor and the slope of pisgah and beth jeshimoth and all the town of the table land and all the kingdom of sihon king of the amorites who be rule in heshbon whom moses overcome together with the chief of midian evi and rekem and zur and hur and reba the chief of sihon who be live in the land . and balaam the son of beor the prophet the child of israel put to death with the sword . and the limit of the child of reuben be the edge of jordan . this be the heritage of the child of reuben by their family with it town and it unwalled place . and moses give their heritage to the tribe of gad by their family . and their limit be jazer and all the town of gilead and half the land of the child of ammon to aroer before rabbah and from heshbon to ramath mizpeh and betonim and from mahanaim to the edge of debir and in the valley beth haram and beth nimrah and succoth and zaphon the rest of the kingdom of sihon king of heshbon have jordan for it limit to the end of the sea of chinnereth on the east side of jordan . this be the heritage of the child of gad by their family with it town and it unwalled place and moses give their heritage to the half tribe of manasseh by their family . and their limit be from mahanaim all bashan all the kingdom of og king of bashan and all havvoth jair in bashan sixty town and half gilead and ashtaroth and edrei town of the kingdom of og in bashan be for the child of machir the son of manasseh for half of the child of machir by their family . these be the heritage of which moses make distribution in the lowland of moab on the other side of jordan in jericho to the east . but to the tribe of levi moses give no heritage the lord the god of israel be their heritage a he say to them .and these be the heritage which the child of israel take in the land of canaan which eleazar the priest and joshua the son of nun and the head of the tribe of the child of israel give out to them their heritage by the lord 's decision a he give order by moses for the nine tribe and the half tribe . for moses have give their heritage to the two tribe and the half tribe on the other side of jordan but to the levite he give no heritage among them . because the child of joseph be two tribe manasseh and ephraim and they give the levite no part in the land only town for their living place with the grass land for their cattle and for their property . a the lord have give order to moses so the people of israel do and they make division of the land . then the child of judah go to joshua in gilgal and caleb the son of jephunneh the kenizzite say to him you have knowledge of what the lord say to moses the man of god about me and about you in kadesh barnea . i be forty year old when moses the servant of the lord send me from kadesh barnea to make a search through the land and the account which i give him be in keep with his desire . my brother however who go up with me make the heart of the people like water but i be true to the lord with all my heart . and on that day moses take an oath say truly the land where your foot have be place will become a heritage for you and your child for ever because you have be true to the lord your god with all your heart . and now a you see the lord have keep me safe these forty five year from the time when the lord say this to moses while israel be wander in the waste land and now i be eighty five year old . and still i be a strong today a i be when moses send me out a my strength be then so be it now for war and for all the business of life . so now give me this hill country name by the lord at that time for you have an account of it then how the anakim be there and great walled town it may be that the lord will be with me and i will be able to take their land a the lord say . and joshua give him his blessing and he give hebron to caleb the son of jephunneh for his heritage . so hebron become the heritage of caleb the son of jephunneh the kenizzite to this day because with all his heart he be true to the lord the god of israel . in early time the name of hebron have be kiriath arba name after arba the great of the anakim . and the land have rest from war .now the part of the land mark out for the child of judah by family go up to the edge of edom as far a the waste land of zin to the south to the farthest point of it on the south . their south limit be from the farthest part of the salt sea from the inlet look to the south from there it go south of the slope up to akrabbim and on to zin then south past kadesh barnea and on by hezron and up to addar turn in the direction of karka then on to azmon end at the stream of egypt and the end of the limit be at the sea this will be your limit on the south . and the east limit be the salt sea as far a the end of jordan . and the limit of the north part of the land be from the inlet of the sea at the end of jordan then the line go up to beth hoglah past the north of beth arabah and up to the stone of bohan the son of reuben then the line go up to debir from the valley of achor and so to the north in the direction of gilgal which be opposite the slope up to adummim on the south side of the river and the line go on to the water of en shemesh end at en rogel then the line go up by the valley of the son of hinnom to the south side of the jebusite which be jerusalem then up to the top of the mountain in front of the valley of hinnom to the west which be at the farthest point of the valley of rephaim on the north and the limit be mark out from the top of the mountain to the fountain of the water of nephtoah and out to the town of mount ephron as far a baalah which be kiriath jearim then turn west the line go from baalah to mount seir and on to the side of mount jearim which be chesalon on the north then down to beth shemesh and on past timnah and out to the side of ekron to the north then it be mark out to shikkeron and on to mount baalah end at jabneel the end of the line be at the sea . and the limit on the west be the edge of the great sea . this be the line go round the land mark out for the child of judah by their family . and to caleb the son of jephunneh he give a part among the child of judah a the lord have give order to joshua that be kiriath arba name after arba the father of anak which be hebron . and the three son of anak sheshai and ahiman and talmai the child of anak be force out from there by caleb . from there he go up against the people of debir now the name of debir before that be kiriath sepher . and caleb say i will give achsah my daughter a wife to the man who overcome kiriath sepher and take it . and othniel the son of kenaz caleb 's brother take it so he give him his daughter achsah for his wife . now when she come to him he put into her mind the idea of request a field from her father and she get down from her as and caleb say to her what be it ? and she say give me a blessing because you have put me in dry south land now give me spring of water . so he give her the high spring and the low spring . this be the heritage of the tribe of judah by their family . the farthest town of the tribe of judah in the direction of the limit of edom to the south be kabzeel and eder and jagur and kinah and dimonah and adadah and kedesh and hazor and ithnan ziph and telem and bealoth and hazor hadattah and kerioth hezron which be hazor amam and shema and moladah and hazar gaddah and heshmon and beth pelet and hazar shual and beer sheba and biziothiah baalah and iim and ezem and eltolad and chesil and hormah and ziklag and madmannah and sansannah and lebaoth and shilhim and ain and rimmon all the town be twenty nine with their unwalled place . in the lowland eshtaol and zorah and ashnah and zanoah and en gannim tappuah and enam jarmuth and adullam socoh and azekah and shaaraim and adithaim and gederah and gederothaim fourteen town with their unwalled place . zenan and hadashah and migdal gad and dilan and mizpeh and joktheel lachish and bozkath and eglon and cabbon and lahmas and chithlish and gederoth beth dagon and naamah and makkedah sixteen town with their unwalled place . libnah and ether and ashan and iphtah and ashnah and nezib and keilah and achzib and mareshah nine town with their unwalled place . ekron with her daughter town and her unwalled place from ekron to the sea all the town by the side of ashdod with their unwalled place . ashdod with her daughter town and her unwalled place gaza with her daughter town and her unwalled place to the stream of egypt with the great sea a a limit . and in the hill country shamir and jattir and socoh and dannah and kiriath sannah which be debir and anab and eshtemoh and anim and goshen and holon and giloh eleven town with their unwalled place . arab and dumah and eshan and janim and beth tappuah and aphekah and humtah and kiriath arba which be hebron and zior nine town with their unwalled place . maon carmel and ziph and jutah and jezreel and jokdeam and zanoah kain gibeah and timnah ten town with their unwalled place . halhul beth zur and gedor and maarath and beth anoth and eltekon six town with their unwalled place . kiriath baal which be kiriath jearim and rabbah two town with their unwalled place . in the waste land beth arabah middin and secacah and nibshan and the town of salt and en gedi six town with their unwalled place . and a for the jebusites live in jerusalem the child of judah be unable to make them go out but the jebusites be live with the child of judah at jerusalem to this day .and the limit of the land mark out for the child of joseph go out from jordan at jericho at the water of jericho on the east in the waste land go up from jericho through the hill country to beth el and it go out from beth el to luz and on as far a the limit of the archites to ataroth and it go down to the west to the limit of the japhletites to the limit of beth horon the low as far a gezer end at the sea . and the child of joseph manasseh and ephraim take their heritage . and the limit of the land of the child of ephraim by their family be mark out in this way the limit of their heritage to the east be ataroth addar to beth horon the high the line go out to the west at michmethath on the north then turn to the east to taanath shiloh go past it on the east of janoah and from janoah down to ataroth and to naarah and touch jericho it go on to jordan . from tappuah the line go on to the west to the river of kanah end at the sea . this be the heritage of the child of ephraim by their family together with the town mark out for the child of ephraim in the heritage of manasseh all the town with their unwalled place . and the canaanite who be live in gezer be not force out but the canaanite have be live among ephraim to this day a servant do forced work .and this be the part mark out for the tribe of manasseh because he be the old son of joseph . a for machir the old son of manasseh the father of gilead because he be a man of war he have gilead and bashan . and a for the rest of the child of manasseh their heritage be give to them by family for the child of abiezer and for the child of helek and for the child of asriel and for the child of shechem and for the child of hepher and for the child of shemida these be the male child of manasseh the son of joseph by their family . but zelophehad the son of hepher the son of gilead the son of machir the son of manasseh have no son but only daughter and these be the name of his daughter mahlah and noah hoglah milcah and tirzah . and they come before eleazar the priest and joshua the son of nun and before the chief say the lord give order to moses to give u a heritage among our brother so in agreement with the order of the lord he give them a heritage among their father 's brother . and ten part be give to manasseh in addition to the land of gilead and bashan which be on the other side of jordan because the daughter of manasseh have a heritage among his son and the land of gilead be the property of the other son of manasseh . and the limit of manasseh 's land be from asher to michmethath which be before shechem the line go on to the right hand to the people of en tappuah . the land of tappuah be the property of manasseh but tappuah on the edge of manasseh be the property of the child of ephraim . and the limit go down to the stream kanah to the south of the stream these town be ephraim 's among the town of manasseh manasseh 's limit be on the north side of the stream end at the sea to the south it be ephraim 's and to the north it be manasseh 's and the sea be his limit and they be touch asher on the north and issachar on the east . in issachar and asher manasseh have beth shean and it daughter town and ibleam and it daughter town and the people of dor and it daughter town and the people of en dor and it daughter town and the people of taanach and it daughter town and the people of megiddo and it daughter town that be the three hill . but the child of manasseh be not able to make the people of those town go out but the canaanite would go on living in that land . and when the child of israel have become strong they put the canaanite to forced work in place of drive them out . then the child of joseph say to joshua why have you give me only one part and one stretch of land for my heritage ? for through the blessing give to me by the lord up to now i be a great people . then joshua say to them if you be such a great people go up into the woodland clear a place there for yourselves in the land of the perizzites and the rephaim if the hill country of ephraim be not wide enough for you . and the child of joseph say the hill country be not enough for u and all the canaanite live in the valley have iron war carriage those in beth shean and it town as well a those in the valley of jezreel . then joshua say to the child of joseph to ephraim and manasseh you be a great people and have great power you be not to have one property only for the hill country of gilead will be yours ... the woodland and cut down ... it outskirt will be yours ... get the canaanite out for they have iron war carriage ... strong .and all the meeting of the child of israel come together at shiloh and put up the tent of meeting there and the land be crush before them . but there be still seven tribe among the child of israel who have not take up their heritage . then joshua say to the child of israel why be you so slow to go in and take up your heritage in the land which the lord the god of your father have give you ? take from among you three men from every tribe and i will send them to go through the land and make a record of it for distribution a their heritage then let them come back to me . and let them make division of it into seven part let judah keep inside his limit on the south and let the child of joseph keep inside their limit on the north . and you be to have the land mark out in seven part and come back to me with the record and i will make the distribution for you here by the decision of the lord our god . for the levite have no part among you to be the lord 's priest be their heritage and gad and reuben and the half tribe of manasseh have have their heritage on the east side of jordan give to them by moses the servant of the lord . so the men get up and go and joshua give order to those who go to make a record of the land say go up and down through the land and make a record of it and come back here to me and i will make the distribution for you here by the decision of the lord in shiloh . so the men go travel through the land and make a record of it by town in seven part in a book and come back to joshua to the tent circle at shiloh . and joshua make the distribution for them in shiloh by the decision of the lord mark out the land for the child of israel by their division . and the first heritage come out for the tribe of benjamin by their family and the limit of their heritage go between the child of judah and the child of joseph . and their limit on the north be from the jordan and the line go up to the side of jericho on the north and through the hill country to the west end at the waste land of beth aven . and from there the line go south to luz to the side of luz which be beth el then down to ataroth addar by the mountain to the south of beth horon the low . and the limit be mark a coming round to the south on the west side from the mountain which be south of beth horon and end at kiriath baal which be kiriath jearim a town of the child of judah this be the west part . and the south part be from the farthest point of kiriath jearim and the line go out to the west to the fountain of the water of nephtoah and the line go down to the farthest part of the mountain face the valley of the son of hinnom which be on the north of the valley of rephaim from there it go down to the valley of hinnom to the side of the jebusite on the south as far a en rogel and it go to en shemesh and on to geliloth opposite the way up to adummim and it go down to the stone of bohan the son of reuben and it go on to the side face the arabah to the north and down to the arabah and on to the north side of beth hoglah end at the north inlet of the salt sea at the south end of jordan this be their limit on the south . and the limit of the east part be the jordan . this be the heritage of the child of benjamin mark out for their family by these limit on all side . and the town of the child of benjamin give to them in the order of their family be jericho and beth hoglah and emek kezziz and beth arabah and zemaraim and beth el and avvim and parah and ophrah and chephar ammoni and ophni and geba twelve town with their unwalled place gibeon and ramah and beeroth and mizpeh and chephirah and mozah and rekem and irpeel and taralah and zela eleph and the jebusite which be jerusalem gibeath and kiriath fourteen town with their unwalled place . this be the heritage of the child of benjamin by their family .and the second heritage come out for the tribe of simeon by their family and their heritage be in the middle of the heritage of the child of judah . and they have for their heritage beer sheba and shema and moladah and hazar shual and balah and ezem and eltolad and bethul and hormah and ziklag and beth marcaboth and hazar susah and beth lebaoth and sharuhen thirteen town with their unwalled place ain rimmon and ether and ashan four town with their unwalled place and all the unwalled place round about these town as far a baalath beer ramah to the south . this be the heritage of the tribe of simeon by their family . the heritage of simeon be take out of judah 's stretch of land for judah 's part be more than they have need of so the heritage of the child of simeon be inside their heritage . and the third heritage come out for zebulun by their family the limit of their heritage be as far a sarid and their limit go up to the west to maralah stretch to dabbesheth and to the stream in front of jokneam then turn east from sarid to the limit of chisloth tabor it go out to daberath and up to japhia and from there it go on east to gath hepher to eth kazin end at rimmon which go as far a neah and the line go round it on the north to hannathon end at the valley of iphtah el and kattath and nahalal and shimron and idalah and beth lehem twelve town with their unwalled place . this be the heritage of the child of zebulun by their family these town with their unwalled place . for issachar the fourth heritage come out for the child of issachar by their family and their limit be to jezreel and chesulloth and shunem and hapharaim and shion and anaharath and rabbith and kishion and ebez and remeth and en gannim and en haddah and beth pazzez and their limit go as far a tabor and shahazimah and beth shemesh end at jordan sixteen town with their unwalled place . this be the heritage of the tribe of the child of issachar by their family these town with their unwalled place . and the fifth heritage come out for the tribe of asher by their family . and their limit be helkath and hali and beten and achshaph and alammelech and amad and mishal stretch to carmel on the west and shihor libnath turn to the east to beth dagon and stretch to zebulun and the valley of iphtah el as far a beth emek and neiel to the north on the left it go as far a cabul and ebron and rehob and hammon and kanah to great zidon and the limit go round to ramah and the walled town of tyre and hosah end at the sea by heleb and achzib and ummah and aphek and rehob twenty two town with their unwalled place . this be the heritage of the tribe of the child of asher by their family these town with their unwalled place . for the child of naphtali the sixth heritage come out for the child of naphtali by their family and their limit be from heleph from the oak tree in zaanannim and adami hannekeb and jabneel as far a lakkum end at jordan and turn west to aznoth tabor the limit go out from there to hukkok stretch to zebulun on the south and asher on the west and judah at jordan on the east . and the walled town be ziddim zer and hammath rakkath and chinnereth and adamah and ramah and hazor and kedesh and edrei and en hazor and iron and migdal el horem and beth anath and beth shemesh nineteen town with their unwalled place . this be the heritage of the tribe of the child of naphtali by their family these town with their unwalled place . for the tribe of dan by their family the seventh heritage come out and the limit of their heritage be zorah and eshtaol and ir shemesh and shaalabbin and aijalon and ithlah and elon and timnah and ekron and eltekeh and gibbethon and baalath and jehud and bene berak and gath rimmon and on the west be ... opposite joppa . but the limit of the child of dan be not wide enough for them so the child of dan go up and make war on leshem and take it put it to the sword without mercy and they take it for their heritage and make a place for themselves there give it the name of leshem dan after the name of their father dan . this be the heritage of the tribe of the child of dan by their family these town with their unwalled place . so the distribution of the land and it limit be complete and the child of israel give joshua the son of nun a heritage among them by the order of the lord they give him the town for which he make request timnath serah in the hill country of ephraim there after build the town he make his living place . these be the heritage which eleazar the priest and joshua the son of nun and the head of family of the tribe of the child of israel give out at shiloh by the decision of the lord at the door of the tent of meeting . so the distribution of the land be complete .and the lord say to joshua say to the child of israel let certain town be mark out a safe place a i say to you by the mouth of moses so that any man who in error and without design have take the life of another may go in flight to them and they will be safe place for you from him who have the right of punishment for blood . and if anyone go in flight to one of those town and come into the public place of the town and put his cause before the responsible men of the town they will take him into the town and give him a place among them where he may be safe . and if the one who have the right of punishment come after him they be not to give the taker of life up to him because he be the cause of his neighbour 's death without design it and not in hate . and he be to go on living in that town till he have to come before the meeting of the people to be judge till the death of him who be high priest at that time then the taker of life may come back to his town and to his house to the town from which he have go in flight . so they make selection of kedesh in galilee in the hill country of naphtali and shechem in the hill country of ephraim and kiriath arba which be hebron in the hill country of judah . and on the east side of jordan at jericho they make selection of bezer in the waste land in the table land out of the tribe of reuben and ramoth in gilead out of the tribe of gad and golan in bashan out of the tribe of manasseh . these be the town mark out for all the child of israel and for the man from a strange country living among them so that anyone cause the death of another in error might go in flight there and not be put to death by him who have the right of punishment for blood till he have come before the meeting of the people .then the head of the family of the levite come to eleazar the priest and joshua the son of nun and to the head of family of the tribe of the child of israel and say to them in shiloh in the land of canaan the lord give order by moses that we be to have town for living in with their grass land for our cattle . and the child of israel out of their heritage give to the levite these town with their grass land by the order of the lord . and the heritage come out for the family of the kohathites the child of aaron the priest who be of the levite be give thirteen town from the tribe of judah simeon and benjamin . the rest of the child of kohath by their family be give ten town from the tribe of ephraim and dan and the half tribe of manasseh . the child of gershon by their family be give thirteen town from the tribe of issachar and asher and naphtali and the half tribe of manasseh which be in bashan . the child of merari by their family be give twelve town from the tribe of reuben and gad and zebulun . all these town with their grass land the child of israel give by the decision of the lord to the levite a the lord have give order by moses . from the tribe of the child of judah and the child of simeon they give these town list here by name these be for the child of aaron among the family of the kohathites of the child of levi for they come first in the distribution . they give them kiriath arba the town of arba the father of anak which be hebron in the hill country of judah with it grass land . but the open country round the town and it unwalled place they give to caleb the son of jephunneh a his property . and to the child of aaron the priest they give hebron with it grass land the town where the taker of life might be safe and libnah with it grass land and jattir with it grass land and eshtemoa with it grass land and holon with it grass land and debir with it grass land and ain and juttah and beth shemesh with their grass land nine town from those two tribe . and from the tribe of benjamin they give gibeon and geba with their grass land anathoth and almon with their grass land four town . thirteen town with their grass land be give to the child of aaron the priest . the rest of the family of the child of kohath the levite be give town from the tribe of ephraim . and they give them shechem with it grass land in the hill country of ephraim the town where the taker of life might be safe and gezer with it grass land and kibzaim and beth horon with their grass land four town . and from the tribe of dan elteke and gibbethon with their grass land aijalon and gath rimmon with their grass land four town . and from the half tribe of manasseh taanach and gath rimmon with their grass land two town . all the town of the rest of the family of the child of kohath be ten with their grass land . and to the child of gershon of the family of the levite they give from the half tribe of manasseh golan in bashan with it grass land the town where the taker of life might be safe and ashtaroth with it grass land two town . and from the tribe of issachar kishion and daberath with their grass land jarmuth and en gannim with their grass land four town . and from the tribe of asher mishal and abdon with their grass land helkath and rehob with their grass land four town . and from the tribe of naphtali kedesh in galilee with it grass land the town where the taker of life might be safe and hammoth dor and kartan with their grass land three town . all the town of the gershonites with their family be thirteen with their grass land . and to the rest of the levite that be the family of the child of merari they give from the tribe of zebulun jokneam and kartah with their grass land dimnah and nahalal with their grass land four town . and from the tribe of reuben bezer and jahaz with their grass land kedemoth and mephaath with their grass land four town . and from the tribe of gad ramoth in gilead the town where the taker of life might be safe and mahanaim with their grass land heshbon and jazer with their grass land four town . all these town be give to the child of merari by their family that be the rest of the family of the levite and their heritage be twelve town . all the town of the levite among the heritage of the child of israel be forty eight town with their grass land . every one of these town have grass land round it . so the lord give to israel all the land which he give by oath to their father so it become their heritage and their living place . and the lord give them peace on every side a he have say to their father all those who be against them give way before them for the lord give them all up into their hand . the lord keep faith with the house of israel about all the good which he say he would do for them and all his word come true .then joshua send for the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh and say to them you have keep all the order of moses the lord 's servant and have do everything i give you order to do you have now be with your brother for a long time till this day you have be do the order of the lord your god . and now the lord your god have give your brother rest a he say so now you may go back to your tent to the land of your heritage which moses the lord 's servant give to you on the other side of jordan . only take great care to do the order and the law which moses the lord 's servant give you to have love for the lord your god and to go in all his way and to keep his law and to be true to him and to be his servant with all your heart and with all your soul . then joshua give them his blessing and send them away and they go back to their tent . now to the one half of the tribe of manasseh moses have give a heritage in bashan but to the other half joshua give a heritage among their brother on the west side of jordan . now when joshua send them away to their tent he give them his blessing and say to them go back with much wealth to your tent and with very much cattle with silver and gold and brass and iron and with a very great store of clothe give your brother a part of the good take in the war . so reuben and gad and the half tribe of manasseh go back part from the child of israel at shiloh in the land of canaan to go to the land of gilead to the land of their heritage which have be give to them by the lord 's order to moses . now when they come to the country by jordan in the land of canaan the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh put up there by jordan a great altar see from far . and news come to the child of israel see the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh have put up an altar opposite the land of canaan in the country by jordan on the side which be israel 's . then all the meeting of the child of israel hearing this come together at shiloh to go up against them to war . and the child of israel sent phinehas the son of eleazar the priest to the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh to the land of gilead and with him they send ten chief one for every tribe of the child of israel every one of them the head of his house among the family of israel . and they come to the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh to the land of gilead and say to them this be what all the meeting of the people of the lord have say what be this wrong which you have do against the god of israel turn back this day from the lord and building an altar for yourselves and be false to the lord ? be not the sin of baal peor great enough from which we be not clear even to this day though punishment come on the people of the lord that now you be turn back from the lord ? and because you be false to him today tomorrow his wrath will be let loose on all the people of israel . but if the land you now have be unclean come over into the lord 's land where his house be and take up your heritage among u but do not be false to the lord and to u by build yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of the lord our god . do not achan the son of zerah do wrong about the cursed thing cause wrath to come on all the people of israel ? and not on him only come the punishment of death . then the child of reuben and the child of gad and the half tribe of manasseh say in answer to the head of the family of israel god even god the lord god even god the lord he see and israel will see if it be in pride or in sin against the lord that we have make ourselves an altar be false to the lord keep u not safe from death this day and if for the purpose of offer burn offering on it and meal offering or peace offering let the lord himself send punishment for it and if we have not in fact do this designedly and with purpose have in our mind the fear that in time to come your child might say to our child what have you to do with the lord the god of israel ? for the lord have make jordan a line of division between u and you the child of reuben and the child of gad you have no part in the lord so your child will make our child give up fear the lord . so we say let u now make an altar for ourselves not for burn offering or for the offering of beast but to be a witness between u and you and between the future generation that we have the right of worship the lord with our burn offering and our offering of beast and our peace offering so that your child will not be able to say to our child in time to come you have no part in the lord . for we say to ourselves if they say this to u or to future generation then we will say see this copy of the lord 's altar which our father make not for burn offering or offering of beast but for a witness between u and you . never let it be say that we be false to the lord turn back this day from him and build an altar for burn offering and meal offering and offering of beast in addition to the altar of the lord our god which be before his house . then phinehas the priest and the chief of the meeting and the head of the family of israel who be with him hear what the child of reuben and the child of gad and the child of manasseh say be pleased . and phinehas the son of eleazar the priest say to the child of reuben and the child of gad and the child of manasseh now we be certain that the lord be among u because you have not do this wrong against the lord and you have keep u from fall into the hand of the lord . then phinehas the son of eleazar the priest and the chief go back from the land of gilead from the child of reuben and the child of gad and come to the child of israel in canaan and give them the news . and the child of israel be pleased about this and they give praise to god and have no more thought of go to war against the child of reuben and the child of gad for the destruction of their land . and the child of reuben and the child of gad give to that altar the name of ed . for they say it be a witness between u that the lord be god .now after a long time when the lord have give israel rest from war on every side and joshua be old and full of year joshua send for all israel for their responsible men and their chief and their judge and their overseer and say to them i be old and full of year you have see everything the lord your god have do to all these nation because of you for it be the lord your god who have be fight for you . now i have give to you a the heritage of your tribe all these nation which be still in the land together with those cut off by me from jordan as far a the great sea on the west . the lord your god will send them away by force drive them out before you and you be to take their land for your heritage a the lord your god say to you . so be very strong to keep and do whatever be record in the book of the law of moses not turn away from it to the right or to the left have nothing to do with these nation who still be live among you let not their god be name by you or use in your oath do not be their servant or give them worship but be true to the lord your god a you have be till this day . for the lord have send out from before you nations great and strong and they have all give way before you till this day . one man of you be able to put to flight a thousand for it be the lord your god who be fight for you a he have say to you . so keep watch on yourselves and see that you have love for the lord your god . for if you go back join yourselves to the rest of these nation who be still among you get marry to them and live with them and they with you then you may be certain that the lord your god will not go on drive these nation out from before you but they will become a danger and a cause of sin to you a whip for your side and thorn in your eye till you be cut off from this good land which the lord your god have give you . now i be about to go the way of all the earth and you have see and be certain all of you in your heart and soul that in all the good thing which the lord say about you he have keep faith with you everything have come true for you . and you will see that a all the good thing which the lord your god undertook to do for you have come to you so the lord will send down on you all the evil thing till he have make your destruction complete and you be cut off from the good land which the lord your god have give you . if the agreement of the lord your god which be give to you by his order be broken and you become the servant of other god and give them worship then the wrath of the lord will be burn against you and you will quickly be cut off from the good land which he have give you .then joshua get all the tribe of israel together at shechem and he send for the responsible men of israel and their chief and their judge and their overseer and they take their place before god . and joshua say to all the people these be the word of the lord the god of israel in the past your father terah the father of abraham and the father of nahor be live on the other side of the river and they be worship other god . and i take your father abraham from the other side of the river guiding him through all the land of canaan i make his offspring great in number and give him isaac . and to isaac i give jacob and esau to esau i give mount seir a his heritage but jacob and his child go down to egypt . and i sent moses and aaron trouble egypt by all the sign i do among them and after that i take you out . i take your father out of egypt and you come to the red sea and the egyptian come after your father to the red sea with their war carriage and their horseman . and at their cry the lord make it dark between you and the egyptian and make the sea go over them cover them with it water your eye have see what i do in egypt then for a long time you be live in the waste land . and i take you into the land of the amorites on the other side of jordan and they make war on you and i give them into your hand and you take their land and i send destruction on them before you . then balak the son of zippor king of moab go up to war against israel and he send for balaam the son of beor to put a curse on you but i do not give ear to balaam and so he go on blessing you and i keep you safe from him . then you go over jordan and come to jericho and the men of jericho make war on you the amorites and the perizzites and the canaanite and the hittite and the girgashites and the hivites and the jebusites and i give them up into your hand . and i send the hornet before you drive out the two king of the amorites before you not with your sword and your bow . and i give you a land on which you have do no work and town not of your building and you be now live in them and your food come from vine garden and olive garden not of your planting . so now go in fear of the lord and be his servant with true heart put away the god worship by your father across the river and in egypt and be servant of the lord . and if it seem evil to you to be the servant of the lord make the decision this day whose servant you will be of the god whose servant your father be across the river or of the god of the amorites in whose land you be live but i and my house will be the servant of the lord . then the people in answer say never will we give up the lord to be the servant of other god for it be the lord our god who have take u and our father out of the land of egypt out of the prison house and who do all those great sign before our eye and keep u safe on all our journey and among all the people through whom we go and the lord send out from before u all the people the amorites live in the land so we will be the servant of the lord for he be our god . and joshua say to the people you be not able to be the servant of the lord for he be a holy god a god who will not let his honour be give to another he will have no mercy on your wrongdoing or your sin . if you be turn away from the lord and become the servant of strange god then turn against you he will do you evil cut you off after he have do you good . and the people say to joshua no ! but we will be the servant of the lord . and joshua say to the people you be witness against yourselves that you have make the decision to be the servant of the lord . and they say we be witness . then he say put away the strange god among you turn your heart to the lord the god of israel . and the people say to joshua we will be the servant of the lord our god and we will give ear to his voice . so joshua make an agreement with the people that day and give them a rule and a law in shechem . and joshua put these word on record write them in the book of the law of god and he take a great stone and put it up there under the oak tree which be in the holy place of the lord . and joshua say to all the people see now this stone be to be a witness against u for all the word of the lord have be say to u in it hearing so it will be a witness against you if you be false to the lord your god . then joshua let the people go away every man to his heritage . now after these thing the death of joshua the son of nun the servant of the lord take place he be then a hundred and ten year old . and they put his body in the earth in the land of his heritage in timnath serah in the hill country of ephraim to the north of mount gaash . and israel be true to the lord all the day of joshua and all the day of the old men who be still live after joshua 's death and have see what the lord have do for israel . and the bone of joseph which the child of israel have take up from egypt they put in the earth in shechem in the property which jacob have get from the son of hamor the father of shechem for a hundred shekel and they become the heritage of the child of joseph . then the death of eleazar the son of aaron take place and his body be put in the earth in the hill of phinehas his son which have be give to him in the hill country of ephraim .now after the death of joshua the child of israel make request to the lord say who be to go up first to make war for u against the canaanite ? and the lord say judah be to go up see i have give the land into his hand . then judah say to simeon his brother come up with me into my heritage so that we may make war against the canaanite and i will then go with you into your heritage . so simeon go with him . and judah go up and the lord give the canaanite and the perizzites into their hand and they overcome ten thousand of them in bezek . and they come across adoni zedek and make war on him and they overcome the canaanite and the perizzites . but adoni zedek go in flight and they go after him and overtake him and have his thumb and his great toe cut off . and adoni zedek say seventy king whose thumb and great toe have be cut off get broken meat under my table a i have do so have god do to me in full . and they take him to jerusalem and he come to his end there . then the child of judah make an attack on jerusalem and take it burn down the town after they have put it people to the sword without mercy . after that the child of judah go down to make war on the canaanite live in the hill country and in the south and in the lowland . and caleb go against the canaanite of hebron now in early time hebron be name kiriath arba and he put sheshai and ahiman and talmai to the sword . and from there he go up against the people of debir . now the name of debir in early time be kiriath sepher . and caleb say i will give achsah my daughter a wife to the man who overcome kiriath sepher and take it . and othniel the son of kenaz caleb 's young brother take it so he give him his daughter achsah for his wife . now when she come to him he put into her mind the idea of request a field from her father and she get down from her as and caleb say to her what be it ? and she say to him give me a blessing because you have put me in a dry south land now give me spring of water . so caleb give her the high spring and the low spring . now hobab the kenite moses ' father in law have come up out of the town of palm tree with the child of judah into the waste land of arad and he go and be live among the amalekites and judah go with simeon his brother and overcome the canaanite live in zephath and put it under the curse and he give the town the name of hormah . then judah take gaza and it limit and ashkelon and it limit and ekron and it limit . and the lord be with judah and he take the hill country for his heritage but he be unable to make the people of the valley go out for they have war carriage of iron . and they give hebron to caleb a moses have say and he take the land of the three son of anak drive them out from there . and the child of judah do not make the jebusites who be live in jerusalem go out the jebusites be still live with the child of benjamin in jerusalem . and the family of joseph go up against beth el and the lord be with them . so they send men to make a search round beth el . now the name of the town in early time be luz . and the watcher saw a man come out of the town and say to him if you will make clear to u the way into the town we will be kind to you . so he make clear to them the way into the town and they put it to the sword but they let the man and all his family get away safe . and he go into the land of the hittite build a town there and name it luz which be it name to this day . and manasseh do not take away the land of the people of beth shean and it daughter town or of taanach and it daughter town or of the people of dor and it daughter town or of the people of ibleam and it daughter town or of the people of megiddo and it daughter town drive them out but the canaanite would go on living in that land . and whenever israel become strong they put the canaanite to force work without drive them out completely . and ephraim do not make the canaanite who be live in gezer go out but the canaanite go on living in gezer among them . zebulun do not make the people of kitron or the people of nahalol go out but the canaanite go on living among them and be put to force work . and asher do not take the land of the people of acco or zidon or ahlab or achzib or helbah or aphik or rehob drive them out but the asherites go on living among the canaanite the people of the land without drive them out . naphtali do not take the land of the people of beth shemesh or of beth anath drive them out but he be live among the canaanite in the land however the people of beth shemesh and beth anath be put to force work . and the child of dan be force into the hill country by the amorites who would not let them come down into the valley for the amorites would go on living in mount here in aijalon and in shaalbim but the child of joseph become strong than they and put them to force work . and the limit of the edomites go from the slope of akrabbim from sela and up .now the angel of the lord come up from gilgal to bochim . and he say i take you out of egypt guide you into the land which i give by an oath to your father and i say my agreement with you will never be break by me and you be to make no agreement with the people of this land you be to see that their altar be break down but you have not give ear to my voice what have you do ? and so i have say i will not send them out from before you but they will be a danger to you and their god will be a cause of fall to you . now on hear these word which the angel of the lord say to all the child of israel the people give themselves up to loud cry and weeping . and they give that place the name of bochim and make offering there to the lord . and joshua let the people go away and the child of israel go every man to his heritage to take the land for themselves . and the people be true to the lord all the day of joshua and all the day of the responsible men who be still live after the death of joshua and have see all the great work of the lord which he have do for israel . and death come to joshua the son of nun the servant of the lord he be a hundred and ten year old . and they put his body in the earth in the land of his heritage in timnath here in the hill country of ephraim to the north of mount gaash . and in time death overtook all that generation and another generation come after them have no knowledge of the lord or of the thing which he have do for israel . and the child of israel do evil in the eye of the lord and become servant to the baal and they give up the lord the god of their father who have take them out of the land of egypt and go after other god the god of the people round about them worship them and move the lord to wrath . and they give up the lord and become the servant of baal and the astarte . and the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and he give them up into the hand of those who violently take their property and into the hand of their hater all round them so that they be force to give way before them . wherever they go out the hand of the lord be against them for evil a the lord have take his oath it would be and thing become very hard for them . then the lord give them judge a their saviour from the hand of those who be cruel to them . but still they would not give ear to their judge but go after other god and give them worship quickly turn from the way in which their father have go keep the order of the lord but they do not do so . and whenever the lord give them judge then the lord be with the judge and be their saviour from the hand of their hater all the day of the judge for the lord be move by their cry of grief because of those who be cruel to them . but whenever the judge be dead they go back and do more evil than their father go after other god to be their servant and their worshipper give up nothing of their sin and their hard hearted way . and the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and he say because this nation have not be true to my agreement which i make with their father and have not give ear to my voice from now on i will not go on drive out from before them any of the nation which at the death of joshua be still live in this land in order to put israel to the test and see if they will keep the way of the lord walking in it a their father do or not . so the lord let those nation go on living in the land not drive them out quickly and do not give them up into the hand of joshua .now these be the nation which the lord keep in the land for the purpose of test israel by them all those who have have no experience of all the war of canaan only because of the generation of the child of israel for the purpose of teach them war only those who up till then have no experience of it the five chief of the philistine and all the canaanite and the zidonians and the hivites live in mount lebanon from the mountain baal hermon as far a hamath for the purpose of test israel by them to see if they would give ear to the order of the lord which he have give to their father by the hand of moses . now the child of israel be live among the canaanite the hittite and the amorites and the perizzites and the hivites and the jebusites and they take a wife the daughter of these nation and give their daughter to their son and become servant to their god . and the child of israel do evil in the eye of the lord and put out of their mind the lord their god and become servant to the baal and the astarte . so the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and he give them up into the hand of cushan rishathaim king of mesopotamia and the child of israel be his servant for eight year . and when the child of israel make prayer to the lord he give them a saviour othniel the son of kenaz caleb 's young brother . and the spirit of the lord come on him and he become judge of israel and go out to war and the lord give up cushan rishathaim king of mesopotamia into his hand and he overcome him . then for forty year the land have peace till the death of othniel the son of kenaz . then the child of israel again do evil in the eye of the lord and the lord make eglon king of moab strong against israel because they have do evil in the lord 's eye . and eglon get together the people of ammon and amalek and they go and overcame israel and take the town of palm tree . and the child of israel be servant to eglon king of moab for eighteen year . then when the child of israel make prayer to the lord he give them a saviour ehud the son of gera the benjamite a left hand man and the child of israel send an offering by him to eglon king of moab . so ehud make himself a two edge sword a cubit long which he put on at his right side under his robe . and he take the offering to eglon king of moab who be a very fat man . and after give the offering he send away the people who have come with the offering . but he himself turn back from the stone image at gilgal say i have something to say to you in secret o king . and he say let there be quiet . then all those who be wait before him go out . then ehud come in to him while he be seat by himself in his summer house . and ehud say i have a word from god for you . and he get up from his seat . and ehud put out his left hand and take the sword from his right side and send it into his stomach and the hand part go in after the blade and the fat be join up over the blade for he do not take the sword out of his stomach . and he go out into the ... then ehud go out into the covered way shut the door of the summer house on him and lock them . now when he have go the king 's servant come and saw that the door of the summer house be lock and they say it may be that he be in his summer house for a private purpose . and they go on wait till they be sham but the door be still shut so they take the key and open them saw their lord stretch out dead on the floor . but ehud have get away while they be wait and have go past the stone image and get away to seirah . and when he come there he have a horn sound in the hill country of ephraim and all the child of israel go down with him from the hill country and he at their head . and he say to them come after me for the lord have give the moabites your hater into your hand . so they go down after him and take the crossing place of jordan against moab and let no one go across . at that time they put about ten thousand men of moab to the sword every strong man and every man of war not a man get away . so moab be break that day under the hand of israel . and for eighty year the land have peace . and after him come shamgar the son of anath who put to death six hundred philistine with an ox stick and he be another saviour of israel .and the child of israel again do evil in the eye of the lord when ehud be dead . and the lord give them up into the hand of jabin king of canaan who be rule in hazor the captain of his army be sisera who be live in harosheth of the gentile . then the child of israel make prayer to the lord for he have nine hundred iron war carriage and for twenty year he be very cruel to the child of israel . now deborah a woman prophet the wife of lapidoth be judge of israel at that time . and she have her seat under the palm tree of deborah between ramah and beth el in the hill country of ephraim and the child of israel come up to her to be judge . and she send for barak the son of abinoam from kedesh naphtali and say to him have not the lord the god of israel give order say go and get your force into line in mount tabor and take with you ten thousand men of the child of naphtali and of the child of zebulun ? and i will make sisera the captain of jabin 's army with his war carriage and his force come against you at the river kishon where i will give him into your hand . and barak say to her if you will go with me then i will go but if you will not go with me i will not go . and she say i will certainly go with you though you will get no honour in your undertaking for the lord will give sisera into the hand of a woman . so deborah get up and go with barak to kedesh . then barak sent for zebulun and naphtali to come to kedesh and ten thousand men go up after him and deborah go up with him . now heber the kenite separate himself from the rest of the kenites from the child of hobab the brother in law of moses have put up his tent a far away a the oak tree in zaanannim by kedesh . and word be give to sisera that barak the son of abinoam have go up to mount tabor . so sisera get together all his war carriage nine hundred war carriage of iron and all the people who be with him from harosheth of the gentile as far a the river kishon . then deborah say to barak up ! for today the lord have give sisera into your hand have not the lord go out before you ? so barak go down from mount tabor and ten thousand men after him . and the lord send fear on sisera and all his war carriage and all his army before barak and sisera get down from his war carriage and go in flight on foot . but barak go after the war carriage and the army as far a harosheth of the gentile and all sisera 's army be put to the sword not a man get away . but sisera go in flight on foot to the tent of jael the wife of heber the kenite for there be peace between jabin king of hazor and the family of heber the kenite . and jael go out to sisera and say to him come in my lord come in to me without fear . so he go into her tent and she put a cover over him . then he say to her give me now a little water for i have need of a drink . and open a skin of milk she give him drink and put the cover over him again . and he say to her take your place at the door of the tent and if anyone come and say to you be there any man here say no . then jael heber 's wife take a tent pin and a hammer and go up to him quietly drive the pin into his head and it go through his head into the earth for he be in a deep sleep from weariness and so he come to his end . then jael go out and meet barak go after sisera say to him come and i will let you see the man you be search for . so he come into her tent and saw and there be sisera stretch out dead with the tent pin in his head . so that day god overcame jabin king of canaan before the child of israel . and the power of the child of israel go on increase against jabin king of canaan till he be cut off .at that time deborah and barak the son of abinoam make this song say because of the flow hair of the fighter in israel because the people give themselves freely give praise to the lord . give attention o king give ear o ruler i even i will make a song to the lord i will make melody to the lord the god of israel . lord when you go out from seir move like an army from the field of edom the earth be shake and the heaven be trouble and the cloud be drop water . the mountain be shake before the lord before the lord the god of israel . in the day of shamgar the son of anath in the day of jael the highway be not use and traveller go by side road . country town be no more in israel be no more till you deborah come up till you come up a a mother in israel . they have no one to make arm there be no more armed men in the town be there a body cover or a spear to be see among forty thousand in israel ? come you ruler of israel you who give yourselves freely among the people give praise to the lord . let them give think to it who go on white ass and those who be walk on the road . give ear to the woman laugh by the water spring there they will give again the story of the upright act of the lord all the upright act of his arm in israel . awake ! awake ! deborah awake ! awake ! give a song up ! barak and take prisoner those who take you prisoner o son of abinoam . then the chief go down to the door the lord 's people go down among the strong one . out of ephraim they come down into the valley after you benjamin among your tribesman from machir come down the captain and from zebulun those in whose hand be the ruler 's rod . your chief issachar be with deborah and naphtali be true to barak into the valley they go rush out at his foot . in reuben there be division and great searchings of heart . why do you keep quiet among the sheep hearing nothing but the watcher pip to the flock ? gilead be live over jordan and dan be wait in his ship asher keep in his place by the sea 's edge living by his inlet . it be the people of zebulun who put their life in danger even to death with naphtali on the high place of the field . the king come on to the fight the king of canaan be war in taanach by the water of megiddo they take no profit in money . the star from heaven be fight from their highway they be fight against sisera . the river kishon take them violently away stop their flight the river kishon . give praise o my soul to the strength of the lord ! then loudly the foot of the horse be sound with the stamp the stamping of their war horse . a curse a curse on meroz ! say the angel of the lord . a bitter curse on her townspeople ! because they come not to the help of the lord to the help of the lord among the strong one . blessing be on jael more than on all woman ! blessing great than on any in the tent ! his request be for water she give him milk she put butter before him on a fair plate . she put out her hand to the tent pin and her right hand to the workman 's hammer and she give sisera a blow crush his head wounding and drive through his brow . bent at her foot he go down he be stretch out bent at her foot he go down where he be bent down there he go down in death . look out from the window she give a cry the mother of sisera be cry out through the window why be his carriage so long in come ? when will the noise of his wheel be sound ? her wise woman give answer to her yes she make answer again to herself be they not get be they not part the good among them a young girl or two to every man and to sisera robe of coloured needlework work in fair colour on this side and on that for the neck of the queen ? so may destruction come on all your hater o lord but let your lover be like the sun go out in his strength . and for forty year the land have peace .and the child of israel do evil in the eye of the lord and the lord give them up into the hand of midian for seven year . and midian be strong than israel and because of the midianites the child of israel make hole for themselves in the mountain and hollow in the rock and strong place . and whenever israel 's grain be plant the midianites and the amalekites and the people of the east come up against them and put their army in position against them and they take all the produce of the earth as far a gaza till there be no food in israel or any sheep or oxen or ass . for they come up regularly with their ox and their tent they come like the locust in number they and their camel be without number and they come into the land for it destruction . and israel be in great need because of midian and the cry of the child of israel go up to the lord . and when the cry of the child of israel because of midian come before the lord the lord send a prophet to the child of israel who say to them the lord the god of israel have say i take you up from egypt out of the prison house and i take you out of the hand of the egyptian and out of the hand of all who be cruel to you and i send them out by force from before you and give you their land and i say to you i be the lord your god you be not to give worship to the god of the amorites in whose land you be live but you do not give ear to my voice . now the angel of the lord come and take his seat under the oak tree in ophrah in the field of joash the abiezrite and his son gideon be crush grain in the place where the grape be crush so that the midianites might not see it . and the angel of the lord come before his eye and say to him the lord be with you o man of war . then gideon say to him o my lord if the lord be with u why have all this come on u ? and where be all his work of power of which our father have give u word say do not the lord take u out of egypt ? but now he have give u up hand u over to the power of midian . and the lord turn to him say go in the strength you have and be israel 's saviour from midian have i not send you ? and he say to him o lord how may i be the saviour of israel ? see my family be the poor in manasseh and i be the least in my father 's house . then the lord say to him truly i will be with you and you will overcome the midianites a if they be one man . so he say to him if now i have grace in your eye then give me a sign that it be you who be talk to me . do not go away till i come with my offering and put it before you . and he say i will not go away before you come back . then gideon go in and make ready a young goat and with an ephah of meal he make unleavened cake he put the meat in a basket and the soup in which it have be cook he put in a pot and he take it out to him under the oak tree and give it to him there . and the angel of god say to him take the meat and the unleavened cake and put them down on the rock over there drain out the soup over them . and he do so . then the angel of the lord put out the stick which be in his hand touch the meat and the cake with the end of it and a flame come up out of the rock burn up the meat and the cake and the angel of the lord be see no longer . then gideon be certain that he be the angel of the lord and gideon say i be in fear o lord god ! for i have see the angel of the lord face to face . but the lord say to him peace be with you have no fear you be in no danger of death . then gideon make an altar there to the lord and give it the name yahweh shalom to this day it be in ophrah of the abiezrites . the same night the lord say to him take ten men of your servant and an ox seven year old and after pull down the altar of baal which be your father 's and cut down the holy tree by it side make an altar to the lord your god on the top of this rock in the ordered way and take the ox and make a burned offering with the wood of the holy tree which have be cut down . then gideon take ten of his servant and do a the lord have say to him but fear to do it by day because of his father 's people and the men of the town he do it by night . and the men of the town get up early in the morning and they saw the altar of baal break down and the holy tree which be by it cut down and the ox offer on the altar which have be put up there . and they say to one another who have do this thing ? and after search with care they say gideon the son of joash have do this thing . then the men of the town say to joash make your son come out to be put to death for pull down the altar of baal and cut down the holy tree which be by it . but joash say to all those who be attack him will you take up the cause of baal ? will you be his saviour ? let anyone who will take up his cause be put to death while it be still morning if he be a god let him take up his cause himself because of the pull down of his altar . so that day he give him the name of jerubbaal say let baal take up his cause against him because his altar have be break down . then all the midianites and the amalekites and the people of the east banding themselves together go over and put up their tent in the valley of jezreel . but the spirit of the lord come on gideon and at the sound of his horn all abiezer come together after him . and he send through all manasseh and they come after him and he send to asher and zebulun and naphtali and they come up and be join to the others . then gideon say to god if you be go to give israel salvation by my hand a you have say see i will put the wool of a sheep on the grain floor if there be dew on the wool only while all the earth be dry then i will be certain that it be your purpose to give israel salvation by my hand a you have say . and it be so for he get up early on the morning after and twist the wool in his hand he get a basin full of water from the dew on the wool . then gideon say to god do not be move to wrath against me if i say only this let me make one more test with the wool let the wool now be dry while the earth be cover with dew . and that night god do so for the wool be dry and there be dew on all the earth round it .then jerubbaal that be gideon and all the people with him get up early and put up their tent by the side of the water spring of harod the tent of midian be on the north side of him under the hill of moreh in the valley . and the lord say to gideon so great be the number of your people that if i give the midianites into their hand they will be uplift in pride over me and will say i myself have be my saviour . so now let it be give out to the people that anyone who be shake with fear be to go back from mount galud . so twenty two thousand of the people go back but there be still ten thousand . then the lord say to gideon there be still more people than be necessary take them down to the water so that i may put them to the test for you there then whoever i say be to go with you will go and whoever i say be not to go will not go . so he take the people down to the water and the lord say to gideon put on one side by themselves all those drink up the water with their tongue like a dog and in the same way all those who go down on their knee to the water while drink . now the number of those who take up the water with their tongue be three hundred all the rest of the people go down on their knee to the water . and the lord say to gideon by those three hundred who be drink with their tongue i will give you salvation and give the midianites into your hand let the rest of the people go away every man to his place . so they take the vessel of the people and their horn from their hand and he send them away every man to his tent keep only the three hundred and the tent of midian be low down in the valley . the same night the lord say to him up ! go down now against their army for i have give them into your hand . but if you have fear of go down take your servant purah with you and go down to the tent and after hear what they be say you will get strength to go down against the army . so he go down with his servant purah to the out line of the tent of the arm men . now the midianites and the amalekites and all the people of the east be cover the valley like locust and their camel be like the sand by the seaside without number . when gideon come there a man be give his friend an account of his dream say see i have a dream about a cake of barley bread which fall into the tent of midian come on to the tent overturn it so that it be stretch out flat on the earth . and his friend in answer say this be certainly the sword of gideon the son of joash the men of israel into their hand god have give up all the army of midian . then gideon hear the story of the dream and the sense in which they take it give worship then he go back to the tent of israel and say up ! for the lord have give the army of midian into your hand . then separate the three hundred men into three band he give every man a horn and a vessel in which be a flaming branch . and he say to them keep your eye on me and do what i do when i come to the out line of tent whatever i do you be to do the same . at the sound of my horn and the horn of those who be with me let your horn be sound all round the tent and say for the lord and for gideon . so gideon and the three hundred men who be with him come to the out line of tent at the start of the middle watch when the watchman have only then take their station and the horn be sound and the vessel break . so the three band all give a loud note on their horn and when the vessel have be break they take the flaming branch in their left hand and the horn in their right hand ready for blow cry out for the lord and for gideon . then they make a line round the tent every man in his place and all the army awake from sleep come run out and with loud cry go in flight . and the three hundred give a loud note on their horn and every man 's sword be turn by the lord against his brother all through the army and the army go in flight as far a beth shittah in the direction of zeredah to the edge of abel meholah by tabbath . and the men of israel come together from naphtali and from asher and all manasseh and go after midian . then gideon send through all the hill country of ephraim say come down against midian and keep the way across jordan before they come . so all the men of ephraim mass themselves together keep the way across jordan . and they take the two chief of midian oreb and zeeb and they put oreb to death at the rock of oreb and zeeb they put to death at the place of the grape crush in zeeb and they go after midian but the head of oreb and zeeb they take across jordan to gideon .and the men of ephraim come and say to him why do you not send for u when you go to war against midian ? and they say sharp and angry word to him . and he say to them what have i do in comparison with you ? be not that which ephraim take up after the grape cut good than all the grape which abiezer get in from the grape cut ? god have give into your hand the chief of midian oreb and zeeb what have i be able to do in comparison with you ? and when he say this their feeling about him become kinder . then gideon come to jordan and go over it with his three hundred overcome with weariness and in need of food . and he say to the men of succoth give bread cake to my people for they be overcome with weariness and i be go on after zebah and zalmunna the king of midian . but the chief of succoth say be the hand of zebah and zalmunna even now in your hand that we be to give bread to your army ? then gideon say because of this when the lord have give zebah and zalmunna into my hand i will have you stretch on a bed of thorn of the waste land and on sharp stem and have you crush a grain be crush on a grain floor . so he go up from there to penuel and make the same request to the men of penuel but they give him the same answer a the men of succoth have give . so he say to the men of penuel when i come back in peace i will have this tower break down . now zebah and zalmunna be in karkor and their army with them about fifteen thousand men those of all the army of the child of the east who be still live for a hundred and twenty thousand of their swordsman have be put to death . and gideon go up by the way use by the people live in tent on the east of nobah and jogbehah and make an attack on the army when they have no thought of danger . and zebah and zalmunna go in flight and he go after them and take the two king of midian zebah and zalmunna and put all the army to the curse . then gideon the son of joash go back from the fight and take prisoner a young man of the people of succoth he get from him in answer to his question a list of the chief of succoth and the responsible men seventy seven men . so he come to the men of succoth and say here be zebah and zalmunna on account of whom you make sport of me say be the hand of zebah and zalmunna even now in your hand that we be to give bread to your army who be overcome with weariness ? then he take the responsible men of the town and have them crush on a bed of thorn and sharp stem . and he have the tower of penuel break down and the men of the town put to death . then he say to zebah and zalmunna where be the men whom you put to death at tabor ? and they give answer a you be so be they every one of them be like a king 's son . and he say they be my brother my mother 's son by the life of the lord if you have keep them safe i would not put you to death . then he say to jether his old son up ! put them to death . but the boy do not take out his sword fearing because he be still a boy . then zebah and zalmunna say up ! put an end to u yourself for you have a man 's strength . then gideon get up and put zebah and zalmunna to death and take the ornament which be on their camel ' neck . then the men of israel say to gideon be our ruler you and your son and your son 's son after him for you have be our saviour from the hand of midian . but gideon say to them i will not be a ruler over you and my son will not be a ruler over you it be the lord who will be ruler over you . then gideon say to them i have a request to make to you let every man give me the ear ring he have take . for they have gold ear ring because they be ishmaelites . and they give answer we will gladly give them . so they put down a robe every man drop into it the ear ring he have take . the weight of the gold ear ring which he get from them be one thousand seven hundred shekel of gold in addition to the moon ornament and jewel and the purple robe which be on the king of midian and the chain on their camel ' neck . and gideon make an ephod from them and put it up in his town ophrah and all israel go after it there and be false to the lord and it become a cause of sin to gideon and his house . so midian be break before the child of israel and the midianites never get back their strength . and the land have peace for forty year in the day of gideon . and jerubbaal the son of joash go back to his house and be live there . gideon have seventy son the offspring of his body for he have a number of wife . and the servant wife he have in shechem have a son by him to whom he give the name abimelech . and gideon the son of joash come to his end when he be very old and his body be put in the rest place of joash his father in ophrah of the abiezrites . and after the death of gideon the child of israel again go after the god of canaan and be false to the lord and make baal berith their god . and the child of israel do not keep in their mind the lord their god who have be their saviour from all their hater on every side and they be not kind to the house of jerubbaal that be gideon in reward for all the good he have do to israel .now abimelech the son of jerubbaal go to shechem to his mother 's family and say to them and to all the family of his mother 's father say now in the ear of all the townsman of shechem be it good for you to be rule by all the seventy son of jerubbaal or by one man only ? and keep in mind that i be your bone and your flesh . so his mother 's family say all this about him in the ear of all the townsman of shechem and their heart be turn to abimelech for they say he be our brother . and they give him seventy shekel of silver from the house of baal berith with which abimelech get the support of a number of uncontrolled and good for nothing person . then he go to his father 's house at ophrah and put his brother the seventy son of jerubbaal to death on the same stone however jotham the young kept himself safe by go away to a secret place . and all the townsman of shechem and all beth millo come together and go and make abimelech their king by the oak of the pillar in shechem . now jotham on hearing of it go to the top of mount gerizim and cry out with a loud voice say to them give ear to me you townsman of shechem so that god may give ear to you . one day the tree go out to make a king for themselves and they say to the olive tree be king over u . but the olive tree say to them be i to give up my wealth of oil by which men give honour to god and go waving over the tree ? then the tree say to the fig tree you come and be king over u . but the fig tree say to them be i to give up my sweet taste and my good fruit and go waving over the tree ? then the tree say to the vine you come and be king over u . but the vine say to them be i to give up my wine which make glad god and men to go waving over the tree ? then all the tree say to the thorn you come and be king over u . and the thorn say to the tree if it be truly your desire to make me your king then come and put your faith in my shade and if not may fire come out of the thorn burn up the cedar of lebanon . so now if you have do truly and uprightly in make abimelech king and if you have do well to jerubbaal and his house in reward for the work of his hand for my father make war for you and put his life in danger and make you free from the hand of midian and you have go against my father 's family this day and have put to death his son even seventy men on one stone and have make abimelech the son of his servant wife king over the townsman of shechem because he be your brother if then you have do what be true and upright to jerubbaal and his family this day may you have joy in abimelech and may he have joy in you but if not may fire come out from abimelech burn up the townsman of shechem and beth millo and may fire come out from the townsman of shechem and beth millo for the destruction of abimelech . then jotham straight away go in flight to beer and be live there for fear of his brother abimelech . so abimelech be chief over israel for three year . and god send an evil spirit between abimelech and the townsman of shechem and the townsman of shechem be false to abimelech so that punishment for the violent attack make on the seventy son of jerubbaal and for their blood might come on abimelech their brother who put them to death and on the townsman of shechem who give him their help in put his brother to death . and the townsman of shechem put secret watcher on the top of the mountain and they make attack on all who go by on the road and take their good and word of this come to abimelech . then gaal the son of ebed come with his brother and go over to shechem and the men of shechem put their faith in him . and they go out into their field and get in the fruit of their vine and when the grape have be crush they make a holy feast and go into the house of their god and over their food and drink they be curse abimelech . and gaal the son of ebed say who be abimelech and who be shechem that we be to be his servant ? be it not right for the son of jerubbaal and zebul his captain to be servant to the men of hamor the father of shechem ? but why be we to be his servant ? if only i have authority over this people ! i would put abimelech out of the way and i would say to abimelech make your army strong and come out . now zebul the ruler of the town hear what gaal the son of ebed have say be move to wrath . and he send to abimelech at arumah say see gaal the son of ebed and his brother have come to shechem and they be work up the town against you . so now get up by night you and your people and keep watch in the field secretly and in the morning when the sun be up get up early and make a rush on the town and when he and his people come out against you do to them whatever you have a chance to do . so abimelech and the people with him get up by night in four band to make a surprise attack on shechem . and gaal the son of ebed go out and take his place at the doorway into the town then abimelech and his people get up from the place where they have be wait . and when gaal saw the people he say to zebul see ! people be come down from the top of the mountain . and zebul say to him you see the shade of the mountain like men . and gaal say again see ! people be come down from the middle of the land and one band be come by way of the oak tree of the seer . then zebul say to him now where be your loud talk when you say who be abimelech that we be to be his servant ? be this not the people whom you be rating so low ? go out now and make war on them . so gaal go out at the head of the townsman of shechem and make war on abimelech . and abimelech go after him and he go in flight before him and a great number be fall by the sword all the way up to the town . then abimelech go back to arumah and zebul send gaal and his brother away and would not let them go on living in shechem . now the day after the people go out into the field and news of it come to abimelech . and he take his people separate them into three band and be wait secretly in the field and when he saw the people come out of the town he go up and make an attack on them . and abimelech with his band make a rush and take up their position at the doorway into the town and the other two band make a rush on all those who be in the field and overcome them . and all that day abimelech be fight against the town and he take it and put to death the people who be in it and have the town pull down and cover with salt . then all the townsman of the tower of shechem hearing of it go into the inner room of the house of el berith . and word be give to abimelech that all the men of the tower of shechem be there together . then abimelech go up to mount zalmon with all his people and abimelech take an axe in his hand and cut down branch of tree take them and put them on his back . and he say to the people who be with him be quick and do a you have see me do . so all the people get branch every man cut down a branch and they go with abimelech at their head and mass the branch against the inner room put fire to the room over them so all those who be in the tower of shechem about a thousand men and woman be burn to death with it . then abimelech go to thebez and put his army in position against thebez and take it . but in the middle of the town there be a strong tower to which all the men and woman of the town go in flight and shut themselves in go up to the roof of the tower . and abimelech come to the tower and make an attack on it and get near to the door of the tower for the purpose of fire it . but a certain woman send a great stone such a be use for crush grain on to the head of abimelech crack the bone . then quickly cry out to his body servant he say to him take out your sword and put an end to me straight away so that men may not say of me his death be the work of a woman . so the young man put his sword through him cause his death . and when the men of israel saw that abimelech be dead they go away every man to his place . in this way abimelech be reward by god for the evil he have do to his father in put his seventy brother to death and god send back on to the head of the men of shechem all the evil they have do and the curse of jotham the son of jerubbaal come on them .now after abimelech tola the son of puah the son of dodo a man of issachar become the saviour of israel he be live in shamir in the hill country of ephraim . he be judge over israel for twenty three year and at his death his body be put to rest in the earth in shamir . and after him come jair the gileadite who be judge over israel for twenty two year . and he have thirty son who go on thirty young ass and they have thirty town in the land of gilead which be name havvoth jair to this day . and at the death of jair his body be put to rest in the earth in kamon . and again the child of israel do evil in the eye of the lord worship the baal and astarte and the god of aram and the god of zidon and the god of moab and the god of the child of ammon and the god of the philistine they give up the lord and be servant to him no longer . and the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and he give them up into the hand of the philistine and into the hand of the child of ammon . and that year the child of israel be crush under their yoke for eighteen year all the child of israel on the other side of jordan in the land of the amorites which be in gilead be cruelly crush down . and the child of ammon go over jordan to make war against judah and benjamin and the house of ephraim and israel be in great trouble . then the child of israel cry out to the lord say great be our sin against you for we have give up our god and have be servant to the baal . and the lord say to the child of israel be not the egyptian and the amorites and the child of ammon and the philistine and the zidonians and amalek and midian crushing you down and in answer to your cry do i not give you salvation from their hand ? but for all this you have give me up and have be servant to other god so i will be your saviour no longer . go send up your cry for help to the god of your selection let them be your saviour in the time of your trouble . and the child of israel say to the lord we be sinner do to u whatever seem good to you only give u salvation this day . so they put away the strange god from among them and become the lord 's servant and his soul be angry because of the sorrow of israel . then the child of ammon come together and put their army in position in gilead . and the child of israel come together and put their army in position in mizpah . and the people of israel say to one another who will be the first to make an attack on the child of ammon ? we will make him head over all gilead .now jephthah the gileadite be a great man of war he be the son of a loose woman and gilead be his father . and gilead 's wife give birth to son and when her son become men they send jephthah away say you have no part in the heritage of our father 's house for you be the son of another woman . so jephthah go in flight from his brother and be live in the land of tob where a number of good for nothing men join jephthah go out with him on his undertaking . now after a time the child of ammon make war against israel . and when the child of ammon make war against israel the responsible men of gilead go to get jephthah back from the land of tob and they say to jephthah come and be our chief so that we may make war against the child of ammon . but jephthah say to the responsible men of gilead do you not in your hate for me send me away from my father 's house ? why do you come to me now when you be in trouble ? and the responsible men of gilead say to jephthah that be the reason we have come back to you so go with u and make war against the child of ammon and we will make you our head over all the people of gilead . then jephthah say to the responsible men of gilead if you take me back to make war against the child of ammon and if with the help of the lord i overcome them will you make me your head ? and the responsible men of gilead say to jephthah may the lord be our witness we will certainly do a you say . so jephthah go with the responsible men of gilead and the people make him head and chief over them and jephthah say all these thing before the lord in mizpah . then jephthah send men to the king of the child of ammon say what have you against me that you have come to make war against my land ? and the king of the child of ammon say to the men send by jephthah because israel when he come up out of egypt take away my land from the arnon as far a the jabbok and as far a jordan so now give me back those land quietly . and jephthah sent again to the king of the child of ammon and say to him this be the word of jephthah israel do not take away the land of moab or the land of the child of ammon but when they come up from egypt israel go through the waste land to the red sea and come to kadesh then israel send men to the king of edom say let me now go through your land but the king of edom do not give ear to them . and in the same way he send to the king of moab but he would not so israel go on living in kadesh . then he go on through the waste land and round the land of edom and the land of moab and come by the east side of the land of moab and put up their tent on the other side of the arnon they do not come inside the limit of moab for the arnon be the limit of moab . and israel send men to sihon king of the amorites the king of heshbon and israel say to him let me now go through your land to my place . but sihon would not give way and let israel go through his land and sihon get together all his people and put his army in position in jahaz and make war on israel . and the lord the god of israel give sihon and all his people into the hand of israel and they overcome them so all the land of the amorites the people of that land become israel 's . all the limit of the amorites be theirs from the arnon as far a the jabbok and from the waste land even to jordan . so now the lord the god of israel have take away their land from the amorites and give it to his people israel be you then to have it ? do you not keep the land of those whom chemosh your god send out from before you ? so we will keep all the land of those whom the lord our god send out from before u . what ! be you any good than balak the son of zippor king of moab ? do he ever take up a cause against israel or make war against them ? while israel be live in heshbon and it daughter town and in aroer and it daughter town and in all the town which be by the side of the arnon for three hundred year why do you not get them back at that time ? so i have do no wrong against you but you be do wrong to me in fight against me may the lord who be judge this day be judge between the child of israel and the child of ammon . the king of the child of ammon however do not give ear to the word which jephthah send to him . then the spirit of the lord come on jephthah and he go through gilead and manasseh and come to mizpeh of gilead and from mizpeh of gilead he go over to the child of ammon . and jephthah take an oath to the lord and say if you will give the child of ammon into my hand then whoever come out from the door of my house meeting me when i come back in peace from the child of ammon will be the lord 's and i will give him a a burned offering . so jephthah go over to the child of ammon to make war on them and the lord give them into his hand . and he make an attack on them from aroer all the way to minnith overrun twenty town as far a abel cheramim and put great number to the sword . so the child of ammon be crush before the child of israel . then jephthah come back to his house in mizpah and his daughter come out meet him on his way with music and with dance she be his only child he have no other son or daughter . and when he saw her he be overcome with grief and say ah ! my daughter ! i be crush with sorrow and it be you who be the chief cause of my trouble for i have make an oath to the lord and i may not take it back . and she say to him my father you have make an oath to the lord do then to me whatever you have say for the lord have send a full reward on your hater on the child of ammon . then she say to her father only do this for me let me have two month to go away into the mountain with my friend weep for my sad fate . and he say go then . so he send her away for two month and she go with her friend to the mountain weep for her sad fate . and at the end of two month she go back to her father who do with her a he have say in his oath and she have never be touch by a man . so it become a rule in israel for the woman to go year by year sorrowing for the daughter of jephthah the gileadite four day in every year .now the men of ephraim come together and take up arm and go over to zaphon and they say to jephthah why do you go over to make war against the child of ammon without send for u to go with you ? now we will put your house on fire over you . and jephthah say to them i and my people be in danger and the child of ammon be very cruel to u and when i send for you you give me no help against them . so when i saw that there be no help to be have from you i put my life in my hand and go over against the child of ammon and the lord give them into my hand why then have you come up to me this day to make war on me ? then jephthah get together all the men of gilead and make war on ephraim and the men of gilead overcame ephraim . and the gileadites take the crossing place of jordan against the ephraimites and when any of the men of ephraim who have go in flight say let me go over the men of gilead say to him be you an ephraimite ? and if he say no then they say to him now say shibboleth and he say sibboleth and be not able to say it in the right way then they take him and put him to death at the cross place of jordan and at that time forty two thousand ephraimites be put to death . now jephthah be judge of israel for six year . and jephthah the gileadite come to his death and his body be put to rest in his town mizpeh of gilead . and after him ibzan of beth lehem be judge of israel . he have thirty son and thirty daughter whom he send to other place and he get thirty wife from other place for his son . and he be judge of israel for seven year . and ibzan come to his death and his body be put to rest at beth lehem . and after him elon the zebulonite be judge of israel and he be judge of israel for ten year . and elon the zebulonite come to his death and his body be put to rest in aijalon in the land of zebulun . and after him abdon the son of hillel the pirathonite be judge of israel . he have forty son and thirty son ' son who go on seventy young ass and he be judge of israel for eight year . and abdon the son of hillel come to his death and his body be put to rest in pirathon in the land of ephraim in the hill country of the amalekites .and the child of israel again do evil in the eye of the lord and the lord give them into the hand of the philistine for forty year . now there be a certain man of zorah of the family of the danites and his name be manoah and his wife have never give birth to a child . and the angel of the lord come to the woman and say to her see now ! though you have never give birth to child you will be with child and give birth to a son . now then take care to have no wine or strong drink and to take no unclean thing for food for you be with child and will give birth to a son his hair be never to be cut for the child be to be separate to god from his birth and he will take up the work of free israel from the hand of the philistine . then the woman come in and say to her husband a man come to me and his form be like the form of a god cause great fear i put no question to him about where he come from and he do not give me his name but he say to me you be with child and will give birth to a son and now do not take any wine or strong drink or let anything unclean be your food for the child will be separate to god from his birth to the day of his death . then manoah make prayer to the lord and say o lord let the man of god whom you send come to u again and make clear to u what we be to do for the child who be to come . and god give ear to the voice of manoah and the angel of god come to the woman again when she be seat in the field but her husband manoah be not with her . so the woman run quickly give her husband the news say i have see the man who come to me the other day . and manoah get up and go after his wife and come up to the man and say to him be you the man who be talk to this woman ? and he say i be . and manoah say now when your word come true what be to be the rule for the child and what will be his work ? and the angel of the lord say to manoah let the woman take note of what i have say to her . she be to have nothing which come from the vine for her food and let her take no wine or strong drink or anything which be unclean let her take care to do all i have give her order to do . and manoah say to the angel of the lord now let u keep you while we make ready a young goat for you . and the angel of the lord say to manoah though you keep me i will not take of your food but if you will make a burned offering let it be offer to the lord . for it have not come into manoah 's mind that he be the angel of the lord . then manoah say to the angel of the lord what be your name so that when your word come true we may give you honour ? but the angel of the lord say to him why be you question me about my name see that it be a wonder ? so manoah take the young goat with it meal offering offer it on the rock to the lord who do strange thing . and when the flame go up to heaven from the altar the angel of the lord go up in the flame of the altar while manoah and his wife be look on and they go down on their face to the earth . but the angel of the lord be see no more by manoah and his wife . then it be clear to manoah that he be the angel of the lord . and manoah say to his wife death will certainly be our fate for it be a god whom we have see . but his wife say to him if the lord be purpose our death he would not have take our burned offering and our meal offering or have give u such order about the child . so the woman give birth to a son and give him the name samson and he become a man and the blessing of the lord be on him . and the spirit of the lord first come on him in mahaneh dan between zorah and eshtaol .now samson go down to timnah and saw a woman in timnah of the daughter of the philistine and when he come back he say to his father and mother i have see a woman in timnah of the daughter of the philistine get her now for me for my wife . then his father and mother say to him be there no woman among the daughter of your relation or among all my people that you have to go for your wife to the philistine who be without circumcision ? but samson say to his father get her for me for she be please to me . now his father and mother have no knowledge that this be the purpose of the lord who have the destruction of the philistine in mind . now the philistine at that time be rule over israel . then samson go down to timnah and his father and his mother and come to the vine garden of timnah and a young lion come rush out at him . and the spirit of the lord come on him with power and unarm a he be pull the lion in two a one might do to a young goat he put him to death but he say nothing to his father and mother of what he have do . so he go down and have talk with the woman and she be please to samson . then after a time he go back to take her and turn from the road to see the dead body of the lion he saw a mass of bee in the body of the lion and honey there . and he take the honey in his hand and go on taste it on the way and when he come to his father and mother he give some to them but do not say that he have take the honey from the body of the lion . then samson go down to the woman and make a feast there a be the way among young men . and he take thirty friend and they be with him . and samson say now i have a hard question for you if you be able to give me the answer before the seven day of the feast be over i will give you thirty linen robe and thirty change of clothing but if you be not able to give me the answer then you will have to give me thirty linen robe and thirty change of clothing . and they say to him put your hard question and let u see what it be . and he say out of the taker of food come food and out of the strong come the sweet . and at the end of three day they be still not able to give the answer . so on the fourth day they say to samson 's wife get from your husband the answer to his question by some trick or other or we will have you and your father 's house burn with fire do you get u here to take all we have ? then samson 's wife weeping over him say truly you have no love for me but only hate you have put a hard question to the child of my people and have not give me the answer . and he say to her see i have not give the answer even to my father or my mother be i to give it to you ? and all the seven day of the feast she go on weep over him and on the seventh day he give her the answer because she give him no peace and she send word of it to the child of her people . then on the seventh day before he go into the bride 's room the men of the town say to him what be sweet than honey ? and what be strong than a lion ? and he say to them if you have not be plough with my cow you would not have get the answer to my question . and the spirit of the lord come rush on him and he go down to ashkelon and attack thirty men there take their clothing from them and give it to the men who have give the answer to his hard question . then full of wrath he go back to his father 's house . but samson 's wife be give to the friend who have be his best man .now a short time after at the time of the grain cut samson take with him a young goat go to see his wife and he say i will go in to my wife into the bride 's room . but her father would not let him go in . and her father say it seem to me that you have only hate for her so i give her to your friend but be not her young sister fairer than she ? so please take her in place of the other . then samson say to them this time i will give payment in full to the philistine for i be go to do them great evil . so samson go and get three hundred fox and some stick of fire wood and he put the fox tail to tail with a stick between every two tail then fire the stick he let the fox loose among the uncut grain of the philistine and all the corded stem as well a the living grain and the vine garden and the olive go up in flame . then the philistine say who have do this ? and they say samson the son in law of the timnite because he take his wife and give her to his friend . so the philistine come up and have her and her father 's house burn . and samson say to them if you go on like this truly i will take my full payment from you and that will be the end of it . and he make an attack on them drive them in uncontrolled flight and cause great destruction then he go away to his safe place in the crack of the rock at etam . then the philistine go and put up their tent in judah all round lehi . and the men of judah say why have you come up against u ? and they say we have come up to take samson and to do to him a he have do to u . then three thousand of the men of judah go down to the crack of the rock of etam and say to samson be it not clear to you that the philistine be our ruler ? what be this you have do to u ? and he say to them i only do to them a they do to me . then they say to him we have come down to take you and give you up into the hand of the philistine . and samson say to them give me your oath that you will not make an attack on me yourselves . and they say no we will take you and give you up into their hand but truly we will not put you to death . so knot two new cord round him they take him up from the rock . and when he come to lehi the philistine come out meet him with loud cry then the spirit of the lord come rush on him and the cord on his arm become like grass which have be burn with fire and the band come fall off his hand . and take up the mouth bone of an as newly dead which he saw by chance on the earth he put to death a thousand men with it . and samson say with a red as 's mouth bone i have make them red with blood with a red as 's mouth bone i have send destruction on a thousand men . and have say these word he let the mouth bone go out of his hand so that place be name ramath lehi . after this he be in great need of water and cry out to the lord he say you have give this great salvation by the hand of your servant and now need of water will be my death and i will be give into the hand of this people who be without circumcision . then god make a crack in the hollow rock in lehi and water come out of it and after drink his spirit come back to him and he be strong again so that place be name en hakkore it be in lehi to this day . and he be judge of israel in the day of the philistine for twenty year .now samson go to gaza and there he saw a loose woman and go in to her . and it be say to the gazites samson be here . so they go round watching for him all day at the doorway of the town but at night they keep quiet say when daylight come we will put him to death . and samson be there till the middle of the night then he get up and take a grip on the door of the town pull them up together with their two support and their lock and put them on his back and take them up to the top of the hill in front of hebron . now after this he be in love with a woman in the valley of sorek name delilah . and the chief of the philistine come up to her and say to her make use of your power over him and see what be the secret of his great strength and how we may get the good of him and put band on him so that we may make him feeble and every one of u will give you eleven hundred shekel of silver . so delilah say to samson make clear to me now what be the secret of your great strength and how you may be put in band and make feeble . and samson say to her if seven new bow cord which have never be make dry be knot round me i will become feeble and will be like any other man . so the chief of the philistine give her seven new bow cord which have never be make dry and she have them tightly knot round him . now she have men wait secretly in the inner room and she say to him the philistine be on you samson . and the cord be break by him a a twist of thread be break when touch by a flame . so the secret of his strength do not come to light . then delilah say to samson see you have be make sport of me with false word now say truly how may you be put in band ? and he say to her if they only put round me new thick cord which have never be use then i will become feeble and will be like any other man . so delilah take new thick cord knot them tightly round him and say to him the philistine be on you samson . and men be wait secretly in the inner room . and the cord be break off his arm like thread . then delilah say to samson up to now you have make sport of me with false word now say truly how may you be put in band ? and he say to her if you get the seven twist of my hair work into the cloth you be make and fix with the pin i will become feeble and will be like any other man . so while he be sleep she get the seven twist of his hair work into her cloth and fix with the pin and say to him the philistine be on you samson . then awake from his sleep he get up quickly pull up cloth and machine together . and she say to him why do you say you be my lover when your heart be not mine ? three time you have make sport of me and have not make clear to me the secret of your great strength . so day after day she give him no peace for ever question him till his soul be trouble to death . and open all his heart to her he say to her my head have never be touch by a blade for i have be separate to god from the day of my birth if my hair be cut off then my strength will go from me and i will become feeble and will be like any other man . and when delilah saw that he have let her see into his heart she send word to the chief of the philistine say come up this time for he have let out all his heart to me . then the chief of the philistine come to her with the money in their hand . and she make him go to sleep on her knee and she send for a man and have his seven twist of hair cut off and while it be be do he become feeble and his strength go from him . then she say the philistine be on you samson . and awake from his sleep he say i will go out as at other time shake myself free . but he be not conscious that the lord have go from him . so the philistine take him and put out his eye then they take him down to gaza and chain him with band of brass put him to work crush grain in the prison house . but the growth of his hair be start again after it have be cut off . and the chief of the philistine come together to make a great offering to dagon their god and to be glad for they say our god have give into our hand samson our hater . and when the people saw him they give praise to their god for they say our god have give into our hand the one who be fight against u who make our country waste and who put great number of u to death . now when their heart be full of joy they say send for samson to make sport for u . and they send for samson out of the prison house and he make sport before them and they put him between the pillar . and samson say to the boy who take him by the hand let me put my hand on the pillar support the house so that i may put my back against them . now the house be full of men and woman and all the lord of the philistine be there and about three thousand men and woman be on the roof look on while samson make sport . and samson cry out to the lord say o lord god do have me now in mind and do make me strong only this once o god so that i may take one last payment from the philistine for my two eye . then samson put his arm round the two middle pillar support the house put his weight on them on one with his right hand and on the other with his left . and samson say let death overtake me with the philistine . and he put out all his strength and the house come down on the chief and on all the people who be in it . so the dead whom he send to destruction by his death be more than all those on whom he have send destruction in his life . then his brother and his father 's people come down and take him up and put his body to rest in the earth between zorah and eshtaol in the rest place of manoah his father . and he have be judge of israel for twenty year .now there be a man of the hill country of ephraim name micah . and he say to his mother the eleven hundred shekel of silver which be take from you about which you take an oath and say in my hearing i have give this silver to the lord from my hand for myself to make a pictured image and a metal image see i have the silver for i take it so now i will give it back to you . and his mother say may the blessing of the lord be on my son . and he give back the eleven hundred shekel of silver to his mother and his mother say i have make the silver holy to the lord from me for my son to make a pictured image and a metal image . so he give the silver back to his mother . then his mother take two hundred shekel of silver and give them to a metal worker who make a pictured image and a metal image from them and it be in the house of micah . and the man micah have a house of god and he make an ephod and family god and put one of his son in the position of priest . in those day there be no king in israel every man do a seemed right to him . now there be a young man living in beth lehem judah of the family of judah and a levite who be not a townsman of the place . and he go away from the town of beth lehem judah look for somewhere to make his living place and on his journey he come to the hill country of ephraim to the house of micah . and micah say to him where do you come from ? and he say to him i be a levite from beth lehem judah and i be look for a living place . then micah say to him make your live place with me and be a father and a priest to me and i will give you ten shekel of silver a year and your clothing and food . and the levite say he would make his live place with the man and he become to him a one of his son . and micah give the position to the levite and the young man become his priest and be in the house of micah . then micah say now i be certain that the lord will do me good see that the levite have become my priest .in those day there be no king in israel and in those day the danites be look for a heritage for themselves to be their living place for up to that time no distribution of land have be make to them among the tribe of israel . so the child of dan send five men from among their number strong men from zorah and from eshtaol to take a look at the land and make a search through it and they say to them go and make a search through the land and they come to the hill country of ephraim to the house of micah where they make a stop for the night . when they be near the house of micah hear a voice which be not strange to them that of the young levite they go out of their road to his place and say to him how do you come here ? and what be you do in this place ? and why be you here ? and he say to them this be what micah do for me and he give me payment and i become his priest . then they say do get direction from god for u to see if the journey on which we be go will have a good outcome . and the priest say to them go in peace your way be guide by the lord . then the five men go on their way and come to laish and saw the people who be there live without thought of danger like the zidonians quiet and safe for they have everything on earth for their need and they be far from the zidonians and have no business with aram . so they come back to their brother in zorah and eshtaol and their brother say to them what news have you ? and they say up ! and let u go against laish for we have see the land and it be very good why be you do nothing ? do not be slow to go in and take the land for your heritage . when you come there you will come to a people live without thought of danger and the land be wide and god have give it into your hand a place where there be everything on earth for man 's need . so six hundred men of the danites from zorah and eshtaol go out arm with instrument of war . and they go up and put up their tent in kiriath jearim in judah so that place be name mahaneh dan to this day . it be to the west of kiriath jearim . from there they go on to the hill country of ephraim and come to the house of micah . then the five men who have go to make a search through the country of laish say to their brother have you knowledge that in these house there be an ephod and family god and a pictured image and a metal image ? so now you see what to do . and turn from their road they come to the house of the young levite the house of micah and say to him be it well with you ? and the six hundred arm men of the danites take their place by the doorway . then the five men who have go to make a search through the land go in and take the pictured image and the ephod and the family god and the metal image and the priest be by the doorway with the six hundred arm men . and when they go into micah 's house and take out the pictured image and the ephod and the family god and the metal image the priest say to them what be you do ? and they say to him be quiet say nothing and come with u and be our father and priest be it good for you to be priest to one man 's house or to be priest to a tribe and a family in israel ? then the priest 's heart be glad and he take the ephod and the family god and the pictured image and go with the people . so they go on their way again put the little one and the ox and the good in front of them . when they have go some way from the house of micah the men from the house near micah 's house come together and overtake the child of dan cry out to them . and the danites turn round say to micah what be your trouble that you have take up arm ? and he say you have take my god which i make and my priest and have go away what be there for me now ? why then do you say to me what be your trouble ? and the child of dan say to him say no more or men of bitter spirit may make an attack on you cause loss of your life and the life of your people . then the child of dan go on their way and when micah saw that they be strong than he he go back to his house . and they take that which micah have make and his priest and come to laish to a people live quietly and without thought of danger and they put them to the sword without mercy burn down their town . and they have no saviour because it be far from zidon and they have no business with aram and it be in the valley which be the property of beth rehob . and build up the town again they take it for their living place . and they give the town the name of dan after dan their father who be the son of israel though the town have be name laish at first . and the child of dan put up the pictured image for themselves and jonathan the son of gershom the son of moses and his son be priest for the tribe of the danites till the day when the ark be take prisoner . and they put up for themselves the image which micah have make and it be there all the time that the house of god be in shiloh .now in those day when there be no king in israel a certain levite be live in the inmost part of the hill country of ephraim and he get for himself a servant wife from beth lehem judah . and his servant wife be angry with him and go away from him to her father 's house at beth lehem judah and be there for four month . then her husband get up and go after her with the purpose of talk kindly to her and take her back with him he have with him his young man and two ass and she take him into her father 's house and her father when he saw him come forward to him with joy . and his father in law the girl 's father keep him there for three day and they have food and drink and take their rest there . now on the fourth day they get up early in the morning and he make ready to go away but the girl 's father say to his son in law take a little food to keep up your strength and then go on your way . so seat themselves they have food and drink the two of them together and the girl 's father say to the man if it be your pleasure take your rest here tonight and let your heart be glad . and the man get up to go away but his father in law would not let him go so he take his rest there again for the night . then early on the morning of the fifth day he get up to go away but the girl 's father say keep up your strength so the two of them have a meal and the man and his woman and his servant do not go till after the middle of the day . and when they get up to go away his father in law the girl 's father say to him now even be come on so do not go tonight see the day be almost go take your rest here and let your heart be glad and tomorrow early go on your way back to your house . but the man would not be keep there that night and he get up and go away and come opposite to jebus which be jerusalem and he have with him the two ass ready for travel and his woman . when they get near jebus the day be far go and the servant say to his master now let u go from our road into this town of the jebusites and take our night 's rest there . but his master say to him we will not go out of our way into a strange town whose people be not of the child of israel but we will go on to gibeah . and he say to his servant come let u go on to one of these place stop for the night in gibeah or ramah . so they go on their way and the sun go down when they be near gibeah in the land of benjamin . and they go off the road there with the purpose of stop for the night in gibeah and he go in seat himself in the street of the town for no one take them into his house for the night . now when it be even they saw an old man come back from his work in the field he be from the hill country of ephraim and be live in gibeah but the men of the place be benjamites . and when he saw the traveller in the street of the town the old man say where be you go ? and where do you come from ? and he say to him we be on our way from beth lehem judah to the inmost part of the hill country of ephraim i come from there and go to beth lehem judah now i be on my way back to my house but no man will take me into his house . but we have dry grass and food for our ass as well a bread and wine for me and for the woman and for the young man with u we have no need of anything . and the old man say peace be with you let all your need be my care only do not take your rest in the street . so he take them into his house and give the ass food and after wash their foot they take food and drink . while they be take their pleasure at the meal the good for nothing men of the town come round the house give blow on the door and they say to the old man the master of the house send out that man who come to your house so that we may take our pleasure with him . so the man the master of the house go out to them and say no my brother do not this evil thing this man have come into my house and you be not to do him this wrong . see here be my daughter a virgin and his servant wife i will send them out for you to take them and do with them whatever you will . but do no such thing of shame to this man . but the men would not give ear to him so the man take his woman and send her out to them and they take her by force use her for their pleasure all night till the morning and when dawn come they let her go . then at the dawn of day the woman come and fall down at the door of the man 's house where her master be be stretch there till it be light . in the morning her master get up and open the door of the house go out to go on his way and he saw his servant wife stretch on the earth at the door of the house with her hand on the step . and he say to her get up and let u be go but there be no answer so he take her up and put her on the as and go on his way and come to his house . and when he have come to his house he get his knife and take the woman cut her up bone by bone into twelve part which he send through all israel . and he give order to the men whom he send say this be what you be to say to all the men of israel have ever an act like this be do from the day when the child of israel come out of egypt to this day ? give thought to it turn it over in your mind and give your opinion of it .then all the child of israel take up arm and the people come together like one man from dan to beer sheba and the land of gilead before the lord at mizpah . and the chief of the people out of all the tribe of israel take their place in the meeting of the people of god four hundred thousand footman arm with sword . now the child of benjamin have word that the child of israel have go up to mizpah . and the child of israel say make clear how this evil thing take place . then the levite the husband of the dead woman say in answer i come to gibeah in the land of benjamin i and my servant wife for the purpose of stop there for the night . and the townsman of gibeah come together against me go round the house on all side by night it be their purpose to put me to death and my servant wife be violently use by them and be dead . so i take her cut her into part which i send through all the country of the heritage of israel for they have do an act of shame in israel . here you all be you child of israel give now your suggestion about what be to be do . then all the people get up a one man and say not one of u will go to his tent or go back to his house but this be what we will do to gibeah we will go up against it by the decision of the lord and we will take ten men out of every hundred through all the tribe of israel a hundred out of every thousand a thousand out of every ten thousand to get food for the people so that they may give to gibeah of benjamin the right punishment for the act of shame they have do in israel . so all the men of israel be band together against the town unite like one man . and the tribe of israel send men through all the tribe of benjamin say what be this evil which have be do among you ? now give up those good for nothing person in gibeah so that we may put them to death clear away the evil from israel . but the child of benjamin would not give ear to the voice of their brother the child of israel . and the child of benjamin come together from all their town to gibeah to go to war with the child of israel . and the child of benjamin who come that day from the town be twenty six thousand men arm with sword in addition to the people of gibeah number seven hundred of the best fight men who be leave hand able to send a stone at a hair without error . and the men of israel other than benjamin be four hundred thousand in number all arm with sword they be all men of war . and they get up and go up to beth el to get direction from god and the child of israel say who be to be the first to go up to the fight against the child of benjamin ? and the lord say judah be to go up first . so the child of israel get up in the morning and put themselves in position against gibeah . and the men of israel go out to war against benjamin and the men of israel put their force in fight order against them at gibeah . then the child of benjamin come out from gibeah cut down twenty two thousand of the israelite that day . but the people the men of israel take heart again put their force in order and take up the same position a on the first day . now the child of israel go up weep before the lord till even request the lord and say be i to go forward again to the fight against the child of benjamin my brother ? and the lord say go up against him . so the child of israel go forward against the child of benjamin the second day . and the second day benjamin go out against them from gibeah cut down eighteen thousand men of the child of israel all swordsman . then all the child of israel and all the people go up to beth el weeping and wait there before the lord go without food all day till even and offer burn offering and peace offering before the lord . and the child of israel make request to the lord for the ark of the agreement of the lord be there in those day and phinehas the son of eleazar the son of aaron be in his place before it and say be i still to go on with the fight against the child of benjamin my brother or be i to give it up ? and the lord say go on for tomorrow i will give him into your hand . so israel put men secretly all round gibeah to make a surprise attack on it . and the child of israel go up against the child of benjamin on the third day and put themselves in fight order against gibeah a before . and the child of benjamin go out against the people move away from the town and a before at their first attack they put to death about thirty men of israel on the highway of which one go up to beth el and the other to gibeah and in the open country . and the child of benjamin say they be give way before u a at first . but the child of israel say let u go in flight and get them away from the town into the highway . so all the men of israel get up and put themselves in fight order at baal tamar and those who have be wait secretly to make a surprise attack come rush out of their place on the west of geba . and they come in front of gibeah ten thousand of the best men in all israel and the fighting become more violent but the child of benjamin be not conscious that evil be come on them . then the lord send sudden fear on benjamin before israel and that day the child of israel put to death twenty five thousand one hundred men of benjamin all of them swordsman . so the child of benjamin saw that they be overcome and the men of israel have give way before benjamin put their faith in the watcher who be to make the surprise attack on gibeah . and the watcher rush on gibeah and overrun it put all the town to the sword without mercy . now the sign fix between the men of israel and those make the surprise attack be that when they make a pillar of smoke go up from the town the men of israel be to make a turn about in the fight . and benjamin have overcome and put to death about thirty of the men of israel and be say certainly they be fall back before u a in the first fight . then the sign go up out of the town in the pillar of smoke and the benjamites turn back saw all the town go up in smoke to heaven . and the men of israel have make a turn about and the men of benjamin be overcome with fear for they saw that evil have overtake them . so turn their back on the men of israel they go in the direction of the waste land but the fight overtake them and those who come out of the town be head them off and put them to the sword . and crush benjamin down they go after them drive them from nohah as far a the east side of gibeah . eighteen thousand men of benjamin come to their death all strong men of war . and turn they go in flight to the rock of rimmon in the waste land and on the highway five thousand of them be cut off by the men of israel who push on hard after them to geba put to death two thousand more . so twenty five thousand of the swordsman of benjamin come to their end that day all strong men of war . but six hundred men turn back go in flight to the rock of rimmon in the waste land and be live on the rock of rimmon for four month . and the men of israel turn again against the child of benjamin put to the sword without mercy all the town and the cattle and everything there be burn every town which come into their hand .now the men of israel have take an oath in mizpah say not one of u will give his daughter a a wife to benjamin . and the people come to beth el wait there till even before god and give themselves up to bitter weep . and they say o lord the god of israel why have this fate come on israel that today one tribe have be cut off from israel ? then on the day after the people get up early and make an altar there offer burn offering and peace offering . and the child of israel say who be there among all the tribe of israel who do not come up to the lord at the meeting of all israel ? for they have take a great oath that whoever do not come up to mizpah to the lord be to be put to death . and the child of israel be move with pity for benjamin their brother say today one tribe have be cut off from israel . what be we to do about wife for those who be still live ? for we have take an oath by the lord that we will not give them our daughter for wife . and they say which one of the tribe of israel do not come up to mizpah to the lord ? and it be see that no one have come from jabesh gilead to the meeting . for when the people be number not one man of the people of jabesh gilead be present . so they the meeting send twelve thousand of the best fight men and give them order say go and put the people of jabesh gilead to the sword without mercy with their woman and their little one . and this be what you be to do every male and every woman who have have sex relation with a man you be to put to the curse but you be to keep safe the virgin . and they do so . now there be among the people of jabesh gilead four hundred young virgin who have never have sex relation with a man these they take to their tent in shiloh in the land of canaan . and all the meeting send to the men of benjamin who be in the rock of rimmon offer them peace . then benjamin come back and they give them the woman whom they have keep from death among the woman of jabesh gilead but still there be not enough for them . and the people be move with pity for benjamin because the lord have let his wrath loose on the tribe of israel . then the responsible men of the meeting say what be we to do about wife for the rest of them see that the woman of benjamin be dead ? and they say how be the rest of benjamin to be give offspring so that one tribe of israel may not be put out of existence see that we may not give them our daughter a wife ? for the child of israel have take an oath say curse be he who give a wife to benjamin . and they say see every year there be a feast of the lord in shiloh which be to the north of beth el on the east side of the highway which go up from beth el to shechem and on the south of lebonah . and they say to the men of benjamin go into the vine garden wait there secretly and watch and if the daughter of shiloh come out to take part in the dance then come from the vine garden and take a wife for every one of you from among the daughter of shiloh and go back to the land of benjamin . and when their father or their brother come and make trouble you be to say to them give them to u a an act of grace for we do not take them a wife for ourselves in war and if you yourselves have give them to u you would have be responsible for the broken oath . so the men of benjamin do this and get wife for themselves for every one of their number take them away by force from the dance then they go back to their heritage build up their town and living in them . then the child of israel go away from there every man to his tribe and his family every man go back to his heritage . in those day there be no king in israel every man do what seem right to him .now there come a time in the day of the judge when there be no food in the land . and a certain man go from beth lehem judah he and his wife and his two son to make a living place in the country of moab . and the name of the man be elimelech and the name of his wife naomi and the name of his two son mahlon and chilion ephrathites of beth lehem judah . and they come into the country of moab and be there for some time . and elimelech naomi 's husband come to his end and only her two son be with her . and they take two woman of moab a their wive the name of the one be orpah and the name of the other ruth and they go on living there for about ten year . and mahlon and chilion come to their end and the woman be without her two son and her husband . so she and her daughter in law get ready to go back from the country of moab for news have come to her in the country of moab that the lord in mercy for his people have give them food . and she go out of the place where she be and her two daughter in law with her and they go on their way to go back to the land of judah . and naomi say to her two daughter in law go back to your mother ' house may the lord be good to you a you have be good to the dead and to me may the lord give you rest in the house of your husband . then she give them a kiss and they be weep bitterly . and they say to her no but we will go back with you to your people . but naomi say go back my daughter why will you come with me ? have i more son in my body to become your husband ? go back my daughter and go on your way i be so old now that i may not have another husband . if i say i have hope if i have a husband tonight and might have son would you keep yourselves till they be old enough ? would you keep from have husband for them ? no my daughter but i be very sad for you that the hand of the lord be against me . then again they be weep and orpah give her mother in law a kiss but ruth would not be part from her . and naomi say see your sister in law have go back to her people and to her god go back after your sister in law . but ruth say give up request me to go away from you or to go back without you for where you go i will go and where you take your rest i will take my rest your people will be my people and your god my god . wherever death come to you death will come to me and there will be my last resting place the lord do so to me and more if we be part by anything but death . and when she saw that ruth be strong in her purpose to go with her she say no more . so the two of them go on till they come to beth lehem . and when they come to beth lehem all the town be move about them and they say be this naomi ? and she say to them do not let my name be naomi but mara for the ruler of all have give me a bitter fate . i go out full and the lord have send me back again with nothing why do you give me the name naomi see that the lord have give witness against me and the ruler of all have send sorrow on me ? so naomi come back out of the country of moab and ruth the moabitess her daughter in law with her and they come to beth lehem in the first day of the grain cutting .and naomi have a relation of her husband a man of wealth of the family of elimelech and his name be boaz . and ruth the moabitess say to naomi now let me go into the field and take up the head of grain after him in whose eye i may have grace . and she say to her go my daughter . and she go and come and take up the head of grain in the field after the cutter and by chance she go into that part of the field which be the property of boaz who be of the family of elimelech . and boaz come from beth lehem and say to the grain cutters the lord be with you . and they make answer the lord give you his bless . then boaz say to his servant who be in authority over the cutter whose girl be this ? and the servant who be in authority over the cutter say it be a moabite girl who come back with naomi out of the country of moab and she say to me let me come into the grain field and take up the grain after the cutter . so she come and have be here from morning till now without rest even for a minute . then say boaz to ruth give ear to me my daughter do not go to take up the grain in another field or go away from here but keep here by my young woman keep your eye on the field they be cut and go after them have i not give order to the young men not to put a hand on you ? and when you be in need of drink go to the vessel and take of what the young men have put there . then she go down on her face to the earth and say to him why have i grace in your eye that you give attention to me see i be from a strange people ? and boaz answering say to her i have have news of everything you have do for your mother in law after the death of your husband how you go away from your father and mother and the land of your birth and come to a people who be strange to you . the lord give you a reward for what you have do and may a full reward be give to you by the lord the god of israel under whose wing you have come to take cover . then she say may i have grace in your eye my lord for you have give me comfort and you have say kind word to your servant though i be not like one of your servant . and at meal time boaz say to her come here and take some of the bread and put your bit into the wine . and she take her seat among the grain cutter and he give her dry grain and she take it and there be more than enough for her meal . and when she get ready to take up the grain boaz give his young men order say let her take it even from among the cut grain and say nothing to her . and let some head of grain be pull out of what have be cord up and drop for her to take and let no sharp word be say to her . so she go on get together the head of grain till even and after crush out the seed it come to about an ephah of grain . and she take it up and go into the town and she let her mother in law see what she have got and after take enough for herself she give her the rest . and her mother in law say to her where do you take up the grain today and where be you work ? may a blessing be on him who give such attention to you . and she give her mother in law an account of where she have be work and say the name of the man with whom i be work today be boaz . and naomi say to her daughter in law may the blessing of the lord who have at all time be kind to the living and to the dead be on him . and naomi say to her the man be of our family one of our near relation . and ruth the moabitess say truly he say to me keep near my young men till all my grain be cut . and naomi say to ruth her daughter in law it be well my daughter for you to go out with his servant girl so that no danger may come to you in another field . so she keep near the servant girl of boaz to take up the grain till the cutting of the early grain and the cutting of the late grain be end and she go on living with her mother in law .and naomi her mother in law say to her my daughter be i not to get you a rest place where you may be in comfort ? and now be there not boaz our relation with whose young woman you be ? see tonight he be separate the grain from the waste in his grain floor . so take a bath and after rub your body with sweet oil put on your best robe and go down to the grain floor but do not let him see you till he have come to the end of his meal . but see to it when he go to rest that you take note of the place where he be sleep and go in there and uncover his foot take your place by him and he will say what you be to do . and she say i will do all you say . so she go down to the grain floor and do all her mother in law have say to her . now when boaz have take meat and drink and his heart be glad he go to take his rest at the end of the mass of grain then she come softly and uncover his foot go to rest . now in the middle of the night the man awake from his sleep in fear and lift himself up saw a woman stretch at his foot . and he say who be you ? and she answer say i be your servant ruth take your servant a wife for you be a near relation . and he say may the lord give you his bless my daughter even well than what you do at the first be this last kind act you have do in not go after young men with or without wealth . and now my daughter have no fear i will do for you whatever you say for it be clear to all my townspeople that you be a woman of virtue . now it be true that i be a near relation but there be a relation nearer than i. take your rest here tonight and in the morning if he will do for you what it be right for a relation to do very well let him do so but if he will not then by the living lord i myself will do so . and she take her rest at his foot till the morning and she get up before it be light enough for one to see another . and he say let it not come to anyone 's knowledge that the woman come to the grain floor . and he say take your robe stretch it out in your hand and she do so and he take six measure of grain and put them into it and give it her to take and she go back to the town . and when she come back her mother in law say to her how do it go with you my daughter ? and she give her an account of all the man have do to her . and she say he give me these six measure of grain say do not go back to your mother in law with nothing in your hand . then she say do nothing now my daughter till you see what will come of this for the man will take no rest till he have put this thing through .and boaz go up to the public place of the town and take his seat there and the near relation of whom he have be talk come by and boaz cry out to him by name say come and be seat here . and he come and be seat . then he get ten of the responsible men of the town and say be seat here . and they take their seat . then he say to the near relation naomi who have come back from the country of moab be offer for a price that bit of land which be our brother elimelech 's and it be in my mind to give you the chance of take it with the approval of those seat here and of the responsible men of my people . if you be ready to do what it be right for a relation to do then do it but if you will not do it say so to me now for there be no one who have the right to do it but you and after you myself . and he say i will do it . then boaz say on the day when you take this field you will have to take with it ruth the moabitess the wife of the dead so that you may keep the name of the dead living in his heritage . and the near relation say i be not able to do the relation 's part for fear of damage the heritage i have you may do it in my place for i be not able to do it myself . now in early time this be the way in israel when property be take over by a near relation or when there be a change of owner . to make the exchange certain one man take off his shoe and give it to the other and this be a witness in israel . so the near relation say to boaz take it for yourself . and he take off his shoe . then boaz say to the responsible men and to all the people you be witness today that i have take at a price from naomi all the property which be elimelech 's and everything which be chilion 's and mahlon 's . and further i have take ruth the moabitess who be the wife of mahlon to be my wife to keep the name of the dead man living in his heritage so that his name may not be cut off from among his countryman and from the memory of his town you be witness this day . and all the people who be in the public place and the responsible men say we be witness . may the lord make this woman who be about to come into your house like rachel and leah which two be the builder of the house of israel and may you have wealth in ephrathah and be great in beth lehem may your family be like the family of perez the son whom tamar give to judah from the offspring which the lord may give you by this young woman . so boaz take ruth and she become his wife and he go in to her and the lord make her with child and she give birth to a son . and the woman say to naomi a blessing on the lord who have not let you be this day without a near relation and may his name be great in israel . he will be a giver of new life to you and your comforter when you be old for your daughter in law who in her love for you be good than seven son have give birth to him . and naomi take the child and put her arm round it and she take care of it . and the woman who be her neighbour give it a name say naomi have a child and they give him the name of obed he be the father of jesse the father of david . now these be the generation of perez perez become the father of hezron and hezron become the father of ram and ram become the father of amminadab and amminadab become the father of nahshon and nahshon become the father of salmon and salmon become the father of boaz and boaz become the father of obed and obed become the father of jesse and jesse become the father of david .now there be a certain man of ramathaim a zuphite of the hill country of ephraim name elkanah he be the son of jeroham the son of elihu the son of tohu the son of zuph an ephraimite and he have two wife one name hannah and the other peninnah and peninnah be the mother of child but hannah have no child . now this man go up from his town every year to give worship and to make offering to the lord of army in shiloh . and the two son of eli hophni and phinehas the priest of the lord be there . and when the day come for elkanah to make his offering he give to peninnah his wife and to all her son and daughter their part of the feast but to hannah he give one part though hannah be very dear to him but the lord have not let her have child . and the other wife do everything possible to make her unhappy because the lord have not let her have child and year by year whenever she go up to the house of the lord she keep on attack her so that hannah give herself up to weeping and would take no food . then her husband elkanah say to her hannah why be you weep ? and why be you take no food ? why be your heart trouble ? be i not more to you than ten son ? so after they have take food and wine in the guest room hannah get up . now eli the priest be seat by the pillar of the doorway of the temple of the lord . and with grief in her soul weep bitterly she make her prayer to the lord . and she make an oath and say o lord of army if you will truly take note of the sorrow of your servant not turn away from me but keep me in mind and will give me a man child then i will give him to the lord all the day of his life and his hair will never be cut . now while she be a long time in prayer before the lord eli be watch her mouth . for hannah 's prayer come from her heart and though her lip be move she make no sound so it seem to eli that she be overcome with wine . and eli say to her how long be you go to be the bad for drink ? put away the effect of your wine from you . and hannah answer him say no my lord i be a woman whose spirit be break with sorrow i have not take wine or strong drink but i have be open my heart before the lord . do not take your servant to be a good for nothing woman for my word have come from my store up sorrow and pain . then eli say to her go in peace and may the god of israel give you an answer to the prayer you have make to him . and she say may your servant have grace in your eye . so the woman go away and take part in the feast and her face be no long sad . and early in the morning they get up and after worship before the lord they go back to ramah to their house and elkanah have connection with his wife and the lord keep her in mind . now the time come when hannah be with child give birth to a son and she give him the name samuel because she say i make a prayer to the lord for him . and the man elkanah with all his family go up to make the year 's offering to the lord and to give effect to his oath . but hannah do not go for she say to her husband i will not go till the child have be take from the breast and then i will take him with me and put him before the lord where he may be for ever . and her husband elkanah say to her do whatever seem right to you but not till you have take him from the breast only may the lord do a he have say . so the woman wait there give her son milk till he be old enough to be take from the breast . then when she have do so she take him with her with a three year old ox and an ephah of meal and a skin full of wine and take him to the house of the lord at shiloh now the child be still very young . and when they have make an offering of the ox they take the child to eli . and she say o my lord a your soul be live my lord i be that woman who be make a prayer to the lord here by your side my prayer be for this child and the lord have give him to me in answer to my request so i have give him to the lord for all his life he be the lord 's . then he give the lord worship there .and hannah in prayer before the lord say my heart be glad in the lord my horn be lift up in the lord my mouth be open wide over my hater because my joy be in your salvation . no other be holy a the lord for there be no other god but you there be no rock like our god . say no more word of pride let not uncontrolled saying come out of your mouth for the lord be a god of knowledge by him act be judge . the bow of the men of war be break and the feeble be clothe with strength . those who be full be offer themselves a servant for bread those who be in need be at rest truly she who have no child have become the mother of seven and she who have a family be waste with sorrow . the lord be the giver of death and life send men down to the underworld and lift them up . the lord give wealth and take a man 's good from him crush men down and again lift them up lift the poor out of the dust and him who be in need out of the low place to give them their place among ruler and for their heritage the seat of glory for the pillar of the earth be the lord 's and he have make them the base of the world . he will keep the foot of his holy one but the evil doer will come to their end in the dark night for by strength no man will overcome . those who make war against the lord will be break against them he will send his thunder from heaven the lord will be judge of the end of the earth he will give strength to his king lift up the horn of him on whom the holy oil have be put . then elkanah go to ramah to his house . and the child become the servant of the lord under the direction of eli the priest . now the son of eli be evil and good for nothing men have no knowledge of the lord . and the priest ' way with the people be this when any man make an offer the priest 's servant come while the flesh be be cook have in his hand a meat hook with three teeth this he put into the pot and everything which come up on the hook the priest take for himself . this they do in shiloh to all the israelite who come there . and more than this before the fat be burn the priest 's servant would come and say to the man who be make the offering give me some of the flesh to be cook for the priest he have no taste for meat cook in water but would have you give it uncooked . and if the man say to him first let the fat be burn then take as much a you will then the servant would say no you be to give it to me now or i will take it by force . and the sin of these young men be very great before the lord for they give no honour to the lord 's offering . but samuel do the work of the lord 's house while he be a child dress in a linen ephod . and his mother make him a little robe and take it to him every year when she come with her husband for the year 's offering . and every year eli give elkanah and his wife a blessing say may the lord give you offspring by this woman in exchange for the child you have give to the lord . and they go back to their house . and the lord have mercy on hannah and she give birth to three son and two daughter . and the young samuel become old before the lord . now eli be very old and he have news from time to time of what his son be do to all israel . and he say to them why be you do such thing ? for from all this people i get account of your evil way . no my son the account which be give me which the lord 's people be send about be not good . if one man do wrong to another god will be his judge but if a man 's sin be against the lord who will take up his cause ? but they give no attention to the voice of their father for it be the lord 's purpose to send destruction on them . and the young samuel become old have the approval of the lord and of men . and a man of god come to eli and say to him the lord say do i let myself be see by your father 's people when they be in egypt servant in pharaoh 's house ? do i take him out of all the tribe of israel to be my priest and to go up to my altar to make the smoke of the offering go up and to take up the ephod ? do i give to your father 's family all the offering make by fire by the child of israel ? why then be you look with envy on my offering of meat and of meal which be order by my word honour your son before me and make yourselves fat with all the best of the offering of israel my people ? for this reason the lord god of israel have say truly i do say that your family and your father 's people would have their place before me for ever but now the lord say let it not be so i will give honour to those by whom i be honour and those who have no respect for me will be of small value in my eye . see the day be come when your arm and the arm of your father 's people will be cut off and never again will there be an old man in your family . but one man of your family will not be cut off by my hand and his eye will be make dark and grief will be in his heart and all the offspring of your family will come to their end by the sword of men . and this will be the sign to you which will come on hophni and phinehas your son death will overtake them on the same day . and i will make a true priest for myself one who will do what be in my heart and in my mind and i will make for him a family which will not come to an end and his place will be before my holy one for ever . then it will be that the rest of your family anyone who have not be cut off will go down on his knee to him for a bit of silver or a bit of bread and say be please to put me into one of the priest 's place so that i may have a little food .now the young samuel be the servant of the lord before eli . in those day the lord keep his word secret from men there be no open vision . and at that time when eli be rest in his place now his eye be become cloud so that he be not able to see and the light of god be still burn while samuel be sleep in the temple of the lord where the ark of god be the voice of the lord say samuel 's name and he say here be i. and run to eli he say here be i for you say my name . and eli say i do not say your name go to your rest again . so he go back to his bed . and again the lord say samuel . and samuel get up and go to eli and say here be i for you certainly say my name . but he say in answer i say nothing my son go to your rest again . now at that time samuel have no knowledge of the lord and the revelation of the word of the lord have not come to him . and for the third time the lord say samuel 's name . and he get up and go to eli and say here be i for you certainly say my name . then it be clear to eli that the voice which have say the child 's name be the lord 's . so eli say to samuel go back and if the voice come again let your answer be say on lord for the ear of your servant be open . so samuel go back to his bed . then the lord come and say a before samuel samuel . then samuel make answer say on lord for the ear of your servant be open . and the lord say to samuel see i will do a thing in israel at which the ear of everyone hearing of it will be burn . in that day i will do to eli everything which i have say about his family from first to last . and you be to say to him that i will send punishment on his family for ever for the sin which he have knowledge of because his son have be curse god and he have no control over them . so i have make an oath to the family of eli that no offering of meat or of meal which they may make will ever take away the sin of his family . and samuel kept where he be not move till the time come for open the door of the house of god in the morning . and fear keep him from give eli an account of his vision . then eli say samuel my son . and samuel answering say here be i. and he say what do the lord say to you ? do not keep it from me may god 's punishment be on you if you keep from me anything he say to you . then samuel give him an account of everything keep nothing back . and he say it be the lord let him do what seem good to him . and samuel become old and the lord be with him and let not one of his word be without effect . and it be clear to all israel from dan to beer sheba that samuel have be make a prophet of the lord . and the lord be see again in shiloh for the lord give to samuel in shiloh the revelation of his word .now at that time the philistine come together to make war against israel and the men of israel go out to war against the philistine and take up their position at the side of eben ezer and the philistine put their force in position in aphek . and the philistine put their force in order against israel and the fighting be hard and israel be overcome by the philistine who put to the sword about four thousand of their army in the field . and when the people come back to their tent the responsible men of israel say why have the lord let the philistine overcome u today ? let u get the ark of the lord 's agreement here from shiloh so that it may be with u and give u salvation from the hand of those who be against u . so the people send to shiloh and get the ark of the agreement of the lord of army whose rest place be between the winged one and hophni and phinehas the two son of eli be there with the ark of god 's agreement . and when the ark of the lord 's agreement come into the tent circle all israel give a great cry so that the earth be sound with it . and the philistine hear the noise of their cry say what be this great cry among the tent of the hebrew ? then it become clear to them that the ark of the lord have come to the tent circle . and the philistine full of fear say god have come into their tent . and they say trouble be ours ! for never before have such a thing be see . trouble be ours ! who will give u salvation from the hand of these great god ? these be the god who send all sort of blow on the egyptian in the waste land . be strong o philistine be men ! do not be servant to the hebrew a they have be to you go forward to the fight without fear . so the philistine go to the fight and israel be overcome and every man go in flight to his tent and great be the destruction for thirty thousand footman of israel be put to the sword . and the ark of god be take and hophni and phinehas the son of eli be put to the sword . and a man of benjamin go run from the fight and come to shiloh the same day with his clothe out of order and earth on his head . and when he come eli be seat by the wayside watching and in his heart be fear for the ark of god . and when the man come into the town and give the news there be a great outcry . and eli hear the noise and the cry say what be the reason of this outcry ? and the man come quickly and give the news to eli . now eli be ninety eight year old and his eye be fix so that he be not able to see . and the man say to eli i have come from the army and have come in flight today from the fight . and he say how do it go my son ? and the man say israel go in flight from the philistine and there have be great destruction among the people and your two son hophni and phinehas be dead and the ark of god have be take . and at these word about the ark of god eli fall back off his seat by the side of the doorway into the town come down on the earth so that his neck be break and death overtook him for he be an old man and of great weight . he have be judge israel for forty year . and his daughter in law the wife of phinehas be with child and near the time when she would give birth and when she have the news that the ark of god have be take and that her father in law and her husband be dead her pain come on her suddenly and she give birth . and when she be very near death the woman who be with her say have no fear for you have give birth to a son . but she make no answer and give no attention to it . and she give the child the name of ichabod say the glory have go from israel because the ark of god be take and because of her father in law and her husband . and she say the glory be go from israel for the ark of god have be take .now the philistine have take the ark of god take it with them from eben ezer to ashdod . they take the ark of god into the house of dagon and put it by the side of dagon . and when the people of ashdod get up early on the morning after they saw that dagon have come down to the earth on his face before the ark of the lord . and they take dagon up and put him in his place again . and when they get up early on the morning after dagon have come down to the earth on his face before the ark of the lord and his head and his hand be break off on the doorstep only the base be in it place . so to this day no priest of dagon or any who come into dagon 's house will put his foot on the doorstep of the house of dagon in ashdod . but the hand of the lord be hard on the people of ashdod and he send disease on them through all the country of ashdod . and when the men of ashdod saw how it be they say let not the ark of the god of israel be with u for his hand be hard on u and on dagon our god . so they send for all the lord of the philistine to come together there and say what be we to do with the ark of the god of israel ? and their answer be let the ark of the god of israel be take away to gath . so they take the ark of the god of israel away . but after they have take it away the hand of the lord be stretch out against the town for it destruction and the sign of disease come out on all the men of the town small and great . so they send the ark of god to ekron . and when the ark of god come to ekron the people of the town make an outcry say they have send the ark of the god of israel to u for the destruction of u and of our people . so they send and get together all the lord of the philistine and they say send away the ark of the god of israel and let it go back to it place so that it may not be the cause of death to u and to our people for there be a great fear of death through all the town the hand of god be very hard on them there . and those men who be not overtake by death be cruelly diseased and the cry of the town go up to heaven .now the ark of the lord be in the country of the philistine for seven month . and the philistine send for the priest and those who be wise in secret art and say to them what be we to do with the ark of the lord ? how be we to send it away to it place ? and they say if you send away the ark of the god of israel do not send it without an offering but send him a sin offering with it then you will have peace again and it will be clear to you why the weight of his hand have not be lift from you . then they say what sin offering be we to send to him ? and they say five gold image of the growth cause by your disease and five gold mouse one for every lord of the philistine for the same disease come on you and on your lord . so make image of the growth cause by your disease and of the mouse which be damage your land and give glory to the god of israel it may be that the weight of his hand will be lift from you and from your god and from your land . why do you make your heart hard like the heart of pharaoh and the egyptian ? when he have make sport of them do they not let the people go and they go away ? so now take and make ready a new cart and two cow which have never come under the yoke and have the cow yoke to the cart and take their young one away from them and put the ark of the lord on the cart and the gold image which you be send a a sin offering in a chest by it side and send it away so that it may go . if it go by the land of israel to beth shemesh then this great evil be his work but if not then we may be certain that the evil be not his do but be the working of chance . and the men do so they take two cow yoke them to the cart and shut up their young one in their living place and they put the ark of the lord on the cart and the chest with the gold image . and the cow take the straight way by the road to beth shemesh they go by the highway not turn to the right or to the left and the sound of their voice be clear on the road and the lord of the philistine go after them as far a the edge of beth shemesh . and the people of beth shemesh be cut their grain in the valley and lift up their eye they saw the ark and be full of joy when they saw it . and the cart come into the field of joshua the beth shemite and come to a stop there by a great stone and cut up the wood of the cart they make a burned offering of the cow to the lord . then the levite take down the ark of the lord and the chest in which be the gold image and put them on the great stone and the men of beth shemesh make burn offering and give worship that day before the lord . and the five lord of the philistine have see it go back to ekron the same day . now these be the gold image which the philistine send a a sin offering to the lord one for ashdod one for gaza one for ashkelon one for gath one for ekron and the gold mouse one for every town of the philistine the property of the five lord wall town as well a country place and the great stone where they put the ark of the lord be still in the field of joshua the beth shemite to this day . but the lord send destruction on seventy men of the people of beth shemesh for look into the ark of the lord and great be the sorrow of the people for the destruction which the lord have send on them . and the men of beth shemesh say who be able to keep his place before the lord this holy god ? and to whom may he go from u ? and they send men to the people live in kiriath jearim say the philistine have send back the ark of the lord come and take it up to your country .so the men of kiriath jearim come and take the ark of the lord to the house of abinadab in gibeah and they make his son eleazar holy and put the ark in his care . and the ark be in kiriath jearim for a long time as much a twenty year and all israel be search after the lord with weep . then samuel say to all israel if with all your heart you would come back to the lord then put away all the strange god and the astarte from among you and let your heart be turn to the lord and be servant to him only and he will make you safe from the hand of the philistine . so the child of israel give up the worship of baal and astarte and become worshipper of the lord only . then samuel say let all israel come to mizpah and i will make prayer to the lord for you . so they come together to mizpah and get water drain it out before the lord and they take no food that day and they say we have do evil against the lord . and samuel be judge of the child of israel in mizpah . now when the philistine have news that the child of israel have come together at mizpah the lord of the philistine go up against israel . and the child of israel hearing of it be full of fear . and the child of israel say to samuel go on cry to the lord our god for u to make u safe from the hand of the philistine . and samuel take a young lamb offer all of it a a burned offering to the lord and samuel make prayer to the lord for israel and the lord give him an answer . and while samuel be offer the burned offer the philistine come near for the attack on israel but at the thunder of the lord 's voice that day the philistine be overcome with fear and they give way before israel . and the men of israel go out from mizpah and go after the philistine attack them till they come under beth car . then samuel take a stone and put it up between mizpah and jeshanah name it eben ezer and say up to now the lord have be our help . so the philistine be overcome and do not come into the country of israel again and all the day of samuel the hand of the lord be against the philistine . and the town which the philistine have take be give back to israel from ekron to gath and all the country round them israel make free from the power of the philistine . and there be peace between israel and the amorites . and samuel be judge of israel all the day of his life . from year to year he go in turn to beth el and gilgal and mizpah judging israel in all those place . and his base be at ramah where his house be there he be judge of israel and there he make an altar to the lord .now when samuel be old he make his son judge over israel . the name of his first son be joel and the name of his second abijah they be judge in beer sheba . and his son do not go in his way but move by the love of money take reward and be not upright in judge . then all the responsible men of israel get together and go to samuel at ramah and say to him see now you be old and your son do not go in your way give u a king now to be our judge so that we may be like the other nation . but samuel be not please when they say to him give u a king to be our judge . and samuel make prayer to the lord . and the lord say to samuel give ear to the voice of the people and what they say to you they have not be turn away from you but they have be turn away from me not desire me to be king over them . a they have do from the first from the day when i take them out of egypt till this day turn away from me and worship other god so now they be act in the same way to you . give ear now to their voice but make a serious protest to them and give them a picture of the sort of king who will be their ruler . and samuel say all these word of the lord to the people who be desire a king . and he say this be the sort of king who will be your ruler he will take your son and make them his servant his horseman and driver of his war carriage and they will go run before his war carriage and he will make them captain of thousand and of fifty some he will put to work ploughing and cut his grain and make his instrument of war and build his war carriage . your daughter he will take to be maker of perfume and cook and bread maker . he will take your field and your vine garden and your olive garden all the best of them and give them to his servant . he will take a tenth of your seed and of the fruit of your vine and give it to his servant . he will take your men servant and your servant girl and the best of your ox and your ass and put them to his work . he will take a tenth of your sheep and you will be his servant . then you will be cry out because of your king whom you have take for yourselves but the lord will not give you an answer in that day . but the people give no attention to the voice of samuel and they say no but we will have a king over u so that we may be like the other nation and so that our king may be our judge and go out before u to war . then samuel after hear all the people have to say go and give an account of it to the lord . and the lord say to samuel give ear to their voice and make a king for them . then samuel say to the men of israel let every man go back to his town .now there be a man of benjamin name kish the son of abiel the son of zeror the son of becorath the son of aphiah a benjamite a man of wealth . he have a son name saul a specially good look young man there be no one well look among the child of israel he be taller by a head than any other of the people . now the ass of saul 's father kish have go wander away . and kish say to his son saul take one of the servant with you and get up and go in search of the ass . so they go through the hill country of ephraim and through the land of shalishah but they saw no sign of them then they go through the land of shaalim but they be not there and they go through the land of the benjamites but they do not come across them . and when they have come to the land of zuph saul say to the servant who be with him come let u go back or my father may give up care about the ass and be trouble about u . but the servant say to him see now in this town there be a man of god who be highly honoured and everything he say come true let u go there now it may be that he will give u direction about our journey . then saul say to his servant but if we go what be we to take the man ? all our bread be go and we have no offering to take to the man of god what be we to do ? but the servant say in answer i have here a fourth part of a shekel of silver i will give that to the man of god and he will give u direction about our way . in the past in israel when a man go to get direction from god he say come let u go to the seer for he who now be name prophet be in those day give the name of seer . then saul say to his servant you have say well come let u go . so they go to the town where the man of god be . and when they be on the way up to the town they saw some young girl go out to get water and say to them be the seer here ? and they say he be in fact he be before you go quickly now for he have come into the town today for the people be make an offering in the high place today when you come into the town you will see him straight away before he go up to the high place for the feast the people be wait for his blessing before start the feast and after that the guest will take part in it . so go up now and you will see him . so they go up to the town and when they come inside the town samuel come face to face with them on his way to the high place . now the day before saul come the word of god have come to samuel say tomorrow about this time i will send you a man from the land of benjamin and on him you be to put the holy oil make him ruler over my people israel and he will make my people safe from the hand of the philistine for i have see the sorrow of my people whose cry have come up to me . and when samuel saw saul the lord say to him this be the man of whom i give you word ! he it be who be to have authority over my people . then saul come up to samuel in the doorway of the town and say give me direction if you will be so good to the house of the seer . then samuel say to saul i be the seer go up before me to the high place and take food with me today and in the morning i will let you go after open to you all the secret of your heart . a for your ass which have be wander for three day give no thought to them for they have come back . and for whom be all the desired thing in israel ? be they not for you and your father 's family ? and saul say be i not a man of benjamin the small of all the tribe of israel ? and my family the least of the family of benjamin ? why then do you say these word to me ? then samuel take saul and his servant into the guest room and make them take the chief place among all the guest who be there about thirty person . and samuel say to the cook give me that part which i give you order to keep by you . and the cook take up the leg with the fat tail on it and put it before saul . and samuel say this be the part which have be keep for you take it a your part of the feast because it have be keep for you till the right time come and till the guest be present . so that day saul take food with samuel . and when they have come down from the high place into the town where a bed be make ready for saul he go to rest . and about dawn samuel say to saul on the roof get up so that i may send you away . so saul get up and he and samuel go out together . and on their way down to the end of the town samuel say to saul give your servant order to go on in front of u so he go on but you keep here so that i may give you the word of god .then samuel take the bottle of oil and put the oil on his head and give him a kiss and say be not the lord with the holy oil making you ruler over israel his people ? and you will have authority over the people of the lord and you will make them safe from the hand of their attacker round about them and this will be the sign for you when you have go away from me today you will see two men by the rest place of rachel 's body in the land of benjamin at zelzah and they will say to you the ass which you go in search of have come back and now your father care no longer for the ass be troubled about you say what be i to do about my son ? then you be to go on from there and when you come to the oak tree of tabor you will see three men go up to god to beth el one have with him three young goat and another three cake of bread and another a skin full of wine they will say peace be with you and will give you two cake of bread which you be to take from them . after that you will come to gibeah the hill of god where an arm force of the philistine be station and when you come to the town you will see a band of prophet come down from the high place with instrument of music before them and they will be act like prophet and the spirit of the lord will come on you with power and you will be act like a prophet with them and will be change into another man . and when these sign come to you see that you take the chance which be offer you for god be with you . then you be to go down before me to gilgal where i will come to you for the offering of burned offering and peace offering go on wait there for seven day till i come to you and make clear to you what you have to do . and it come about that when he go away from samuel god give him a change heart and all those sign take place that day . and when they come to gibeah a band of prophet come face to face with him and the spirit of god come on him with power and he take his place among them a a prophet . now when saul 's old friend saw him among the band of prophet the people say to one another what have come to saul the son of kish ? be even saul among the prophet ? and one of the people of that place say in answer and who be their father ? so it become a common saying be even saul among the prophet ? then go away from the prophet he come to the house . and saul 's father 's brother say to him and his servant where have you be ? and he say search for the ass and when we saw no sign of them we come to samuel . then he say and what do samuel say to you ? and saul answer him say he give u word that the ass have come back . but he say nothing to him of samuel 's word about the kingdom . then samuel sent for the people to come together before the lord at mizpah and he say to the child of israel the lord the god of israel have say i take israel out of egypt and make you free from the hand of the egyptian and from all the kingdom which keep you down but today you be turn away from your god who himself have be your saviour from all your trouble and sorrow and you have say to him put a king over u . so now take your place before the lord by your tribe and by your thousand . so samuel make all the tribe of israel come near and the tribe of benjamin be take . then he make the tribe of benjamin come near by family and the family of the matrites be take and from them saul the son of kish be take but when they go in search of him he be nowhere to be see . so they put another question to the lord be the man present here ? and the answer of the lord be he be keep himself from view among the good . so they go quickly and make him come out and when he take his place among the people he be taller by a head than any of the people . and samuel say to all the people do you see the man of the lord 's selection how there be no other like him among all the people ? and all the people with loud cry say long life to the king ! then samuel give the people the law of the kingdom write them in a book which he put in a safe place before the lord . and samuel sent all the people away every man to his house . and saul go to gibeah to his house and with him go the men of war whose heart have be touch by god . but certain good for nothing person say how be this man to be our saviour ? and have no respect for him they give him no offering .then about a month after this nahash the ammonite come up and put his force in position for attack jabesh gilead and all the men of jabesh say to nahash make an agreement with u and we will be your servant . and nahash the ammonite say to them i will make an agreement with you on this condition that all your right eye be put out so that i may make it a cause of shame to all israel . then the responsible men of jabesh say to him give u seven day so that we may send men to every part of israel and then if no one come to our help we will come out to you . so they send representative to saul 's town gibeah and these give the news to the people and all the people give themselves to weep . now saul come from the field drive the ox before him and he say why be the people weep ? and they give him word of what the men of jabesh have say . and at their word the spirit of god come on saul with power and he become very angry . and he take two ox and cut them up send them through all the land of israel by the hand of runner say if any man do not come out after saul and samuel this will be do to his ox . and the fear of the lord come on the people and they come out like one man . and he have them number in bezek the child of israel be three hundred thousand and the men of judah thirty thousand . then he say to the representative who have come say to the men of jabesh gilead tomorrow by the time the sun be high you will be make safe . and the representative come and give the news to the men of jabesh and they be glad . so the men of jabesh say tomorrow we will come out to you and you may do to u whatever seem good to you . now on the day after saul put the people into three band and in the morning watch they come to the tent of the ammonite and they go on attack them till the heat of the day and those who be not put to death be put to flight in every direction so that no two of them be together . and the people say to samuel who be it who say be saul to be our king ? give the men up so that we may put them to death . and saul say not a man be to be put to death today for today the lord have make israel safe . then samuel say to the people come let u go to gilgal and there make the kingdom strong in the hand of saul . so all the people go to gilgal and there in gilgal they make saul king before the lord and peace offering be offer before the lord and there saul and all the men of israel be glad with great joy .and samuel say to all israel you see that i have give ear to everything you say to me and have make a king over you . and now see the king be before you and i be old and grey head and my son be with you i have be live before your eye from my early day till now . here i be give witness against me before the lord and before the man on whom he have put the holy oil whose ox or as have i take ? to whom have i be untrue ? who have be crush down by me ? from whose hand have i take a price for the blinding of my eye ? i will give it all back to you . and they say you have never be untrue to u or cruel to u you have take nothing from any man . then he say the lord be witness against you and the man on whom he have put the holy oil be witness this day that you have see no wrong in me . and they say he be witness . and samuel say to the people the lord be witness who give authority to moses and aaron and who take your father up out of the land of egypt . keep your place now while i take up the argument with you before the lord and give you the story of the righteousness of the lord which he have make clear by his act to you and to your father . when jacob and his son have come into egypt and be crush by the egyptian the prayer of your father come up to the lord and the lord send moses and aaron who take your father out of egypt and he put them into this place . but they be false to the lord their god and he give them up into the hand of sisera captain of the army of jabin king of hazor and into the hand of the philistine and into the hand of the king of moab who make war against them . then cry out to the lord they say we have do evil because we have be turn away from the lord worship the baal and the astarte but now make u safe from those who be against u and we will be your servant . so the lord send jerubbaal and barak and jephthah and samuel and take you out of the power of those who be fight against you on every side and make you safe . and when you saw that nahash the king of the ammonite be come against you you say to me no more of this we will have a king for our ruler when the lord your god be your king . here then be the king mark out by you the lord have put a king over you . if in the fear of the lord you be his servant hear his voice and not go against the order of the lord but be true to the lord your god you and the king ruling over you then all will be well but if you do not give ear to the voice of the lord but go against his order then the hand of the lord will be against you and against your king for your destruction a it be against your father . now keep where you be and see this great thing which the lord will do before your eye . be it not now the time of the grain cutting ? my cry will go up to the lord and he will send thunder and rain so that you may see and be conscious of your great sin which you have do in the eye of the lord in desire a king for yourselves . so samuel make prayer to the lord and the lord send thunder and rain that day and all the people be in fear of the lord and of samuel . and all the people say to samuel make prayer for u to the lord your god so that death may not overtake u for in addition to all our sin we have do this evil in desire a king . then samuel say to the people have no fear truly you have do evil but do not be turn away from the lord be his servant with all your heart and do not go from the right way turn to those false god in which there be no profit and no salvation for they be false . for the lord will not give his people up because of the honour of his name for it be the lord 's pleasure to make of you a people for himself . and a for me never will i go against the order of the lord by give up my prayer for you but i will go on teach you the good and right way . only go in the fear of the lord and be his true servant with all your heart keep in mind what great thing he have do for you . but if you still do evil destruction will overtake you and your king .and saul take for himself three thousand men of israel of whom he keep two thousand with him in michmash and in the mountain of beth el and a thousand be with jonathan in gibeah in the land of benjamin the rest of the people he send back to their tent . and jonathan make an attack on the arm force of the philistine station at gibeah and news be give to the philistine that the hebrew be turn against them . and saul have a horn sound through all the land and all israel have the news that saul have make an attack on the philistine and that israel be bitterly hat by the philistine . and the people come together after saul to gilgal . and the philistine come together to make war on israel three thousand war carriage and six thousand horseman and an army of people like the sand of the sea in number they come up and take up their position in michmash to the east of beth aven . when the men of israel saw the danger they be in for the people be troubled they take cover in crack in the hillside and in the wood and in rock and hole and hollow . and a great number of the people have go over jordan to the land of gad and gilead but saul be still in gilgal and all the people go after him shake in fear . and he go on wait there for seven day the time fix by samuel but samuel do not come to gilgal and the people be start to go away from him . then saul say come here and give me the burned offering and the peace offering . and he make a burned offering to the lord . and when the burn offering be end samuel come and saul go out to see him and to give him a blessing . and samuel say what have you do ? and saul say because i saw that the people be go away from me and you have not come at the time which have be fix and the philistine have come together at michmash i say now the philistine will come down on me at gilgal and i have make no prayer for help to the lord and so force myself to do it i make a burned offering . and samuel say to saul you have do a foolish thing you have not keep the rule which the lord your god give you it be the purpose of the lord to make your authority over israel safe for ever . but now your authority will not go on the lord search for a man who be please to him in every way have give him the place of ruler over his people because you have not do what the lord give you order to do . then samuel go up from gilgal and the rest of the people go up after saul against the men of war and they come from gilgal to gibeah in the land of benjamin and saul take the number of the people who be with him about six hundred men . and saul with jonathan his son and the people who be with them be wait in geba in the land of benjamin but the tent of the philistine be in michmash . and three band of men come out from the philistine to make an attack one band go by the road which go to ophrah into the land of shual and another go in the direction of beth horon and another go by the hill look down on the valley of zeboiim in the direction of the waste land . now there be no iron worker in all the land of israel for the philistine say for fear the hebrew make themselves sword or spear but all the israelite have to go to the philistine to get their plough and blade and ax and hook make sharp for they have instrument for put an edge on their plough and blade and fork and ax and for put iron point on their ox drive rod . so on the day of the fight at michmash not a sword or a spear be to be see in the hand of any of the people with saul and jonathan only saul and his son jonathan have them . and the arm force of the philistine go out to the narrow way of michmash .now one day jonathan the son of saul say to the young man who be with him look after his arm come let u go over to the philistine force over there . but he say nothing to his father . and saul be still wait in the farthest part of geba under the fruit tree in migron there be about six hundred men with him and ahijah the son of ahitub brother of ichabod the son of phinehas the son of eli the priest of the lord in shiloh who have the ephod . and the people have no idea that jonathan have go . now between the narrow road over the mountain by which jonathan be make his way to the philistine ' force there be a sharp overhanging rock on one side and a sharp rock on the other side one be name bozez and the other seneh . the one rock go up on the north in front of michmash and the other on the south in front of geba . and jonathan say to his young servant who have his arm come let u go over to the army of these men who have no circumcision it may be that the lord will give u help for there be no limit to his power the lord be able to give salvation by a great army or by a small band . and his servant say to him do whatever be in your mind see i be with you in every impulse of your heart . then jonathan say now we will go over to these men and let them see u . if they say to u keep quiet where you be till we come to you then we will keep our place and not go up to them . but if they say come up to u then we will go up for the lord have give them into our hand and this will be the sign to u . and they let the philistine force see the two of them and the philistine say look ! the hebrew be come out of the hole where they have take cover . and the arm men of the force give jonathan and his servant their answer say come up here to u and we will let you see something . then jonathan say to his servant come up after me for the lord have give them up into the hand of israel . and jonathan go up grip with his hand and his foot his servant go up after him and the philistine give way before jonathan when he make an attack on them and his servant put them to death after him . and at their first attack jonathan and his servant put to the sword about twenty men all inside the space of half an acre of land . and there be great fear in the tent and in the field and among all the men of the arm force and the attacker be shake with fear even the earth be move with a great shaking and there be a fear a from god . and the watchman of saul look out from geba in the land of benjamin saw all the army flow away and run here and there . then saul say to the people who be with him let everyone be number and let u see who have go from u . and when they have be number it be see that jonathan and his servant be not there . and saul say to ahijah let the ephod come here . for he go before israel with the ephod at that time . now while saul be talk to the priest the noise in the tent of the philistine become louder and louder and saul say to the priest take back your hand . and saul and all the people with him come together and go forward to the fight and every man 's sword be turn against the man at his side and there be a very great noise . then the hebrew who have be with the philistine for some time and have go up with them to their tent turn round be join to those who be with saul and jonathan . and all the men of israel who have take cover in the hill country of ephraim hearing that the philistine have be put to flight go after them attack them . so the lord make israel safe that day and the fight go over to beth aven . and all the people be with saul about twenty thousand men and the fight be general through all the hill country of ephraim but saul make a great error that day by put the people under an oath say let that man be curse who take food before even come and i have give punishment to those who be against me . so the people have not a taste of food . and there be honey on the face of the field and all the people come to the honey the bee have go from it but not a man put his hand to his mouth for fear of the curse . but jonathan have no knowledge of the oath his father have put on the people stretch out the rod which be in his hand put the end of it in the honey and put it to his mouth then his eye be make bright . then one of the people say to him your father put the people under an oath say let that man be curse who take any food this day . and the people be feeble needing food . then jonathan say my father have make trouble come on the land now see how bright my eye have become because i have take a little of this honey . how much more if the people have freely take their food from the good of those who be fight against them ! would there not have be much great destruction among the philistine ? that day they overcome the philistine from michmash to aijalon and the people be feeble from need of food . and rush at the good take in the fight the people take ox and sheep and young ox and put them to death there on the earth and have a meal take the flesh with the blood in it . then it be say to saul see the people be sin against the lord take the blood with the flesh . and he say to those who give him the news now let a great stone be roll to me here . and saul say go about among the people and say to them let every man come here to me with his ox and his sheep and put them to death here and take his meal do no sin against the lord by take the blood with the flesh . so all the people take their ox with them that night and put them to death there . and saul put up an altar to the lord this be the first altar which he put up to the lord . and saul say let u go down after the philistine by night attack them till the morning till there be not a man of them live . and they say do whatever seem right to you . then the priest say let u come near to god . and saul desire direction from god say be i to go down after the philistine ? will you give them up into the hand of israel ? but he give him no answer that day . and saul say come near all you chief of the people and let u get word from god and see in whom be this sin today . for by the living lord the saviour of israel even if the sinner be jonathan my son death will certainly be his fate . but not a man among all the people give him any answer . then he say to all israel you be on one side and i with jonathan my son will be on the other side . and the people say to saul do whatever seem good to you . then saul say to the lord the god of israel why have you not give me an answer today ? if the sin be in me or in jonathan my son o lord god of israel give urim and if it be in your people israel give thummim . and by the decision of the lord saul and jonathan be mark out and the people go free . and saul say give your decision between my son jonathan and me . and jonathan be take . then saul say to jonathan give me an account of what you have do . and jonathan give him the story and say certainly i take a little honey on the end of my rod and now death be to be my fate . and saul say may god 's punishment be on me if death be not your fate jonathan . and the people say to saul be death to come to jonathan the worker of this great salvation for israel ? let it not be so by the living lord not one hair of his head be to be touch for he have be work with god today . so the people keep jonathan from death . then saul turn back go after the philistine no longer and the philistine go back to their place . now when saul have take his place a ruler of israel he make war on those who be against him on every side moab and the ammonite and edom and the king of zobah and the philistine and whichever way he go he overcome them . and he do great thing and overcome the amalekites and make israel safe from the hand of their attacker . now the son of saul be jonathan and ishvi and malchi shua and these be the name of his daughter the older be name merab and the young michal the name of saul 's wife be ahinoam the daughter of ahimaaz the captain of his army be abner the son of ner brother of saul 's father . kish the father of saul and ner the father of abner be son of abiel . all through the life of saul there be bitter war against the philistine and whenever saul saw any strong man or any good fighting man he keep him near himself .and samuel say to saul the lord send me to put the holy oil on you and to make you king over his people over israel so give ear now to the word of the lord . the lord of army say i will give punishment to amalek for what he do to israel fight against him on the way when israel come out of egypt . go now and put amalek to the sword put to the curse all they have without mercy put to death every man and woman every child and baby at the breast every ox and sheep camel and as . and saul sent for the people and have them number in telaim two hundred thousand footman and ten thousand men of judah . and saul come to the town of amalek and take up his position in the valley secretly . and saul say to the kenites go away take yourselves out from among the amalekites or destruction will overtake you with them for you be kind to the child of israel when they come out of egypt . so the kenites go away from among the amalekites . and saul make an attack on the amalekites from havilah on the road to shur which be before egypt . he take agag king of the amalekites prisoner and put all the people to the sword without mercy . but saul and the people do not put agag to death and they keep the best of the sheep and the ox and the fat beast and the lamb and whatever be good not desire to put them to the curse but everything which be bad and of no use they put to the curse . then the lord say to samuel it be no longer my pleasure for saul to be king for he be turn back from go in my way and have not do my order . and samuel be very sad cry to the lord in prayer all night . and early in the morning he get up and go to saul and word be give to samuel that saul have come to carmel and put up a pillar and have go from there down to gilgal . and samuel come to saul and saul say to him may the blessing of the lord be with you i have do what be order by the lord . and samuel say what then be this sound of the cry of sheep and the noise of ox which come to my ear ? and saul say they have take them from the amalekites for the people have keep the best of the sheep and of the ox a an offering to the lord your god all the rest we have give up to destruction . then samuel say to saul say no more ! let me give you word of what the lord have say to me this night . and he say to him say on . and samuel say though you may seem little to yourself be you not head of the tribe of israel ? for the lord with the holy oil make you king over israel and the lord send you on a journey and say go and put to the curse those sinner the amalekites fight against them till every one be dead . why then do you not do the order of the lord but by violently take their good do evil in the eye of the lord ? and saul say truly i have do the order of the lord and have go the way the lord send me i have take agag the king of amalek and have give the amalekites up to destruction . but the people take some of their good sheep and oxen the chief of the thing which be put to the curse to make an offering of them to the lord your god in gilgal . and samuel say have the lord a much delight in offering and burn offering a in the do of his order ? truly to do his pleasure be well than to make offering and to give ear to him than the fat of sheep . for to go against his order be like the sin of those who make use of secret art and pride be like give worship to image . because you have put away from you the word of the lord he have put you from your place a king . and saul say to samuel great be my sin for i have go against the order of the lord and against your word because fear the people i do what they say . so now let my sin have forgiveness and go back with me to give worship to the lord . and samuel say to saul i will not go back with you for you have put away from you the word of the lord and the lord have put you from your place a king over israel . and when samuel be turn round to go away saul take the skirt of his robe in his hand and the cloth come away . and samuel say to him the lord have take away the kingdom of israel from you this day by force and have give it to a neighbour of yours who be good than you . and far the glory of israel will not say what be false and his purpose may not be change for he be not a man whose purpose may be change . then he say great be my sin but still give me honour now before the head of my people and before israel and come back with me so that i may give worship to the lord your god . so samuel go back after saul and saul give worship to the lord . then samuel say make agag the king of the amalekites come here to me . and agag come to him shake with fear . and agag say truly the pain of death be past . and samuel say a your sword have make woman without child so now your mother will be without child among woman . and agag be cut up by samuel bone from bone before the lord in gilgal . then samuel go to ramah and saul go up to his house in gibeah in the land of saul . and samuel never saw saul again till the day of his death but samuel be sorrow for saul and it be no long the lord 's pleasure for saul to be king over israel .and the lord say to samuel how long will you go on sorrow for saul seeing that i have put him from his place a king over israel ? take oil in your vessel and go i will send you to jesse the beth lehemite for i have get a king for myself among his son . and samuel say how be it possible for me to go ? if saul get news of it he will put me to death . and the lord say take a young cow with you and say i have come to make an offering to the lord . and send for jesse to be present at the offering and i will make clear to you what you be to do and you be to put the holy oil on him whose name i give you . and samuel do a the lord say and come to beth lehem . and the responsible men of the town come out to him in fear and say do you come in peace ? and he say in peace i have come to make an offering to the lord make yourselves clean and come with me to make the offering . and he make jesse and his son clean and send for them to be present at the offering . now when they come look at eliab he say clearly the man of the lord 's selection be before him . but the lord say to samuel do not take note of his face or how tall he be because i will not have him for the lord 's view be not man 's man take note of the out form but the lord see the heart . then jesse sent for abinadab and make him come before samuel . and he say the lord have not take this one . then jesse make shammah come before him . and he say the lord have not take this one . and jesse make his seven son come before samuel . and samuel say to jesse the lord have not take any of these . then samuel say to jesse be all your child here ? and he say there be still the young and he be look after the sheep . and samuel say to jesse send and make him come here for we will not take our seat till he be here . so he send and make him come in . now he have red hair and beautiful eye and please look . and the lord say come put the oil on him for this be he . then samuel take the bottle of oil and put the oil on him there among his brother and from that day the spirit of the lord come on david with power . so samuel go back to ramah . now the spirit of the lord have go from saul and an evil spirit from the lord be trouble him . and saul 's servant say to him see now an evil spirit from god be trouble you . now give order to your servant who be here before you to go in search of a man who be an expert player on a corded instrument and it will be that when the evil spirit from god be on you he will make music for you on his instrument and you will get well . and saul say to his servant then get me a man who be an expert player and make him come to me . then one of the servant in answer say i have see a son of jesse the beth lehemite who be expert at playing and a strong man and a man of war and he be wise in his word and please in look and the lord be with him . so saul send his servant to jesse and say send me your son david who be with the sheep . and jesse take five cake of bread and a skin of wine and a young goat and send them to saul by david . and david come to saul wait before him and he become very dear to saul who make him his servant give him the care of his arm . and saul sent to jesse say let david be with me for he be please to me . and whenever the evil spirit from god come on saul david take his instrument and make music so new life come to saul and he get well and the evil spirit go away from him .now the philistine get their army together for war and come together at socoh in the land of judah and take up their position between socoh and azekah in ephes dammim . and saul and the men of israel come together and take up their position in the valley of elah and put their force in order against the philistine . the philistine be station on the mountain on one side and israel on the mountain on the other side and there be a valley between them . and a fighter come out from the tent of the philistine name goliath of gath he be more than six cubit tall . and he have a head dress of brass on his head and he be dress in a coat of metal the weight of which be five thousand shekel of brass . his leg be cover with plate of brass and hang on his back be a javelin of brass . the stem of his spear be as long a a cloth worker 's rod and it head be make of six hundred shekel ' weight of iron and one go before him with his body cover . he take up his position and in a loud voice say to the army of israel why have you come out to make war ? be i not a philistine and you servant of saul ? send out a man for yourselves and let him come down to me . if he be able to have a fight with me and overcome me then we will be your servant but if i be able to overcome him then you will be our servant and do work for u . and the philistine say i have put to shame the army of israel this day give me a man so that we may have a fight together . and saul and all israel hear those word of the philistine be troubled and full of fear . now david be the son of that ephrathite of beth lehem judah name jesse who have eight son and he be an old man in saul 's day and far on in year . and the three old son of jesse have go with saul to the fight the name of the three who go to the fight be eliab the old and abinadab the second and shammah the third . and david be the young and the three old be with saul 's army . now david go to and from saul look after his father 's sheep at beth lehem . and the philistine come near every morning and evening for forty day . and jesse say to his son david take now for your brother an ephah of this dry grain and these ten cake of bread and go quickly with them to the tent to your brother and take these ten cheese to the captain of their thousand and see how your brother be and come back with a sign to say how they be . now saul and they and all the men of israel be in the valley of elah fight with the philistine . and david get up early in the morning and give the sheep into the care of a keeper take the thing and go a jesse have say and he come to the line where the cart be when the army be go out to the fight give their war cry . and israel and the philistine have put their force in position army against army . and david give his parcel into the hand of the keeper of the army store and go run to the army and come to his brother to get knowledge about them . and while he be talk to them the fighter the philistine of gath goliath by name come out from the philistine ' line and say the same word in david 's hearing . and all the men of israel when they saw him go in flight overcome with fear . and the men of israel say have you see this man ? clearly he have come out to put shame on israel and it be certain that if any man overcome him the king will give that man great wealth and will give him his daughter and make his father 's family free in israel . and david say to the men near him what will be do to the man who overcome this philistine and take away the shame from israel ? for who be this philistine a man without circumcision that he have put shame on the army of the living god ? and the people give him this answer so it will be do to the man who overcome him . and eliab his old brother hear what david say to the men be move to wrath against david and say why have you come here ? into whose care have you give that little flock of sheep in the waste land ? i have knowledge of your pride and the evil of your heart you have come down to see the fight . and david say what have i do now ? be it not only a word ? and turn away from him to one of the other men he say the same word and the people give him the same answer . and hear what david say they give saul word of it and he send for him . and david say to saul let no man 's heart become feeble because of him i your servant will go out and have a fight with this philistine . and saul say to david you be not able to go out against this philistine and have a fight with him for you be only a boy and he have be a man of war from his early day . and david say to saul your servant have be keeper of his father 's sheep and if a lion or a bear come and take a lamb from the flock i go out after him and overcome him and take it out of his mouth and if turn on me he come at me i take him by the hair and overcame him and put him to death . your servant have overcome lion and bear and the fate of this philistine who be without circumcision will be like theirs seeing that he have put shame on the army of the living god . and david say the lord who keep me safe from the grip of the lion and the bear will be my saviour from the hand of this philistine . and saul say to david go ! and may the lord be with you . then saul give david his clothing of war and put a head dress of brass on his head and have him clothe with a coat of metal . and david take saul 's sword and put the band round him over the metal coat and be unable to go forward for he be not use to them . then david say to saul it be not possible for me to go out with these for i be not use to them . so david take them off . then he take his stick in his hand and get five smooth stone from the bed of the stream and put them in a bag such a be use by sheep keeper and in his hand be a leather band use for send stone and so he go in the direction of the philistine . and the philistine come nearer to david and the man who have his body cover go before him . and when the philistine take note saw david he have a poor opinion of him for he be only a boy red haired and good look . and the philistine say to david be i a dog that you come out to me with stick ? and the philistine put curse on david by all his god . and the philistine say to david come here to me and i will give your flesh to the bird of the air and the beast of the field . then david say to the philistine you come to me with a sword and a spear and a javelin but i come to you in the name of the lord of army the god of the army of israel on which you have put shame . this day the lord will give you up into my hand and i will overcome you and take your head off you and i will give the body of the philistine army to the bird of the air and the beast of the earth today so that all the earth may see that israel have a god and all these people who be here today may see that the lord do not give salvation by sword and spear for the fight be the lord 's and he will give you up into our hand . now when the philistine make a move and come near to david david quickly go at a run in the direction of the army meet the philistine face to face . and david put his hand in his bag and take out a stone and send it from his leather band straight at the philistine and the stone go deep into his brow and he go down to the earth fall on his face . so david overcame the philistine with his leather band and a stone wound the philistine and cause his death but david have no sword in his hand . so run up to the philistine and put his foot on him david take his sword out of it cover and put him to death cut off his head with it . and when the philistine saw that their fighter be dead they go in flight . and the men of israel and of judah get up and give a cry and go after the philistine as far a gath and the town door of ekron . and the wounded of the philistine be fall down by the road from shaaraim all the way to gath and ekron . then the child of israel come back from go after the philistine and take their good from the tent . and david take the head of the philistine to jerusalem but the metal war dress and the arm he put in his tent . and when saul saw david go out against the philistine he say to abner the captain of the army abner whose son be this young man ? and abner say on your life o king i have no idea . and the king say make search and see whose son this young man be . and when david be come back after the destruction of the philistine abner take him to saul with the head of the philistine in his hand . and saul say to him young man whose son be you ? and david in answer say i be the son of your servant jesse of beth lehem .now after david 's talk with saul be end the soul of jonathan be join with the soul of david and david become a dear to him a his very life . and that day saul take david and would not let him go back to his father 's house . then jonathan and david make an agreement together because of jonathan 's love for david . and jonathan take off the robe he have on and give it to david with all his military dress even to his sword and his bow and the band round his body . and david go wherever saul send him and do wisely and saul put him at the head of his men of war and this be please to all the people as well a to saul 's servant . now on their way when david come back after the destruction of the philistine the woman come out of all the town of israel with song and dance meeting david with melody and joy and instrument of music . and the woman answer one another in their song say saul have put to death his thousand and david his ten of thousand . and saul be very angry and this saying be unpleasing to him and he say they have give david credit for ten of thousand and to me for only thousand what more be there for him but the kingdom ? and from that day saul be look with envy on david . now on the day after an evil spirit from god come on saul with great force and he be act like a prophet among the men of his house while david be make music for him a he do day by day and saul have his spear in his hand . and saul balance the spear in his hand say i will give david a blow pin him to the wall . and david get away from him twice . and saul go in fear of david because the lord be with david and have go away from saul . so saul send him away and make him a captain over a thousand and he go about his business before the people . and in all his undertaking david do wisely and the lord be with him . and when saul saw how wisely he do he be in fear of him . but david be love by all israel and judah for he go out and come in before them . and saul say to david here be my old daughter merab whom i will give you for your wife only be strong for me fight in the lord 's war . for saul say let it not be through me that his fate come to him but through the philistine . and david say to saul who be i and what be my father 's family in israel that i be to be son in law to the king ? but when the time come to give merab saul 's daughter to david she be give to adriel of meholath . and saul 's daughter michal be in love with david and saul have word of it and be please . and saul say i will give her to him so that she may be a cause of danger to him and so that the hand of the philistine may be against him . so saul say to david today you be to become my son in law for the second time . and saul give his servant order say have talk with david secretly and say to him see how the king have delight in you and how you be love by all his servant then be the king 's son in law . and saul 's servant say these thing to david . and david say do it seem to you a small thing to be the king 's son in law seeing that i be a poor man of no great name ? and the servant of saul give him an account of what david have say . and saul say then say to david the king have no desire for any bride price but only for the private part of a hundred philistine so that the king may get the good of his hater . but it be in saul 's mind that david might come to his end by the hand of the philistine . and when his servant say these word to david he be well pleased to be the son in law of the king . and the day be still not past . so david and his men get up and go and put to death two hundred of the philistine and david take their private part and give the full number of them to the king so that he might be the king 's son in law . and saul give him his daughter michal for his wife . and it be clear to saul that the lord be with david and he be love by all israel . and saul 's fear of david become all the great and he go on hat him day by day . then the ruler of the philistine go out to war and whenever they go out david do more wisely than all the other servant of saul so that his name become greatly honour .and saul give order to his son jonathan and to all his servant to put david to death . but saul 's son jonathan have great delight in david . and jonathan say to david saul my father be purpose your death so now take care in the morning and keep yourself safe in a secret place and i will go out and take my place by my father 's side in the field near where you be and i will get into talk with my father about you and when i see how thing be i will give you word . and jonathan give his father saul a good account of david and say to him let not the king do wrong against his servant against david because he have do you no wrong and all his act have have a good outcome for you for he put his life in danger and overcome the philistine and the lord give all israel salvation you saw it and be glad why then be you sin against him who have do no wrong desire the death of david without cause ? and saul give ear to the voice of jonathan and say with an oath by the living lord he be not to be put to death . then jonathan sent for david and give him word of all these thing . and jonathan take david to saul who keep him by his side a in the past . and there be war again and david go out fight the philistine cause great destruction among them and they go in flight before him . and an evil spirit from the lord come on saul when he be seat in his house with his spear in his hand and david make music for him . and saul would have send his spear through him pin him to the wall but he get away and the spear go into the wall and that night david go in flight and get away . then in that night saul send men to david 's house to keep watch on him so a to put him to death in the morning and david 's wife michal say to him if you do not go away to a safe place tonight you will be put to death in the morning . so michal let david down through the window and he go in flight and get away . then michal take the image and put it in the bed with a cushion of goat 's hair at it head and she put clothe over it . and when saul send men to take david she say he be ill. and saul send his men to see david say do not come back without him take him in his bed so that i may put him to death . and when the men come in there be the image in the bed with the cushion of goat 's hair at it head and saul say to michal why have you be false to me let my hater go and get safely away ? and in answer michal say to saul he say to me let me go or i will put you to death . so david go in flight and get away and come to ramah to samuel and give him an account of all saul have do to him . and he and samuel go and be live in naioth . and word be give to saul that david be at naioth in ramah . and saul sent men to take david and when they saw the band of prophet at work with samuel in his place at their head the spirit of god come on saul 's men and they become like prophet . and saul have news of this sent other men who in the same way become like prophet . and a third time saul send men and they like the others become like prophet . then he himself go to ramah and come to the great water spring in secu and question the people he say where be samuel and david ? and one say they be at naioth in ramah . and he go on from there to naioth in ramah and the spirit of god come on him and he go on act like a prophet till he come to naioth in ramah . and he take off his clothing act like a prophet before samuel and fall down he be stretch out without his clothing all that day and all that night . this be the reason for the saying be even saul among the prophet ?and david go in flight from naioth in ramah and come to jonathan and say what have i do ? what be my crime and my sin against your father that he be attempt to take my life ? and he say to him far be the thought you will not be put to death see my father do nothing great or small without give me word of it would he keep this secret from me ? it be not so . but david take his oath again and say your father see that i be dear to you so he say to himself let jonathan have no idea of this for it will be a grief to him but a the lord be live and a your soul be live there be only a step between me and death . then jonathan say to david whatever your desire be i will do it for you . and david say to jonathan tomorrow be the new moon and i will not be seat with the king at his table but let me go to a safe place in the country till the evening . and if your father take note of the fact that i be away say david make a request to me for himself that he might go to beth lehem to his town for it be the time when his family make their offering year by year . if he say it be well your servant will be at peace but if he be angry then it will be clear to you that he have an evil purpose in mind against me . so then be kind to your servant for you have be unite with your servant in an agreement make before the lord but if there be any wrongdoing in me put me to death yourself why take me to your father ? and jonathan say do not have such a thought for if i saw that my father be design evil against you would i not give you word of it ? then david say to jonathan who will give me word if your father give you a rough answer ? and jonathan say to david come let u go out into the country . and the two of them go out together into the open country . and jonathan say to david may the lord the god of israel be witness when i have have a chance of talk to my father about this time tomorrow if his feeling to david be good will i not send and give you the news ? may the lord 's punishment be on jonathan if it be my father 's pleasure to do you evil and i do not give you word of it and send you away so that you may go in peace and may the lord be with you a he have be with my father . and may you while i be still live o may you be kind to me a the lord be kind and keep me from death ! and let not your mercy ever be cut off from my family even when the lord have send destruction on all david 's hater cut them off from the face of the earth . and if it come about that the name of jonathan be cut off from the family of david the lord will make david responsible . and jonathan again take an oath to david because of his love for him for david be a dear to him a his very soul . then jonathan say to him tomorrow be the new moon and it will be see that you be not present for there will be no one in your seat . and on the third day it will be specially note and you will go to the place where you take cover when the other business be in hand waiting by the hill over there . and on the third day i will send arrow from my bow against it side a if at a mark . and i will send my boy to have a look for the arrow . and if i say to him see the arrow be on this side of you take it up ! then you may come for there be peace for you and no evil by the living lord . but if i say to the boy see the arrow have go past you then go on your way for the lord have send you away . a for what you and i be talk of the lord be between you and me for ever . so david go to a secret place in the country and when the new moon come the king take his place at the feast . and the king take his seat a at other time by the wall and jonathan be in front and abner be seat by saul 's side but there be no one in david 's seat . but saul say nothing that day for his thought be something have take place make him unclean it be clear that he be not clean . and on the day after the new moon that be the second day there be still no one in david 's seat and saul say to his son jonathan why have the son of jesse not come to the feast yesterday or today ? and answer saul jonathan say he make a request to me that he might go to beth lehem say our family be make an offering in the town and my brother have give me order to be there so now if i have grace in your eye let me go away and see my brother . this be why he have not come to the king 's table . then saul be move to wrath against jonathan and he say to him you son of an evil and uncontrolled woman have i not see how you have give your love to the son of jesse to your shame and the shame of your mother ? for while the son of jesse be live on the earth your position be unsafe and your kingdom be in danger . so make him come here to me for it be certainly right for him to be put to death . and jonathan answer his father saul say to him why be he to be put to death ? what have he do ? and saul point his spear at him make an attempt to give him a wound from which it be clear to jonathan that his father 's purpose be to put david to death . so jonathan get up from the table burn with wrath and take no part in the feast the second day of the month be full of grief for david because his father have put shame on him . now in the morning jonathan go out into the field at the time he have say to david and he have a little boy with him . and he say to the boy go and get the arrow i let loose from my bow . and while the boy be run he send an arrow past him . and when the boy come to the place where the arrow be jonathan cry out after the boy say have it not go past you ? and jonathan go on cry out after the boy be quick do not keep wait about go quickly . and jonathan 's boy get the arrow and come back to his master . but the boy have no idea what be go on only jonathan and david have knowledge of it . and jonathan give his bow and arrows to the boy and say to him take these and go back to the town . and when the boy have go david come from his secret place by the hill and fall to the earth go down on his face three time and they give one another a kiss weeping together till david 's grief be the great . and jonathan say to david go in peace for we two have take an oath in the name of the lord say the lord will be between me and you and between my seed and your seed for ever . then david go away and jonathan go into the town .then david come to nob to ahimelech the priest and ahimelech be full of fear at meeting david and say to him why be you by yourself have no man with you ? and david say to ahimelech the priest the king have give me order and have say to me say nothing to anyone about the business on which i be send you and the order i have give you and a certain place have be fix to which the young men be to go . so now if you have here five cake of bread give them into my hand or whatever you have . and the priest answering david say i have no common bread here but there be holy bread if only the young men have keep themselves from woman . and david in answer say to the priest certainly woman have be keep from u and a have be do before when i have go out the arm of the young men be make holy even though it be a common journey how much more today will their arm be make holy . so the priest give him the holy bread there be no other only the holy bread which have be take from before the lord so that new bread might be put in it place on the day when it be take away . now a certain man of the servant of saul be there that day keep back before the lord his name be doeg an edomite the strong of saul 's runner . and david say to ahimelech have you no sword or spear with you here ? for i have come without my sword and other arm because the king 's business have to be do quickly . and the priest say the sword of goliath the philistine whom you put to death in the valley of elah be here fold in a cloth at the back of the ephod take that if you will for there be no other sword here . and david say there be no other sword like that give it to me . then david get up and go in flight that day for fear of saul and go to achish the king of gath . and the servant of achish say to him be not this david the king of the land ? do they not make song about him in their dance say saul have put to death thousand and david ten of thousand ? and david take these word to heart fear achish the king of gath . so change his behaviour before them he make it seem a if he be off his head hammer on the door of the town and let the water from his mouth go down his chin . then achish say to his servant look ! the man be clearly off his head why have you let him come before me ? be there not enough unbalanced men about me that you have let this person come and do such trick before me ? be such a man to come into my house ?so david go away from there and take cover in a strong place at adullam and his brother and all his father 's people hearing of it go down to him there . and everyone who be in trouble and everyone who be in debt and everyone who be bitter in soul come together to him and he become captain over them about four hundred men be join to him . and from there david go to mizpeh in the land of moab and he say to the king of moab let my father and mother come and make their living place with you till it be clear to me what god will do for me . and he take them to the king of moab and they go on living with him while david be in his safe place . and the prophet gad say to david do not go on living in this place but go into the land of judah . then david go away and come to the woodland of hereth . and news be give to saul that david have be see and the men who be with him now saul be in gibeah seat under the tree in the high place with his spear in his hand and all his servant be in their place before him . then saul say to his servant who be there about him give ear now you benjamites will the son of jesse give to every one of you field and vine garden will he make you all captain of hundred and captain of thousand that all of you have make design against me and not one of you give me word when my son make an agreement with the son of jesse and not one of you have pity for me or have make my eye open to the fact that my servant have be move by my son against me a at this day ? then doeg the edomite who be by the side of the servant of saul in answer say i saw the son of jesse come to nob to ahimelech the son of ahitub . and he get direction from the lord for him and give him food and put in his hand the sword of goliath the philistine . then the king sent for ahimelech the priest the son of ahitub and for all the men of his father 's family who be priest in nob and they all come to the king . and saul say give ear now o son of ahitub . and answer he say here i be my lord . and saul say to him why have you make design against me with the son of jesse give him food and a sword and get direction from the lord for him and help him to take up arm against me and to be on the watch to make a secret attack on me a he be do now ? then ahimelech answer say to the king who among all your servant be so true to you a david who be the king 's son in law and be a captain of your arm men and have a place of honour in your house ? be this the first time i have get direction from god for him ? far be the thought ! let the king make no such statement against his servant or my father 's family for your servant have no knowledge great or small of this thing . and the king say you will certainly be put to death ahimelech you and all your father 's family . then the king say to the runner who be wait near him put the priest of the lord to death because they be on david 's side and have knowledge of his flight do not give me word of it . but the king 's servant would not put out their hand to make an attack on the lord 's priest . then the king say to doeg you be to put the priest to death . and doeg the edomite turning on the priest and attack them put to death that day eighty five men who take up the ephod . and nob the town of the priest he put to the sword all the men and woman child and baby at the breast and ox and ass and sheep . and abiathar one of the son of ahimelech the son of ahitub get away and go in flight after david and give him the news of how saul have put to death the lord 's priest . and david say to abiathar i be certain that day when doeg the edomite be there that he would take the news to saul i be responsible for the life of all your father 's family . keep here with me and have no fear for he who have design on my life have design on yours but with me you will be safe .and they send word to david say the philistine be fight against keilah and take the grain from the grain floor . so david question the lord say be i to go and make an attack on these philistine ? and the lord say to david go and make an attack on the philistine so that keilah may be keep from fall into their hand . and david 's men say to him even here in judah we be full of fear how much more then if we go to keilah against the army of the philistine ? then david put the question to the lord again and the lord answering say up ! go down to keilah for i will give the philistine into your hand . so david and his men go to keilah and have a fight with the philistine and take away their cattle and put them to the sword with great destruction . so david be the saviour of the people of keilah . now when abiathar the son of ahimelech go in flight to david he come down to keilah with the ephod in his hand . and news be give to saul that david have come to keilah . and saul say now god have give him into my hand for by go into a walled town with locked door he have let himself be shut in . and saul sent for all the people to come to the fight and go down to keilah to make an attack on david and his men . and it be clear to david that saul have evil design against him and he say to abiathar the priest come here with the ephod . then david say o lord the god of israel news have be give to your servant that it be saul 's purpose to come to keilah and send destruction on the town because of me . and now be it true a they have say to me that saul be come ? o lord the god of israel give ear to your servant and say if these thing be so . and the lord say he be come down . then david say will the men of keilah give me and my men up to saul ? and the lord say they will give you up . then david and his men about six hundred of them go out of keilah and get away wherever they be able to go . and saul hearing that david have get away from keilah do not go there . and david kept in the waste land in safe place wait in the hill country in the waste land of ziph . and saul be search for him every day but god do not give him up into his hand . and david be full of fear in the knowledge that saul have come out to take his life and david be in the waste land of ziph in horesh . and saul 's son jonathan go to david in horesh and make his hand strong in god and say to him have no fear for saul my father will not get you into his power and you will be king of israel and i will be by your side and my father saul be certain of this . and the two of them make an agreement before the lord and david go on living in horesh and jonathan go back to his house . then the ziphites come up to gibeah to see saul and say be not david live secretly among u in the strong place in horesh in the hill of hachilah to the south of the waste land ? so now o king have your soul 's desire and come down and we for our part will give him up into the king 's hand . and saul say the lord 's blessing will be yours for you have have pity on me . go now and take more step and see where he be live for they say that he be expert in deceit . so take care to get knowledge of all the secret place where he be take cover and be certain to come back to me and i will go with you and without doubt if he be anywhere in the land i will get him among all the family of judah . and they go back and come to ziph before saul but david and his men be in the waste land of maon in the dry land south of the waste land . and saul and his men go in search of him . and david have word of it so he come down to the rock in the waste land of maon . and saul hearing of this go after david into the waste land of maon . and saul and his men go on one side of the mountain and david and his men go on the other and david 's purpose be to get away as quickly a possible for fear of saul for saul and his men be make a circle round david and his men in order to take them . but a man come to saul say be quick and come for the philistine have make an attack on the land . so turn back from go after david saul go against the philistine so that place be name sela hammah lekoth . and from there david go up and take cover in the safe place of en gedi .now when saul come back from fight the philistine news be give him that david be in the waste land of en gedi . then saul take three thousand of the best men out of all israel and go in search of david and his men on the rock of the mountain goat . and on the way he come to a place where sheep be keep where there be a hollow in the rock and saul go in for a private purpose . now david and his men be in the deep part of the hollow . and david 's men say to him now be the time when the lord say to you i will give up your hater into your hand to do with him whatever seem good to you . then david get up take the skirt of saul 's robe in his hand cut off the end of it without his knowledge . and later david be full of regret for cut off saul 's skirt . and david say to his men before the lord never let it be say that my hand be lift up against my lord the man of the lord 's selection for the lord 's holy oil have be put on him . so with these word david keep his servant back and do not let them make an attack on saul . and saul get up and go on his way . and after that david come out of the hollow rock and cry after saul say my lord the king . and when saul give a look back david go down on his face and give him honour . and david say to saul why do you give any attention to those who say that it be my desire to do you wrong ? look ! you have see today how the lord give you up into my hand even now in the hollow of the rock and some would have have me put you to death but i have pity on you for i say never will my hand be lift up against my lord who have be mark with the holy oil . and see my father see the skirt of your robe in my hand for the fact that i take off the skirt of your robe and do not put you to death be witness that i have no evil purpose and i have do you no wrong though you be wait for my life to take it . may the lord be judge between me and you and may the lord give me my right against you but my hand will never be lift up against you . there be an old saying from the evil doer come evil but my hand will never be lift up against you . after whom have the king of israel come out ? for whom be you search ? for a dead dog an insect . so let the lord be judge and give a decision between me and you and see and give support to my cause and keep me from fall into your hand . now when david have say these word to saul saul say be this your voice david my son ? and saul be overcome with weep . and he say to david you be right and i be wrong for you have give me back good but i have give you evil . and you have make clear to me how good you have be to me today because when the lord give me up into your hand you do not put me to death . if a man come across his hater will he let him get away safe ? so may you be reward by the lord for what you have do for me today . and now i be certain that you will be king and that the kingdom of israel will be make strong under your authority . so give me your oath by the lord that you will not put an end to my seed after me or let my name be cut off from my father 's family . and david give saul his oath . and saul go back to his house but david and his men go up to their safe place .and death come to samuel and all israel come together weep for him and put his body in it rest place in his house at ramah . then david go down to the waste land of maon . now there be a man in maon whose business be in carmel he be a great man and have three thousand sheep and a thousand goat and he be cut the wool of his sheep in carmel . now this man be name nabal and his wife 's name be abigail she be a woman of good sense and pleasing look but the man be cruel and evil in his way he be of the family of caleb . and david have word in the waste land that nabal be cut the wool of his sheep . and david sent ten young men and say to them go up to carmel and go to nabal and say kind word to him in my name and say this to my brother may all be well for you peace be to you and your house and all you have . i have have word that you have wool cutter now the keeper of your sheep have be with u and we have do them no evil and take nothing of theirs while they be in carmel . if your young men be question they will say the same thing . so now let my young men have grace in your eye for we be come at a good time please give anything you may have by you to your servant and to your son david . and when david 's young men come they say all this to nabal in david 's name and say nothing more . and nabal give them his answer and say who be david ? who be the son of jesse ? there be a number of servant in these day run away from their master . be i to take my bread and my wine and the meat i have get ready for my wool cutter and give it to men come from i have no idea where ? so david 's young men turn away go back and give him an account of everything he have say . and david say to his men put on your sword every one of you . and every man put on his sword and david do the same and about four hundred men go up with david and two hundred kept watch over their good . but one of the young men say to nabal 's wife abigail david send men from the waste land to say kind word to our master and he give them a rough answer . but these men have be very good to u they do u no wrong and nothing of ours be touch while we be with them in the field but day and night they be like a wall round u while we be with them look after the sheep . so now give thought to what you be go to do for evil be in store for our master and all his house for he be such a good for nothing person that it be not possible to say anything to him . then abigail quickly take two hundred cake of bread and two skin full of wine and five sheep ready for cook and five measure of dry grain and a hundred parcel of dry grape and two hundred cake of fig and put them on ass . and she say to her young men go on in front of me and i will come after you . but she say nothing to her husband nabal . now while she be go down under cover of the mountain on her as david and his men come down against her and suddenly she come face to face with them . now david have say what be the use of my take care of this man 's good in the waste land so that there be no loss of anything which be his ? he have only give me back evil for good . may god 's punishment be on david if when morning come there be so much a one male of his people still live . and when abigail saw david she quickly get off her as fall down on her face before him . and fall at his foot she say may the wrong be on me my lord on me let your servant say a word to you and give ear to the word of your servant . let my lord give no attention to nabal that good for nothing for a his name be so be he a man without sense but i your servant do not see the young men whom my lord sent . so now my lord by the living god and by your living soul see that the lord have keep you from the crime of blood and from take into your hand the punishment for your wrong may all your hater and those who would do evil to my lord be like nabal . and let this offering which your servant give to my lord be give to the young men who be with my lord . and may the sin of your servant have forgiveness for the lord will certainly make your family strong because my lord be fight in the lord 's war and no evil will be see in you all your day . and though a man have take up arm against you put your life in danger still the soul of my lord will be keep safe among the band of the living with the lord your god and the soul of those who be against you he will send violently away from him like stone from a bag . and when the lord have do for my lord all those good thing which he have say he will do for you and have make you a ruler over israel then you will have no cause for grief and my lord 's heart will not be trouble because you have take life without cause and have yourself give punishment for your wrong and when the lord have be good to you then give a thought to your servant . and david say to abigail may the lord the god of israel be praise who send you to me today a blessing on your good sense and on you who have keep me today from the crime of blood and from take into my hand the punishment for my wrong . for truly by the living lord the god of israel who have keep me from do you evil if you have not be so quick in come to me and meet me by dawn there would not have be in nabal 's house so much a one male living . then david take from her hand her offering and he say to her go back to your house in peace see i have give ear to your voice and take your offering with respect . and abigail go back to nabal and he be feast in his house like a king and nabal 's heart be full of joy for he have take much wine so she say nothing to him till dawn come . and in the morning when the effect of the wine be go nabal 's wife give him an account of all these thing and all the heart go out of him and he become like stone . and about ten day after the lord send disease on nabal and death come to him . and david hearing that nabal be dead say may the lord be praise who have take up my cause against nabal for the shame which he put on me and have keep back his servant from evil and have send on nabal 's head the reward of his evil do . and david sent word to abigail desire to take her a his wife . and when david 's servant come to carmel to abigail they say to her david have send u to you to take you to him a his wife . and she get up and go down on her face to the earth say see i be ready to be a servant girl wash the foot of the servant of my lord . then abigail get up quickly and go on her as with five of her young woman after the men whom david have send and she become david 's wife . and david have take ahinoam of jezreel to be his wife these two be his wife . now saul have give his daughter michal david 's wife to palti the son of laish of gallim .and the ziphites come to saul at gibeah and say be not david wait secretly near u in the hill of hachilah before the waste land ? then saul go down to the waste land of ziph take with him three thousand of the best men of israel to make search for david in the waste land of ziph . and saul put up his tent on the hill of hachilah which be in front of the waste land on the road . but david be in the waste land and he saw that saul be come after him . and so david send out watcher and get word from them that saul be certainly come . and david get up and come to the place where saul 's tent be and david have a view of the place where saul be sleep with abner the son of ner the captain of his army and saul be sleep inside the ring of cart and the tent of the people be all round him . then david say to ahimelech the hittite and to abishai the son of zeruiah brother of joab who will go down with me to the tent of saul ? and abishai say i will go down with you . so david and abishai come down to the army by night and saul be sleep inside the ring of cart with his spear plant in the earth by his head and abner and the people be sleep round him . then abishai say to david god have give up your hater into your hand today now let me give him one blow through to the earth with his spear and there will be no need to give him a second . and david say to abishai do not put him to death for who without sin may put out his hand against the man on whom the lord have put the holy oil ? and david say by the living lord the lord will send destruction on him the natural day of his death will come or he will go into the fight and come to his end . never will my hand be stretch out against the man mark with the holy oil but take the spear which be by his head and the vessel of water and let u go . so david take the spear and the vessel of water from saul 's head and they get away without any man see them or be conscious of their coming or awake for they be all sleeping because a deep sleep from the lord have come on them . then david go over to the other side and take his place on the top of a mountain some distance away with a great space between them and cry out to the people and to abner the son of ner david say have you no answer to give abner ? then abner say who be that cry out to the king ? and david say to abner be you not a man of war ? be there any other like you in israel ? why then have you not keep watch over your lord the king ? for one of the people come in to put the king your lord to death . what you have do be not good . by the living lord death be the right fate for you because you have not keep watch over your lord the man on whom the lord have put the holy oil . now see where be the king 's spear and the vessel of water which be by his head ? and saul conscious that the voice be david 's say be that your voice david my son ? and david say it be my voice o my lord king . and he say why do my lord go arm against his servant ? what have i do ? or what evil be there in me ? let my lord the king give ear now to the word of his servant . if it be the lord who be move you against me let him take an offering but if it be the child of men may they be curse before the lord for drive me out today and keep me from my place in the heritage of the lord say go be the servant of other god . then do not let my blood be drain out on the earth away from the face of the lord for the king of israel have come out to take my life like one go after bird in the mountain . then saul say i have do wrong come back to me david my son i will do you no more wrong because my life be dear to you today truly i have be foolish and my error be very great . then david say here be the king 's spear ! let one of the young men come over and get it . and the lord will give to every man the reward of his righteousness and his faith because the lord give you into my hand today and i would not put out my hand against the man who have be mark with the holy oil . and so a your life be dear to me today may my life be dear to the lord and may he make me free from all my trouble . then saul say to david may a blessing be on you david my son you will do great thing and without doubt you will overcome . then david go on his way and saul go back to his place .and david say to himself some day death will come to me by the hand of saul the only thing for me to do be to get away into the land of the philistine then saul will give up hope of take me in any part of the land of israel and so i may be able to get away from him . so david and the six hundred men who be with him go over to achish the son of maoch king of gath . and david and his men be live with achish at gath every man have his family with him and david have his two wife ahinoam of jezreel and abigail of carmel who have be the wife of nabal . and saul hearing that david have go to gath go after him no longer . then david say to achish if now i have grace in your eye let me have a place in one of the small town of your land to be my living place for it be not right for your servant to be live with you in the king 's town . so achish straight away give him ziklag and for that reason ziklag have be the property of the king of judah to this day . and david be live in the land of the philistine for the space of a year and four month . and david and his men go up and make attack on the geshurites and the girzites and the amalekites for these be the people who be live in the land from telam on the way to shur as far a egypt . and david again and again make attack on the land till not a man or a woman be still live and he take away the sheep and the ox and the ass and the camel and the clothing and he come back to achish . and every time achish say where have you be fight today ? david say against the south of judah and the south of the jerahmeelites and the south of the kenites . not one live man or woman do david ever take back with him to gath fear that they might give an account of what have take place and say this be what david do and so have he be do all the time while he have be live in the land of the philistine . and achish have belief in what david say say he have make himself hat by all his people israel and so he will be my servant for ever .now in those day the philistine get their force together to make war on israel . and achish say to david certainly you and your men be to go out with me to the fight . and david say to achish you will see now what your servant will do . and achish say to david then i will make you keeper of my head for ever . now samuel be dead and all israel after weep for him have put his body in it last resting place in ramah his town . and saul have put away from the land all those who have control of spirit and who make use of secret art . and the philistine come together and put their force in position in shunem and saul get all israel together and they take up their position in gilboa . and when saul saw the philistine army he be trouble and his heart be move with fear . and when saul go for direction to the lord the lord give him no answer by a dream or by the urim or by the prophet . then saul say to his servant get me a woman who have control of a spirit so that i may go to her and get direction . and his servant say to him there be such a woman at en dor . so saul put on other clothing so that he might not be see to be the king take two men with him and go to the woman by night and he say now with the help of the spirit which you have make the person whose name i will give you come up . and the woman say to him but you have knowledge of what saul have do how he have put away out of the land those who have control of spirit and the user of secret art why would you by a trick put me in danger of death ? and saul make an oath to her by the lord say by the living lord no punishment will come to you for this . then the woman say who be i to let you see ? and he say make samuel come up for me . and the woman saw that it be saul and she give a loud cry and say to saul why have you make use of deceit ? for you be saul . and the king say to her have no fear what do you see ? and the woman say to saul i see a god come up out of the earth . and he say to her what be his form ? and she say it be an old man come up cover with a robe . and saul saw that it be samuel and with his face bend down to the earth he give him honour . and samuel say to saul why have you make me come up trouble my rest ? and saul in answer say i be in great danger for the philistine be make war on me and god have go away from me and will no longer give me any answer by the prophet or by dream so i have send for you to make clear to me what i be to do . and samuel say why do you put your question to me see that god have go away from you and be on the side of him who be against you ? and the lord himself have do what i say the lord have take the kingdom out of your hand and give it to your neighbour david because you do not do what the lord say and do not give effect to his burn wrath against amalek . so the lord have do this thing to you today . and more than this the lord will give israel up with you into the hand of the philistine and tomorrow you and your son will be with me and the lord will give up the army of israel into the hand of the philistine . then saul go down flat on the earth and be full of fear because of samuel 's word and there be no strength in him for he have take no food all that day or all that night . and the woman come to saul and saw that he be in great trouble and say to him see now your servant have give ear to your word and i have put my life in danger by do what you say . so now give ear to the voice of your servant and let me give you a little bread and take some food to give you strength when you go on your way . but he would not say i have no desire for food . but his servant together with the woman make him take food and he give way to them . so he get up from the earth and take his seat on the bed . and the woman have in the house a young cow make fat for food and she put it to death straight away and she take meal and get it mixed and make unleavened bread and she put it before saul and his servant and they have a meal . then they get up and go away the same night .now the philistine get all their army together at aphek and the israelite put their force in position by the fountain in jezreel . and the lord of the philistine go on with their hundred and their thousand and david and his men come after with achish . then the ruler of the philistine say what be these hebrew do here ? and achish say to the ruler of the philistine be this not david the servant of saul the king of israel who have be with me for a year or two and i have never see any wrong in him from the time when he come to me till now ? but the ruler of the philistine be angry with him and say to him make the man go back to the place you have give him do not let him go down with u to the fight or he may be turn against u and be false to u for how will this man make peace with his lord ? will it not be with the head of these men ? be this not david who be name in their song when in the dance they say to one another saul have put to death thousand and david ten of thousand ? then achish sent for david and say to him by the living lord you be upright and everything you have do with me in the army have be please to me i have see no evil in you from the day when you come to me till now but still the lord be not pleased with you . so now go back and go in peace so that you do not make the lord of the philistine angry . and david say to achish but what have i do ? what have you see in your servant while i have be with you till this day that i may not go and take up arm against those who be now make war on my lord the king ? and achish in answer say it be true that in my eye you be good like an angel of god but still the ruler of the philistine have say he be not to go up with u to the fight . so get up early in the morning with the servant of your lord who be with you and go to the place i have give you and have no evil design in your heart for you be good in my eye but when there be light enough in the morning go away . so david and his men get up early in the morning to go back to the land of the philistine . and the philistine go up to jezreel .now when david and his men come to ziklag on the third day the amalekites have make an attack on the south and on ziklag and have overcome ziklag and put it on fire and have make the woman and all who be there small and great prisoner they have not put any of them to death but have take them all away . and when david and his men come to the town they saw that it have be burn down and their wife and their son and daughter have be make prisoner . then david and the people who be with him give themselves up to weep till they be able to go on weep no longer . and david 's two wife ahinoam of jezreel and abigail the wife of nabal of carmel have be make prisoner . and david be greatly troubled for the people be talk of stone him because their heart be bitter every man sorrow for his son and his daughter but david make himself strong in the lord his god . and david say to abiathar the priest the son of ahimelech come here to me with the ephod . and abiathar take the ephod to david . then david question the lord say be i to go after this band ? will i be able to overtake them ? and in answer he say go after them for you will certainly overtake them and get back everything . so david go and his six hundred men go with him and they come to the stream besor . and david with four hundred men go on but two hundred of them be overcome with weariness and not able to go across the stream . and in the field they saw an egyptian whom they take to david and they give him bread and he have a meal and they give him water for drink and they give him part of a cake of fig and some dry grape and after the food his spirit come back to him for he have have no food or drink for three day and night . and david say to him whose man be you and where do you come from ? and he say i be a young man of egypt servant to an amalekite and my master go on without me because three day back i become ill. we make an attack on the south part of the country of the cherethites and on the land which be judah 's and on the south of caleb and we put ziklag on fire . and david say to him will you take me down to this band ? and he say if you give me your oath that you will not put me to death or give me up to my master i will take you to them . and when he have take him down they saw them all seat about on all side feasting and drinking among all the mass of good which they have take from the land of the philistine and the land of judah . and david go on fight them from even till the evening of the day after and not one of them get away but only four hundred young men who go in flight on camel . and david get back everything the amalekites have take and he get back his two wife . there be no loss of anything small or great son or daughter or good or anything which they have take away david get it all back . and they take all the flock and herd and drive them in front of him say these be david 's . and david come to the two hundred men who because of weariness have not go with him but be wait at the stream besor and they go out meeting david and the people who be with him and when they come near them they say how be you ? then the bad and good for nothing men among those who go with david say because they do not go with u we will give them nothing of the good which we have get back but only to every man his wife and child so that he may take them and go . then david say you be not to do this my brother after what the lord have give u who have keep u safe and give up the band which come against u into our hand . who be go to give any attention to you in this question ? for an equal part will be give to him who go to the fight and to him who be wait by the good they be all to have the same . and so he make it a rule and an order for israel from that day till now . and when david come to ziklag he send some of the good to the responsible men of judah and to his friend say here be an offering for you from the good of those who be fight against the lord he send to those who be in beth el and in ramah of the south and in jattir and to those in arara and eshtemoa and carmel and in the town of the jerahmeelites and in the town of the kenites and to those who be in hormah and in bor ashan and in athach and in hebron and to all the place where david and his men have be live .now the philistine be fight against israel and the men of israel go in flight before the philistine fall down wound in mount gilboa . and the philistine overtake saul and his son and they put to death jonathan and abinadab and malchi shua the son of saul . and the fight be go badly for saul and the archer come across him and he be wound by the archer . then saul say to the servant who have the care of his arm take out your sword and put it through me before these men without circumcision come and make sport of me . but his servant full of fear would not do so . then saul take out his sword and fall on it put an end to himself . and when his servant saw that saul be dead he do the same and be unite with him in death . so death overtook saul and his three son and his servant on the same day . and when the men of israel across the valley and on the other side of jordan saw that the army of israel be in flight and that saul and his son be dead they come out of their town and go in flight and the philistine come and take them for themselves . now on the day after when the philistine come to take their good from the dead they saw saul and his three son dead on the earth in mount gilboa . and cut off his head and take away his war dress they send word into the land of the philistine round about to take the news to their god and to the people . his war dress they put in the house of astarte and his body be fix on the wall of beth shan . and when the people of jabesh gilead have news of what the philistine have do to saul all the fight men get up and travel all night take saul 's body and the body of his son from the wall of beth shan and they come to jabesh and have them burn there . and their bone they put in the earth under a tree in jabesh and for seven day they take no food .now after the death of saul when david have come back from the destruction of the amalekites have be in ziklag for two day on the third day a man come from saul 's tent with his clothe out of order and earth on his head and when he come to david he go down on the earth and give him honour . and david say to him where have you come from ? and he say i have come in flight from the tent of israel . and david say to him how do thing go ? give me the news . and in answer he say the people have go in flight from the fight and a great number of them be dead and saul and his son jonathan be dead . and david say to the young man who give him the news why be you certain that saul and his son jonathan be dead ? and the young man say i come by chance to mount gilboa and i saw saul support himself on his spear and the war carriage and horseman overtake him . and look back he saw me and give a cry to me . and answer him i say here be i. and he say to me who be you ? and i say i be an amalekite . then he say to me come here to my side and put me to death for the pain of death have me in it grip but my life be still strong in me . so i put my foot on him and give him his death blow because i be certain that he would not go on living after his fall and i take the crown from his head and the band from his arm and i have them here for my lord . then david give way to bitter grief and so do all the men who be with him and till even they give themselves to sorrow and weep and take no food weep for saul and for jonathan his son and for the people of the lord and for the men of israel because they have come to their end by the sword . and david say to the young man who have give him the news where do you come from ? and he say i be the son of a man from a strange land i be an amalekite . and david say to him have you no fear of stretch out your hand to put to death the one mark with the holy oil ? and david sent for one of his young men and say go near and put an end to him . and he put him to death . and david say to him may your blood be on your head for your mouth have give witness against you say i have put to death the man mark with the holy oil . then david make this song of grief for saul and jonathan his son it be record in the book of jashar for teach to the son of judah and he say the glory o israel be dead on your high place ! how have the great one be make low ! give no news of it in gath let it not be say in the street of ashkelon or the daughter of the philistine will be glad the daughter of men without circumcision will be uplift in joy . o mountain of gilboa let there be no dew or rain on you you field of death for there the arm of the strong have be sham the arm of saul a if he have not be mark with the holy oil . from the blood of the dead from the fat of the strong the bow of jonathan be not turn back the sword of saul do not come back unused . saul and jonathan be love and please in their life and in their death they be not part they go more quickly than eagle they be strong than lion . o daughter of israel have sorrow for saul by whom you be delicately clothe in robe of red with ornament of gold on your dress . how have the great one be make low in the fight ! jonathan be dead on your high place . i be full of grief for you my brother jonathan very dear have you be to me your love for me be a wonder great than the love of woman . how have the great one be make low and the arm of war broken !now after this david question the lord say be i to go up into any of the town of judah ? and the lord say to him go up . and david say where be i to go ? and he say to hebron . so david go there take with him his two wife ahinoam of jezreel and abigail the wife of nabal of carmel . and david take all his men with him every man with his family and they be live in the town round hebron . and the men of judah come there and with the holy oil make david king over the people of judah . and word come to david that it be the men of jabesh gilead who put saul 's body in it last resting place . and david sent to the men of jabesh gilead and say to them may the lord give you his blessing because you have do this kind act to saul your lord and have put his body to rest ! may the lord be good and true to you and i myself will see that your kind act be reward because you have do this thing . then let your hand be strong and have no fear though saul your lord be dead the people of judah have make me their king . now abner the son of ner captain of saul 's army have take saul 's son ish bosheth over to mahanaim and make him king over gilead and the asherites and over jezreel and ephraim and benjamin that be over all israel . saul 's son ish bosheth be forty year old when he become king over israel and he be ruler for two year . but judah be on the side of david . and the time when david be king in hebron over the people of judah be seven year and six month . and abner the son of ner with the servant of saul 's son ish bosheth go out from mahanaim to gibeon . and joab the son of zeruiah and the servant of david go out and come face to face with them by the pool of gibeon and they take up their position face one another on opposite side of the pool . and abner say to joab let the young men give a test of their strength before u . and joab say let them do so . so they get up and go over by number twelve for benjamin and ish bosheth and twelve of the servant of david . and every one get the other by the head drive his sword into the other 's side so they all go down together and that place be name the field of side and it be in gibeon . and there be hard fighting that day and abner and the men of israel give way before the servant of david . there be three son of zeruiah there joab and abishai and asahel and asahel be a quick foot a a roe of the field . asahel go run after abner not turn to the right or to the left . then abner look back say be it you asahel ? and he say it be i. and abner say then go to the right or to the left and put your hand on one of the fight men and take his arm . but asahel would not be turn away from go after abner . then again abner say to asahel go to one side do not keep on come after me why will you make me put an end to you ? for then i will be sham before your brother joab . but still he do not go to one side so abner give him a back blow in the stomach with his spear so that the spear come out at his back and he go down on the earth wound to death and all those who come to the place where asahel go down dead come to a stop . but joab and abishai go after abner and the sun go down when they come to the hill of ammah which be to the east of the road through the waste land of geba . and the men of benjamin come together after abner in one band and take their place on the top of a hill . then cry out to joab abner say be fight and destruction to go on for ever ? do you not see that the end will only be bitter ? how long will it be before you send the people back and make them give up attack their countryman ? and joab say by the living god if you have not give the word the people would have go on attack their countryman till the morning . so joab have a horn sound and all the people come to a stop and give up go after israel and fight them . and all that night abner and his men go through the arabah they go over jordan and through all bithron and come to mahanaim . and joab come back from fight abner and when he have get all his men together it be see that nineteen of david 's men in addition to asahel be not with them . but david 's men have put to death three hundred and sixty of the men of benjamin and of abner 's men and they take asahel 's body and put it in the last resting place of his father in beth lehem . and joab and his men travel all night come to hebron at dawn .now there be a long war between saul 's people and david 's people and david become strong and strong but those on saul 's side become more and more feeble . while david be in hebron he become the father of son the old be amnon son of ahinoam of jezreel and the second chileab whose mother be abigail the wife of nabal the carmelite and the third absalom son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur and the fourth adonijah the son of haggith and the fifth shephatiah the son of abital and the sixth ithream whose mother be david 's wife eglah . these be the son of david whose birth take place in hebron . now while there be war between saul 's people and david 's people abner be make himself strong among the supporter of saul . now saul have among his wife a woman name rizpah the daughter of aiah and ish bosheth say to abner why have you take my father 's wife ? and abner be very angry at the word of ish bosheth and he say be i a dog 's head of judah ? i be this day do all in my power for the cause of your father saul and for his brother and his friend and have not give you up into the hand of david and now you say i have do wrong with a woman . may god 's punishment be on abner if i do not for david a the lord in his oath have say and if i do not take away the kingdom from the family of saul and make david ruler over israel and judah from dan as far a beer sheba ! and so great be ish bosheth 's fear of abner that he be not able to say a word in answer . and abner send men to david at hebron say make an agreement with me and i will give you my support in get all israel on your side . and he say it be well i will make an agreement with you but on one condition which be that when you come before me saul 's daughter michal be to come with you till she come you will not see my face . and david sent men to saul 's son ish bosheth say give me back michal my wife whom i make mine for the price of the private part of a hundred philistine . so ish bosheth sent and take her from her husband paltiel the son of laish . and her husband go with her as far a bahurim weep while he go . then abner say to him go back . and he go back . then abner have a talk with the chief men of israel say in the past it be your desire to make david your king so now do it for the lord have say of david by the hand of my servant david i will make my people israel safe from the philistine and from all who be against them . and abner say the same thing to benjamin and he go to david in hebron to make clear to him what seem good to israel and to all the people of benjamin . so abner with twenty men come to hebron to david . and david make a feast for abner and the men who be with him . and abner say to david now i will go and make all israel come to my lord the king so that they may make an agreement with you and your kingdom may be as wide a your heart 's desire . then david send abner away and he go in peace . now the servant of david and joab have be out attack a band of arm men and they come back with a great store of good take in the fight but abner be no longer in hebron with david for he have send him away and he have go in peace . when joab and his men come news be give them that abner the son of ner have come to the king who have let him go away again in peace . then joab come to the king and say what have you do ? when abner come to you why do you send him away and let him go ? be it not clear to you that abner the son of ner come with deceit to get knowledge of your go out and your come in and of all you be do ? and when joab have come out from david he send men after abner and they overtake him at the water spring of sirah and make him come back with them but david have no knowledge of it . and when abner be back in hebron joab take him on one side by the doorway of the town to have a word with him quietly and there he give him a wound in the stomach cause his death in payment for the death of his brother asahel . and when david have word of it he say may i and my kingdom be clear for ever in the eye of the lord from the blood of abner the son of ner may it come on the head of joab and all his father 's family among the men of joab 's family may there ever be some who be diseased or leper or who do the work of woman or be put to the sword or be waste from need of food ! so joab and abishai his brother put abner to death because he have put to death their brother asahel in the fight at gibeon . and david say to joab and all the people who be with him go in grief and put haircloth about you in sorrow for abner . and king david go after the dead body . and they put abner 's body to rest in hebron and the king and all the people be weep loudly by the rest place of abner 's body . and the king make a song of grief for abner and say be the death of abner to be like the death of a foolish man ? your hand be free your foot be not chain like the downfall of a man before evil men so be your fall . and the weeping of the people over him go on again . and the people come to make david take food while it be still day but david with an oath say may god 's punishment be on me if i take a taste of bread or any other thing till the sun have go down ! and all the people take note of it and be please like everything the king do it be please to the people . so it be clear to israel and to all the people on that day that the king be not responsible for the death of abner the son of ner . and the king say to his servant do you not see that a chief and a great man have come to his end today in israel ? while i though i be crown king have little strength and these men the son of zeruiah be out of my control may the lord give to the evil doer the reward of his evil do !and when saul 's son ish bosheth have news that abner be dead in hebron his hand become feeble and all the israelite be trouble . and saul 's son have two men captain of band one name baanah and the other rechab son of rimmon the beerothite of the tribe of benjamin for beeroth be at one time take to be part of benjamin but the people of beeroth have go in flight to gittaim where they have be live to this day . now jonathan saul 's son have a son whose foot be damage . he be five year old when news of the death of saul and jonathan come from jezreel and the woman who take care of him take him up and go in flight and while she be get him away as quickly a she be able he have a fall and his foot be damage . his name be mephibosheth . and rechab and baanah the son of rimmon the beerothite go out and come to the house of ish bosheth in the heat of the day when he be rest in the middle of the day . now the woman who keep the door be clean grain and sleep overcame her . and rechab and his brother baanah get in without be see . and when they come into the house ish bosheth be stretch on his bed in his bedroom and they make an attack on him and put him to death and cut off his head they take it with them and go by the road through the arabah all night . and they take the head of ish bosheth to david in hebron and say to the king here be the head of ish bosheth the son of saul your hater who would have take your life the lord have take payment for the wrong of my lord the king from saul and his seed today . and david make answer to rechab and his brother baanah the son of rimmon the beerothite and say to them by the living lord who have keep me safe from all my trouble when one come to me with the news of saul 's death in the belief that it would be good news i take him and put him to death in ziklag which be the reward i give him for his news how much more when evil men have put an upright person to death in his house sleep on his bed will i take payment from you for his blood and have you cut off from the earth ? and david give order to his young men and they put them to death cut off their hand and their foot and hang them up by the side of the pool in hebron . but they take the head of ish bosheth and put it in it last resting place with abner 's body in hebron .then all the tribe of israel come to david in hebron and say truly we be your bone and your flesh . in the past when saul be king over u it be you who go at the head of israel when they go out or come in and the lord say to you you be to be the keeper of my people israel and their ruler . so all the responsible men of israel come to the king at hebron and king david make an agreement with them in hebron before the lord and they put the holy oil on david and make him king over israel . david be thirty year old when he become king and he be king for forty year rule over judah in hebron for seven year and six month and in jerusalem over all israel and judah for thirty three year . and the king and his men go to jerusalem against the jebusites the people of the land and they say to david you will not come in here but the blind and the feeble foot will keep you out for they say david will not be able to come in here . but david take the strong place of zion which be the town of david . and that day david say whoever make an attack on the jebusites let him go up by the water pipe and put to death all the blind and feeble foot who be hat by david . and this be why they say the blind and feeble foot may not come into the house . so david take the strong tower for his living place name it the town of david . and david take in hand the building of the town all round start from the millo . and david become great and great for the lord the god of army be with him . and hiram king of tyre send men to david with cedar tree and woodworker and stoneworkers and they make david a house . and david saw that the lord have make his position safe a king over israel and that he have make his kingdom great because of his people israel . and david take more woman and wife in jerusalem after he have come from hebron and he have more son and daughter . these be the name of those whose birth take place in jerusalem shammua and shobab and nathan and solomon and ibhar and elishua and nepheg and japhia and elishama and eliada and eliphelet . and when the philistine have news that david have be make king over israel they all go up in search of david and david hearing of it go down to the strong place . and when the philistine come they go in every direction in the valley of rephaim . and david desire direction from the lord say be i to go up against the philistine ? will you give them up into my hand ? and the lord say go up for i will certainly give up the philistine into your hand . and david go to baal perazim and overcome them there and he say the lord have let the force fight against me be break before me a a wall be break by rush water . so that place be name baal perazim . and the philistine when they go in flight do not take their image with them and david and his men take them away . and the philistine come up again and go in every direction in the valley of rephaim . and when david go for direction to the lord he say you be not to go up against them in front but make a circle round them from the back and come on them opposite the spice tree . then at the sound of footstep in the top of the tree go forward quickly for the lord have go out before you to overcome the army of the philistine . and david do a the lord have say and he overcome the philistine attack them from gibeon to near gezer .and david get together all the fight men of israel to the number of thirty thousand and david and all the people who be with him go to baal of judah to get the ark of god over which the holy name be name the name of the lord of army whose place be between the winged one . and they put the ark of god on a new cart and take it out of the house of abinadab which be on the hill and uzzah and ahio the son of abinadab be the driver of the cart . and uzzah go by the side of the ark while ahio go before it . and david and all the men of israel make melody before the lord with all their power with song and with corded instrument and instrument of brass . and when they come to nacon 's grain floor uzzah put his hand on the ark of god to keep it safe in it place for the ox be out of control . and the wrath of the lord burning against uzzah sent destruction on him because he have put his hand on the ark and death come to him there by the ark of god . and david be angry because of the lord 's outburst of wrath against uzzah and he give that place the name perez uzzah which be it name to this day . and such be david 's fear of the lord that day that he say how may i let the ark of god come to me ? so david do not let the ark of the lord come back to him to the town of david but have it turn away and put into the house of obed edom the gittite . and the ark of the lord be in the house of obed edom the gittite for three month and the lord send a blessing on obed edom and all his family . and they say to king david the blessing of the lord be on the family of obed edom and on all he have because of the ark of god . and david go and take the ark of god from the house of obed edom into the town of david with joy . and when those who be lift the ark of the lord have go six step he make an offering of an ox and a fat young beast . and david clothe in a linen ephod be dance before the lord with all his strength . so david and all the men of israel take up the ark of the lord with cry of joy and sounding of horn . and when the ark of the lord come into the town of david michal saul 's daughter look out of the window saw king david dancing and jumping before the lord and to her mind he seem foolish . and they take in the ark of the lord and put it in it place inside the tent which david have put up for it and david make burned offering and peace offering to the lord . and after david have make the burned offering and the peace offering he give the people a blessing in the name of the lord of army . and he give to every man and woman among all the people among all the mass of israel a cake of bread and a measure of wine and a cake of dry grape . then all the people go away every man to his house . then david come back to give a blessing to his family . and michal saul 's daughter come out to him and say how full of glory be the king of israel today who let himself be see uncover by his servant girl like a foolish person uncover himself without shame ! and david say to michal i be dance before the lord who put me over your father and all his son to make me a ruler over the people of the lord over his people israel and i will go on play before the lord and i will do even bad than this and make myself even lower in your eye but the servant girl of whom you be talk will give me honour . and michal saul 's daughter have no child till the day of her death .now when the king be live in his house and the lord have give him rest from war on every side the king say to nathan the prophet see now i be live in a house of cedar but the ark of god be house inside the curtain of a tent . and nathan say to the king go and do whatever be in your heart for the lord be with you . now that night the word of the lord come to nathan say go and say to my servant david the lord say be you to be the builder of a house a living place for me ? for from the day when i take the child of israel up out of egypt till this day i have have no house but have go from place to place in a tent . in all the place where i go with all the child of israel do i ever say to any of the judge of israel to whom i give the care of my people israel why have you not make me a house of cedar ? then say these word to my servant david the lord of army say i take you from the field from keep the sheep so that you might be a ruler over my people over my people israel and i have be with you wherever you go cut off before you all those who be against you and i will make your name great like the name of the great one of the earth . and i will make a resting place for my people israel plant them there so that they may be live in the place which be theirs and never again be move and never again will they be trouble by evil men a they be at the first from the time when i put judge over my people israel and i will give you peace from all who be against you . and the lord say to you that he will make you the head of a line of king . and when the time come for you to go to rest with your father i will put in your place your seed after you the offspring of your body and i will make his kingdom strong . he will be the builder of a house for my name and i will make the seat of his authority certain for ever . i will be to him a father and he will be to me a son if he do wrong i will give him punishment with the rod of men and with the blow of the child of men but my mercy will not be take away from him a i take it from him who be before you . and your family and your kingdom will keep their place before me for ever the seat of your authority will never be overturn . so nathan give david an account of all these word and this vision . then david the king go in and take his seat before the lord and say who be i o lord god and what be my family that you have be my guide till now ? and this be only a small thing to you o lord god but your word have even be about the far off future of your servant 's family o lord god ! what more may david say to you ? for you have knowledge of your servant o lord god . because of your word and from your heart you have do all this great work and let your servant see it . truly you be great o lord god there be no one like you and no other god but you a be clear from everything which have come to our ear . and what other nation in the earth like your people israel do a god go out to take for himself to be his people and to make a name for himself and to do great and strange thing for them drive out a nation and it god from before his people ? but you take and make strong for yourself your people israel to be your people for ever and you lord become their god . and now o lord god may the word which you have say about your servant and about his family be make certain for ever and may you do a you have say ! and let your name be make great for ever and let men say the lord of army be god over israel and let the family of david your servant be make strong before you ! for you o lord of army the god of israel have clearly say to your servant i will make you the head of a family of king and so it have come into your servant 's heart to make this prayer to you . and now o lord god you be god and your word be true and you have say you will give your servant this good thing so may it be your pleasure to give your blessing to the family of your servant so that it may go on for ever before you for you o lord god have say it and may your bless be on your servant 's family line for ever !and it come about after this that david make an attack on the philistine and overcome them and david take the authority of the mother town from the hand of the philistine . and he overcome the moabites and he have them measure with a line when they be stretch out on the earth mark out two line for death and one full line for life . so the moabites become servant to david and give him offering . and david overcame hadadezer the son of rehob king of zobah when he go to make his power see by the river . and david take from him one thousand seven hundred horseman and twenty thousand footman and david have the leg muscle of the horse cut only keep enough of them for a hundred war carriage . and when the aramaean of damascus come to the help of hadadezer king of zobah david put to the sword twenty two thousand of the aramaean . and david put arm force in aram of damascus and the aramaean become servant to david and give him offering . and the lord make david overcome wherever he go . and david take their gold body cover from the servant of hadadezer and take them to jerusalem . and from tebah and berothai town of hadadezer king david take a great store of brass . and when tou king of hamath have news that david have overcome all the army of hadadezer he send his son hadoram to david with word of peace and blessing because he have overcome hadadezer in the fight for hadadezer have war with tou and hadoram take with him vessel of silver and gold and brass these king david make holy to the lord together with the silver and gold which he have take from the nation he have overcome the nation of edom and moab and the child of ammon and the philistine and the amalekites and the good he have take from hadadezer the son of rehob king of zobah . and david get great honour for himself when he come back by the destruction of edom in the valley of salt to the number of eighteen thousand men . and he put armed force in edom all through edom he have arm force station and all the edomites become servant to david . and the lord make david overcome wherever he go . and david be king over all israel judging and give right decision for all his people . and joab the son of zeruiah be chief of the army and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud be keeper of the record and zadok and abiathar the son of ahimelech the son of ahitub be priest and seraiah be the scribe and benaiah the son of jehoiada be over the cherethites and the pelethites and david 's son be priest .and david say be there still anyone of saul 's family living so that i may be a friend to him because of jonathan ? now there be of saul 's people a servant name ziba and they send him to david and the king say to him be you ziba ? and he say i be . and the king say be there anyone of saul 's family still live to whom i may be a friend in god 's name ? and ziba say there be a son of jonathan whose foot be damage . and the king say to him where be he ? and ziba say to the king he be in the house of machir the son of ammiel in lo debar . then king david sent and have him take from lo debar from the house of machir the son of ammiel . and mephibosheth the son of jonathan come to david and fall down on his face give him honour . and david say mephibosheth . and answer he say your servant be here . and david say to him have no fear for truly i will be good to you because of your father jonathan and i will give back to you all the land which be saul 's and you will have a place at my table at all time . and he go down on his face before the king and say what be your servant for you to take note of a dead dog such a i be ? then the king sent for ziba saul 's servant and say to him all the property of saul and of his family i have give to your master 's son . and you and your son and your servant be to take care of the land for him and get in the fruit of it so that your master 's son may have food but mephibosheth your master 's son will have a place at my table at all time . now ziba have fifteen son and twenty servant . then ziba say to the king every order which you have give to your servant will be do . a for mephibosheth he have a place at david 's table like one of the king 's son . and mephibosheth have a young son name mica . and all the people live in the house of ziba be servant to mephibosheth . so mephibosheth go on living in jerusalem for he take all his meal at the king 's table and he have not the use of his foot .now after this death come to the king of the child of ammon and hanun his son become king in his place . and david say i will be a friend to hanun the son of nahash a his father be a friend to me . so david send his servant to give him word of comfort on account of his father . and david 's servant come into the land of the child of ammon . but the chief of the child of ammon say to hanun their lord do it seem to you that david be honour your father by send comforter to you ? have he not send his servant to go through the town and make secret observation of it and overcome it ? so hanun take david 's servant and after cut off half the hair on their chin and cut off the skirt of their robe up to the middle he send them away . when david have news of it he send men out with the purpose of meet them on their way for the men be greatly sham and the king say go to jericho till your hair be long again and then come back . and when the child of ammon saw that they have make themselves hat by david they send to the aramaean of beth rehob and zobah and get for payment twenty thousand footman and they get from the king of maacah a thousand men and from tob twelve thousand . and hearing of this david send joab and all the army and the best fight men . and the child of ammon come out and put their force in position at the way into the town and the aramaean of zobah and of rehob with the men of tob and maacah be by themselves in the field . now when joab saw that their force be in position against him in front and at his back he take the best of the men of israel and put them in line against the aramaean and the rest of the people he put in position against the child of ammon with abishai his brother at their head . and he say if the aramaean be strong and get the good of me then you be to come to my help but if the child of ammon get the good of you i will come to your help . take heart and let u be strong for our people and for the town of our god and may the lord do what seem good to him . then joab and the people with him go forward to the fight against the aramaean and they go in flight before him . and when the child of ammon saw the flight of the aramaean they themselves go in flight from abishai and come into the town . so joab go back from fight the child of ammon and come to jerusalem . and when the aramaean saw that israel have overcome them they get themselves together . and hadadezer sent for the aramaean who be on the other side of the river and they come to helam with shobach the captain of hadadezer 's army at their head . and word of this be give to david and he get all israel together and go over jordan and come to helam . and the aramaean put their force in position against david and make an attack on him . and the aramaean go in flight before israel and david put to the sword the men of seven hundred aramaean war carriage and forty thousand footman and shobach the captain of the army be wound and come to his death there . and when all the king who be servant of hadadezer saw that they be overcome by israel they make peace with israel and become their servant . so the aramaean in fear give no more help to the child of ammon .now in the spring at the time when king go out to war david send joab and his servant and all israel with him and they make waste the land of the child of ammon and take up their position before rabbah shut it in . but david be still at jerusalem . now one evening david get up from his bed and while he be walk on the roof of the king 's house he saw from there a woman bathing and the woman be very beautiful . and david sent to get knowledge who the woman be . and one say be this not bath sheba the daughter of eliam and wife of uriah the hittite ? and david sent and take her and she come to him and he take her to his bed for she have be make clean then she go back to her house . and the woman become with child and she send word to david that she be with child . and david sent to joab say send uriah the hittite to me . and joab sent uriah to david . and when uriah come to him david put question to him about how joab and the people be and how the war be go . and david say to uriah go down to your house and let your foot be wash . and uriah go away from the king 's house and an offering from the king be send after him . but uriah take his rest at the door of the king 's house with all the servant of his lord and do not go down to his house . and when word be give to david that uriah have not go down to his house david say to uriah have you not come from a journey ? why do you not go down to your house ? and uriah say to david israel and judah with the ark be live in tent and my lord joab and the other servant of my lord be sleep in the open field and be i to go to my house and take food and drink and go to bed with my wife ? by the living lord and by the life of your soul i will not do such a thing . and david say to uriah be here today and after that i will let you go . so uriah be in jerusalem that day and the day after . and when david sent for him he take meat and drink with him and david make him the worse for drink and when even come he go to rest on his bed with the servant of his lord but he do not go down to his house . now in the morning david give uriah a letter to take to joab . and in the letter he say take care to put uriah in the very front of the line where the fighting be most violent and go back from him so that he may be overcome and put to death . so while joab be watch the town he put uriah in the place where it be clear to him the best fighter be . and the men of the town go out and have a fight with joab and a number of david 's men come to their death in the fight and with them uriah the hittite . then joab sent david news of everything which have take place in the war and he give order to the man who take the news say after you have give the king all the news about the war if the king be angry and say why do you go so near the town for the fight ? be it not certain that their archer would be on the wall ? who put abimelech the son of jerubbaal to death ? do not a woman send a great stone down on him from the wall put him to death at thebez ? why do you go so near the wall ? then say to him your servant uriah the hittite be among the dead . so the man go and come to david and give him all the news which joab have send him to give then david be angry with joab and say why do you go so near the town for the fight ? be it not certain that their archer would be on the wall ? who put abimelech the son of jerubbaal to death ? do not a woman send a great stone down on him from the wall put him to death at thebez ? why do you go so near the wall ? and the man say to david truly the men get the good of u and come out against u into the open country but we send them back to the very door of the town . and the archer send their arrow at your servant from the wall and some of the king 's servant be dead and among them be your servant uriah the hittite . then david say to the man go and say to joab do not let this be a grief to you for one man may come to his death by the sword like another put up an even strong fight against the town and take it and do you put heart into him . and when the wife of uriah have news that her husband be dead she give herself up to weep for him . and when the day of weep be past david sent for her and take her into his house and she become his wife and give him a son . but the lord be not pleased with the thing david have do .and the lord send nathan to david . and nathan come to him and say there be two men in the same town one a man of great wealth and the other a poor man . the man of wealth have great number of flock and herd but the poor man have only one little she lamb which he have get and take care of from it birth it have be with him like one of his child his meat be it food and from his cup it take it drink resting in his arm and it be like a daughter to him . now a traveller come to the house of the man of wealth but he would not take anything from his flock or his herd to make a meal for the traveller who have come to him but he take the poor man 's lamb and make it ready for the man who have come . and david be full of wrath against that man and he say to nathan by the living lord death be the right punishment for the man who have do this and he will have to give back four time the value of the lamb because he have do this and because he have no pity . and nathan say to david you be that man . the lord god of israel say i make you king over israel put holy oil on you and i keep you safe from the hand of saul i give you your master 's daughter and your master 's wife for yourself and i give you the daughter of israel and judah and if that have not be enough i would have give you such and such thing . why then have you have no respect for the word of the lord do what be evil in his eye ? you have put uriah the hittite to death with the sword and have take his wife to be your wife you have put him to death with the sword of the child of ammon . so now the sword will never be turn away from your family because you have have no respect for me and have take the wife of uriah the hittite to be your wife . the lord say from those of your family i will send evil against you and before your very eyes i will take your wife and give them to your neighbour and he will take your wife to his bed by the light of this sun . you do it secretly but i will do this thing before all israel and in the light of the sun . and david say to nathan great be my sin against the lord . and nathan say to david the lord have put away your sin death will not come on you . but still because you have have no respect for the lord death will certainly overtake the child who have newly come to birth . then nathan go back to his house . and the hand of the lord be on david 's son the child of uriah 's wife and it become very ill. so david make prayer to god for the child and he take no food day after day and go in and stretch himself out on the earth be there all night . and the chief men of his house get up and go to his side to make him get up from the earth but he would not and he would not take food with them . and then on the seventh day the child 's death take place . and david 's servant be in fear of give him the news of the child 's death for they say truly while the child be still live he give no attention when we say anything to him what will he do to himself if we give him word that the child be dead ? but when david saw that his servant be talk together quietly he be certain that the child be dead and he say to his servant be the child dead ? and they say he be . then david get up from the earth and after wash and rub himself with oil and change his clothing he go into the house of the lord and give worship then he go back to his house and at his order they put food before him and he have a meal . then his servant say to him why have you be act in this way ? you be weep and go without food while the child be still live but when the child be dead you get up and have a meal . and he say while the child be still live i go without food and give myself up to weep for i say who be able to say that the lord will not have mercy on me and give the child life ? but now that the child be dead there be no reason for me to go without food be i able to make him come back to life ? i will go to him but he will never come back to me . and david give comfort to his wife bath sheba and he go in to her and have connection with her and she have a son to whom she give the name solomon . and he be dear to the lord . and he send word by nathan the prophet who give him the name jedidiah by the word of the lord . now joab be fight against rabbah in the land of the child of ammon and he take the water town . and joab send men to david say i have make war against rabbah and have take the water town . so now get the rest of the people together and put them in position against the town and take it for if i take it it will be name after my name . then david get all the people together and go to rabbah and make war on it and take it . and he take the crown of milcom from his head the weight of it be a talent of gold and in it be stone of great price and it be put on david 's head . and he take a great store of good from the town . and he take the people out of the town and put them to work with wood cut instrument and iron grain crusher and iron ax and at brick making this he do to all the town of the child of ammon . then david and all the people go back to jerusalem .now after this it come about that absalom david 's son have a beautiful sister whose name be tamar and david 's son amnon be in love with her . and he be so deeply in love that he become ill because of his sister tamar for she be a virgin and so it seem hard to amnon to do anything to her . but amnon have a friend whose name be jonadab the son of shimeah david 's brother and jonadab be a very wise man . and he say to him o son of the king why be you get thin day by day ? will you not say what your trouble be ? and amnon say to him i be in love with tamar my brother absalom 's sister . then jonadab say to him go to your bed and let it seem that you be ill and when your father come to see you say to him let my sister tamar come and give me bread and get the food ready before my eye so that i may see it and take it from her hand . so amnon go to bed and make himself seem ill and when the king come to see him amnon say to the king please let my sister tamar come and make me one or two cake before my eye so that i may take food from her hand . then david sent to the house for tamar and say go now to your brother amnon 's house and get a meal for him . so tamar go to her brother amnon 's house and he be in bed . and she take paste and make cake before his eye cook them over the fire . and she take the cooking pot and put the cake before him but he would not take them . and amnon say let everyone go away from me . so they all go out . then amnon say to tamar take the food and come into my bedroom so that i may take it from your hand . so tamar take the cake she have make and go with them into her brother amnon 's bedroom . and when she take them to give them to him he put his arm round her and say come to bed my sister . and answer him she say o my brother do not put shame on me it be not right for such a thing to be do in israel do not this evil thing . what will become of me in my shame ? and a for you you will be look down on with disgust by all israel . now then go and make your request to the king for he will not keep me from you . but he would not give attention to what she say but be strong than she he take her by force and have connection with her . then amnon be full of hate for her hat her with a hate great than his early love for her . and he say to her get up and be go . and she say to him not so my brother for this great wrong in send me away be bad than what you do to me before . but he give no attention to her . then he give a cry to the servant who be wait on him and say put this woman out and let the door be lock after her . now she have on a long robe such a in past time the king 's virgin daughter be dress in . then the servant put her out lock the door after her . and tamar in her grief put dust on her head and she put her hand on her head and go away cry loudly . and her brother absalom say to her have your brother amnon be with you ? but now let there be an end to your cry my sister he be your brother do not take this thing to heart . so tamar go on living uncomforted in her brother 's house . but when king david have news of all these thing he be very angry but he do not make trouble for amnon his son for he be dear to david be his old son . but absalom say nothing to his brother amnon good or bad for he be full of hate for him because he have take his sister tamar by force . now after two full year absalom have men cut the wool of his sheep in baal hazor which be near ephraim and he send for all the king 's son to come to his feast . and absalom come to the king and say see now your servant be cut the wool of his sheep will the king and his servant be please to come ? and the king say to absalom no my son let u not all go or the number will be over great for you . and he make his request again but he would not go but he give him his blessing . then absalom say if you will not go then let my brother amnon go with u . and the king say to him be there any reason for him to go with you ? but absalom go on request him till he let amnon and all the king 's son go with him . and absalom make a great feast like a feast for a king . now absalom have give order to his servant say now take note when amnon 's heart be glad with wine and when i say to you make an attack on amnon then put him to death without fear have i not give you order ? be strong and without fear . so absalom 's servant do to amnon a absalom have give them order . then all the king 's son get up and every man get on his beast and go in flight . now while they be on their way news be give to david that absalom have put to death all the son of the king and that not one of them be still live . then the king get up in great grief stretch himself out on the earth and all his servant be by his side with their clothing part . and jonadab the son of shimeah david 's brother say let not my lord have the idea that all the son of the king have be put to death for only amnon be dead this have be purpose by absalom from the day when he take his sister tamar by force . so now let not my lord the king take this thing to heart with the idea that all the king 's son be dead for only amnon be dead . but absalom go in flight . and the young man who keep the watch lift up his eye saw that a great band of people be come down the slope by the way of the horons and the watchman come and give word to the king say i saw men come down by the way of the horons from the hillside . and jonadab say to the king see the king 's son be come a your servant say so it be . and while he be talk the king 's son come with weeping and loud cry and the king and all his servant be weep bitterly . so absalom go in flight and come to talmai the son of ammihud the king of geshur where he be for three year . and the king be sorrow for his son all the time . and the heart of david be waste with desire for absalom for he be comfort for the death of amnon .now it be clear to joab the son of zeruiah that the king 's heart be turn to absalom . and joab sent to tekoa and get from there a wise woman and say to her now make yourself seem like one give up to grief and put on the clothing of sorrow not use any sweet oil for your body but look like one who for a long time have be weep for the dead and come to the king and say these word to him . so joab give her word to say . and the woman of tekoa come to the king and fall on her face give him honour and say give me help o king . and the king say to her what be your trouble ? and her answer be truly i be a widow and my husband be dead . and i have two son and the two of them have a fight in the field and there be no one to come between them and one with a blow put the other to death . and now all the family be turn against me your servant say give up him who be the cause of his brother 's death so that we may put him to death in payment for the life of his brother whose life he take and we will put an end to the one who will get the heritage so they will put out my last burning coal and my husband will have no name or offspring on the face of the earth . and the king say to the woman go to your house and i will give order about this . and the woman of tekoa say to the king my lord o king may the sin be on me and on my family and may the king and the seat of his kingdom be clear of sin ! and the king say if anyone say anything to you make him come to me and he will do you no more damage . then she say let the king keep in mind the lord your god so that he who give punishment for blood may be keep back from further destruction and that no one may send death on my son . and he say by the living lord not a hair of your son 's head will come to the earth . then the woman say will the king let his servant say one word more ? and he say say on . and the woman say why have you have such a thought about the people of god ? for in say these very word the king have put himself in the wrong because he have not take back the one whom he send far away . for death come to u all and we be like water drain out on the earth which it be not possible to take up again and god will not take away the life of the man whose purpose be that he who have be send away may not be completely cut off from him . and now it be my fear of the people which have make me come to say these word to my lord the king and your servant say i will put my cause before the king and it may be that he will give effect to my request . for the king will give ear and take his servant out of the power of the man whose purpose be the destruction of me and my son together from the heritage of god . then your servant say may the word of my lord the king give me peace ! for my lord the king be a the angel of god in his hearing of good and bad and may the lord your god be with you ! then the king say to the woman now give me an answer to the question i be go to put to you keep nothing back . and the woman say let my lord the king say on . and the king say be not the hand of joab with you in all this ? and the woman in answer say by the life of your soul my lord the king it be not possible for anyone to go to the right hand or to the left from anything say by the king your servant joab give me order and put all these word in my mouth this he do hop that the face of this business might be change and my lord be wise with the wisdom of the angel of god have knowledge of everything on earth . and the king say to joab see now i will do this thing go then and come back with the young man absalom . then joab fall down on his face on the earth give the king honour and blessing and joab say today it be clear to your servant that i have grace in your eye my lord king because the king have give effect to the request of his servant . so joab get up and go to geshur and come back again to jerusalem with absalom . and the king say let him go to his house but let him not see my face . so absalom go back to his house and do not see the face of the king . now in all israel there be no one so greatly to be praise for his beautiful form a absalom from his foot to the crown of his head he be completely beautiful . and when he have his hair cut which he do at the end of every year because of the weight of his hair the weight of the hair be two hundred shekel by the king 's weight . and absalom be the father of three son and of one daughter name tamar who be very beautiful . for two full year absalom be live in jerusalem without ever see the face of the king . then absalom sent for joab to send him to the king but he would not come to him and he send again a second time but he would not come . so he say to his servant see joab 's field be near mine and he have barley in it go and put it on fire . and absalom 's servant put the field on fire . then joab come to absalom in his house and say to him why have your servant put my field on fire ? and absalom 's answer be see i send to you say come here so that i may send you to the king to say why have i come back from geshur ? it would be good for me to be there still let me now see the king 's face and if there be any sin in me let him put me to death . so joab go to the king and say these word to him and when the king have send for him absalom come and go down on his face on the earth before the king and the king give him a kiss .now after this absalom get for himself a carriage and horse and fifty runner to go before him . and absalom get up early morning after morning and take his place at the side of the public meeting place and when any man have a cause which have to come to the king to be judge then absalom cry out to him say what be your town ? and he would say your servant be of one of the tribe of israel . and absalom would say to him see your cause be true and right but no man have be name by the king to give you a hearing . and more than this absalom say if only i be make judge in the land so that every man who have any cause or question might come to me and i would give a right decision for him ! and if any man come near to give him honour he take him by the hand and give him a kiss . and this absalom do to everyone in israel who come to the king to have his cause judge so absalom like a thief take away the heart of the men of israel . now at the end of four year absalom say to the king let me go to hebron and give effect to the oath which i make to the lord for while i be live in geshur in aram your servant make an oath say if ever the lord let me come back to jerusalem i will give him worship in hebron . and the king say to him go in peace . so he get up and go to hebron . but absalom at the same time send watcher through all the tribe of israel to say at the sound of the horn you be to say absalom be king in hebron . and with absalom at his request go two hundred men from jerusalem who be completely unconscious of his design . and absalom sent for ahithophel the gilonite one of david 's helper from giloh his town while he be make the offering . and the design against david become strong for more and more people be join to absalom . and one come to david and say the heart of the men of israel have go after absalom . and david say to all his servant who be with him at jerusalem come let u go in flight or not one of u will be safe from absalom let u go without loss of time or he will overtake u quickly and send evil on u and put the town to the sword . and the king 's servant say to the king see your servant be ready to do whatever the king say be to be do . so the king go out take with him all the people of his house but for ten of his woman who be to take care of the house . and the king go out and all his servant go after him and make a stop at the far house . and all the people go on by his side and all the cherethites and all the pelethites and all the men of ittai of gath six hundred men who come after him from gath go on before the king . then the king say to ittai the gittite why be you come with u ? go back and keep with the king for you be a man of another country you be far from the land of your birth . it be only yesterday you come to u why then be i to make you go up and down with u ? for i have to go where i may go back then and take your countryman with you and may the lord 's mercy and good faith be with you . and ittai the gittite in answer say by the living lord and by the life of my lord the king in whatever place my lord the king may be for life or death there will your servant be . and david say to ittai go forward then . and ittai the gittite go on with all his men and all the little one he have with him . and there be great weeping in all the country when all the people go through and the king himself be wait in the kidron valley and all the people go by him in the direction of the olive tree on the edge of the waste land . then zadok come and abiathar and with them the ark of god 's agreement and they put down the ark of god till all the people from the town have go by . and the king say to zadok take the ark of god back into the town if i have grace in the eye of the lord he will let me come back and see it and his house again but if he say i have no delight in you then here i be let him do to me what seem good to him . the king say far to zadok the priest see you and abiathar be to go back to the town in peace with your two son ahimaaz your son and jonathan the son of abiathar . see i will be wait at the way across the river in the waste land till i get news from you . so zadok and abiathar take the ark of god back to jerusalem and do not go away from there . and david go up the slope of the mount of olive weep all the way with his head cover and no shoe on his foot and all the people who be with him cover their head go up weeping . and word come to david say ahithophel be among those who be join to absalom . and david say o lord let the wisdom of ahithophel be make foolish . now when david have come to the top of the slope where they give worship to god hushai the archite come to him in great grief with dust on his head david say to him if you go on with me you will be a trouble to me but if you go back to the town and say to absalom i will be your servant o king a in the past i have be your father 's servant so now i will be yours then you will be able to keep ahithophel 's design against me from be put into effect . and have you not there zadok and abiathar the priest ? so whatever come to your ear from the king 's house give word of it to zadok and abiathar the priest . see they have with them their two son ahimaaz zadok 's son and jonathan the son of abiathar by them you may send word to me of everything which come to your ear . so hushai david 's friend go into the town and absalom come to jerusalem .and when david have go a little way past the top of the slope ziba the servant of mephibosheth come to him with two ass on which be two hundred cake of bread and a hundred stem of dry grape and a hundred summer fruit and a skin of wine . and david say to ziba what be your reason for this ? and ziba say the ass be for the use of the king 's people and the bread and the fruit be food for the young men and the wine be for drink for those who be overcome by weariness in the waste land . and the king say and where be your master 's son ? and ziba say he be still at jerusalem for he say today israel will give back to me the kingdom of my father . then the king say to ziba truly everything which be mephibosheth 's be yours . and ziba say i give honour to my lord may i have grace in your eye my lord o king ! and when king david come to bahurim a man of saul 's family name shimei the son of gera come out from there call curse after him . and he send stone at david and at all the king 's servant and at all the people and at all the men of war by his side on the right hand and on the left . and shimei say with curse be go be go you man of blood you good for nothing the lord have send punishment on you for all the blood of the family of saul whose kingdom you have take and the lord have give the kingdom to absalom your son now you yourself be take in your evil because you be a man of blood . then abishai the son of zeruiah say to the king be this dead dog to go on curse my lord the king ? let me go over and take off his head . and the king say what have i to do with you you son of zeruiah ? let him go on curse for the lord have say put a curse on david and who then may say why have you do so ? and david say to abishai and to all his servant you see how my son the offspring of my body have make design against my life how much more then may this benjamite do so ? let him be and let him go on curse for the lord have give him order . it may be that the lord will take note of my wrong and give me back good in answer to his cursing of me today . so david and his men go on their way and shimei go by the hillside parallel with them curse and send stone and dust at him . and the king and his people come tire to jordan and take their rest there . and absalom and the men of israel come to jerusalem and ahithophel be with him . then hushai the archite david 's friend come to absalom and say long life to the king long life to the king ! and absalom say be this your love for your friend ? why do you not go with your friend ? and hushai say to absalom not so i be for that man whom the lord and this people and all the men of israel have take a king and i will take my place with him . and more than this ! where be my place a a servant ? be it not before his son ? a i have be your father 's servant so will i be yours . then absalom say to ahithophel give your opinion now what be we to do ? and ahithophel say to absalom go in to your father 's woman who be here look after his house then all israel will have the news that you be hat by your father and the hand of your supporter will be strong . so they put up the tent for absalom on the top of the house and absalom go in to his father 's woman before the eye of all israel . in those day the opinion of ahithophel be value as highly a if through him a man might get direction from god so be they value by david as much a by absalom .then ahithophel say to absalom let me take out twelve thousand men and this very night i will go after david and i will come up with him when he be tired and feeble and make him full of fear and all the people with him will go in flight and i will make an attack on the king only and i will make all the people come back to you a a bride come back to her husband it be the life of only one man you be go after so all the people will be at peace . and the saying be please to absalom and to the responsible men of israel . then absalom say now send for hushai the archite and let u give ear to what he have to say . and when hushai come absalom say to him this be what ahithophel have say be we to do a he say ? if not what be your suggestion ? and hushai say to absalom ahithophel 's idea be not a good one at this time . hushai say far you have knowledge of your father and his men that they be men of war and that their feeling be bitter like those of a bear in the field whose young one have be take from her and your father be a man of war and will not take his night 's rest with the people but he will certainly have take cover now in some hole or secret place and if some of our people at the first attack be overcome then any hearing of it will say there be destruction among the people who be on absalom 's side . then even the strong whose heart be like the heart of a lion will become like water for all israel be conscious that your father be a man of war and those who be with him be strong and without fear . but my suggestion be that all israel from dan as far a beer sheba come together to you a great army like the sand of the sea in number and that you yourself go out among them . then we will come on him in some place wherever he may be fall on him a the dew come on the earth and of him and all the men who be with him not one will get away with his life . and if he have go into some town then let all israel take strong cord to that town and we will have it pull into the valley till not one small stone be to be see there . then absalom and all the men of israel say hushai 's suggestion be well than that of ahithophel . for it be the purpose of the lord to make the wise design of ahithophel without effect so that the lord might send evil on absalom . then hushai say to zadok and abiathar the priest this be the suggestion make by ahithophel to absalom and the responsible men of israel and this be what i say to them . so now send the news quickly to david and say do not take your night 's rest by the way across the river to the waste land but be certain to go over or the king and all the people with him will come to destruction . now jonathan and ahimaaz be wait by en rogel and a servant girl go from time to time and give them news and they go with the news to king david for it be not wise for them to let themselves be see come into the town . but a boy saw them and give word of it to absalom so the two of them go away quickly and come to the house of a man in bahurim who have a water hole in his garden and they go down into it . and a woman put a cover over the hole and put crush grain on top of it and no one have any knowledge of it . and absalom 's servant come to the woman at the house and say where be ahimaaz and jonathan ? and the woman say to them they have go from here to the stream . and after search for them and see nothing of them they go back to jerusalem . then after the servant have go away they come up out of the water hole and go to give king david the news and they say get up and go quickly over the water for such and such be ahithophel 's design against you . so david and all the people who be with him go up over jordan when dawn come every one of them have go over jordan . now when ahithophel saw that his suggestion be not act on he get his as ready and go back to his house to the town where he come from and have put his house in order he put himself to death by hang so he come to his end and be put in the rest place of his father . and david come to mahanaim . and absalom with all the men of israel go over jordan . and absalom put amasa at the head of the army in place of joab . now amasa be the son of a man name ithra the ishmaelite who have be the lover of abigail the daughter of jesse sister of zeruiah joab 's mother . and israel and absalom put up their tent in the land of gilead . now when david have come to mahanaim shobi the son of nahash of rabbah the ammonite and machir the son of ammiel of lo debar and barzillai the gileadite of rogelim come with bed and basin and pot and grain and meal and all sort of dry food and honey and butter and sheep and milk cheese for david and his people for they say this people be in the waste land need food and drink and rest .and david have the people who be with him numbered and he put over them captain of thousand and captain of hundred . and david send the people out a third of them under the order of joab and a third under the order of abishai son of zeruiah joab 's brother and a third under ittai the gittite . and the king say to the people and i myself will certainly go out with you . but the people say it be well for you not to go out for if we be put to flight they will not give a thought to u and if death overtake half of u it will be nothing to them but you be of more value than ten thousand of u so it be well for you to be ready to come to our help from this town . and the king say to them i will do whatever seem best to you . so the king take his place by the door of the town and all the people go out by hundred and by thousand . and the king give order to joab and abishai and ittai say because of me be gentle to the young man absalom . and this order about absalom be give in the hearing of all the people . so the people go out into the field against israel and the fight take place in the wood of ephraim . and the people of israel be overcome there by the servant of david and there be a great destruction that day and twenty thousand men be put to the sword . and the fight go on over all the face of the country and the wood be responsible for more death than the sword . and absalom come across some of david 's men . and absalom be seat on his mule and the mule go under the thick branch of a great tree and his head become fix in the tree and he be lift up between earth and heaven and the beast under him go on . and a certain man saw it and say to joab i saw absalom hanging in a tree . and joab say to the man who have give him the news if you saw this why do you not put your sword through him and i would have give you ten bit of silver and a band for your robe ? and the man say to joab even if you give me a thousand bit of silver i would not put out my hand against the king 's son for in our hear the king give order to you and abishai and ittai say take care that the young man absalom be not touch . and if i have falsely put him to death and nothing may be keep secret from the king you would have have nothing to do with me . then joab say i would have make it safe for you . and he take three spear in his hand and put them through absalom 's heart while he be still live in the branch of the tree . and ten young men servant of joab come round absalom and put an end to him . and joab have the horn sound and the people come back from go after israel for joab keep them back . and they take absalom 's body and put it into a great hole in the wood and put a great mass of stone over it and every man of israel go in flight to his tent . now absalom before his death have put up for himself a pillar in the king 's valley name it after himself for he say i have no son to keep my name in memory and to this day it be name absalom 's pillar . then ahimaaz the son of zadok say let me go and give the king news of how the lord have do right in his cause against those who take up arm against him . and joab say you will take no news today another day you may give him the news but you will take no news today because the king 's son be dead . then joab say to the cushite go and give the king word of what you have see . and the cushite make a sign of respect to joab go off run . then ahimaaz the son of zadok say to joab again whatever may come of it let me go after the cushite . and joab say why have you a desire to go my son see that you will get no reward for your news ? whatever may come of it he say i will go . then he say to him go . so ahimaaz go run by the lowland road and overtake the cushite . now david be seat between the two town door and the watchman go up to the roof of the doorway on the wall and lift up his eye saw a man run by himself . and the watchman give news of it to the king . and the king say if he be come by himself then he have news . and the man be travel quickly and come near . then the watchman saw another man run and cry out in the direction of the door he say here be another man run by himself . and the king say he like the other come with news . and the watchman say it seem to me that the running of the first be like the running of ahimaaz the son of zadok . and the king say he be a good man and his news will be good . and ahimaaz cry out to the king say it be well . and fall down before the king with his face to the earth he say may the lord your god be praise who have give up the men who take up arm against my lord the king ! and the king say be it well with the young man absalom ? and ahimaaz say in answer when joab send me your servant i saw a great outcry go on but i have no knowledge of what it be . and the king say get back and take your place here . so turn to one side he take his place there . and then the cushite come and say i have news for my lord the king today the lord have do right in your cause against all those who take up arm against you . and the king say to the cushite be the young man absalom safe ? and the cushite say in answer may all the king 's hater and those who do evil against the king be a that young man be ! then the king be much move and go up into the room over the door weeping and say o my son absalom my son my son absalom ! if only my life might have be give for yours o absalom my son my son !and word be give to joab that the king be weep and sorrow for absalom . and the salvation of that day be change to sorrow for all the people for it be say to the people the king be in bitter grief for his son . and the people make their way back to the town quietly and secretly a those who be sham go secretly when they go in flight from the war . but the king cover his face give a great cry o my son absalom o absalom my son my son ! and joab come into the house to the king and say today you have put to shame the face of all your servant who even now have keep you and your son and your daughter and your wife and all your woman safe from death for your hater it seem be dear to you and your friend be hat . for you have make it clear that captain and servant be nothing to you and now i see that if absalom be live and we have all be dead today it would have be right in your eye . so get up now and go out and say some kind word to your servant for by the lord i give you my oath that if you do not go out not one of them will keep with you tonight and that will be bad for you than all the evil which have overtake you from your early year . then the king get up and take his seat near the town door . and word be give to all the people that the king be in the public place and all the people come before the king . now all the men of israel have go back in flight to their tent . and through all the tribe of israel the people be have argument say the king make u safe from the hand of those who be against u and make u free from the hand of the philistine and now he have go in flight from the land because of absalom . and absalom whom we make a ruler over u be dead in the fight . so now why do you say nothing about get the king back ? and word of what all israel be say come to the king . and king david sent word to zadok and abiathar the priest say to the responsible men of judah why be you the last to take step to get the king back to his house ? you be my brother my bone and my flesh why be you the last to get the king back again ? and say to amasa be you not my bone and my flesh ? may god 's punishment be on me if i do not make you chief of the army before me at all time in place of joab ! and the heart of the men of judah be move like one man so that they send to the king say come back with all your servant . so the king come back and come as far a jordan . and judah come to gilgal meet the king there to take him back with them over jordan . and shimei the son of gera the benjamite from bahurim get up quickly and go down with the men of judah for the purpose of meet king david and with him a thousand men of benjamin and ziba the servant of saul with his fifteen son and twenty servant come rush to jordan before the king and keep go across the river to take the people of the king 's house over and to do whatever be desire by the king . and shimei the son of gera go down on his face in the dust before the king when he be about to go over jordan and say to him let me not be judge a a sinner in your eye o my lord and do not keep in mind the wrong i do on the day when my lord the king go out of jerusalem or take it to heart . for your servant be conscious of his sin and so a you see i have come today the first of all the son of joseph for the purpose of meet my lord the king . but abishai the son of zeruiah say be not death the right fate for shimei because he have be curse the one mark by the holy oil ? and david say what have i to do with you you son of zeruiah that you put yourselves against me today ? be it right for any man in israel to be put to death today ? for i be certain today that i be king in israel . so the king say to shimei you will not be put to death . and the king give him his oath . and mephibosheth the son of saul 's son come down for the purpose of meet the king his foot have not be care for or his hair cut or his clothing wash from the day when the king go away till the day when he come back in peace . now when he have come from jerusalem to see the king the king say to him why do you not come with me mephibosheth ? and he say in answer because of the deceit of my servant my lord king for i your servant say to him you be to make ready an as and on it i will go with the king for your servant have not the use of his foot . he have give you a false account of me but my lord the king be like the angel of god do then whatever seem good to you . for all my father 's family be only dead men before my lord the king and still you put your servant among those whose place be at the king 's table . what right then have i to say anything more to the king ? and the king say say nothing more about these thing . i say let there be a division of the land between ziba and you . and mephibosheth say let him take it all now that my lord the king have come back to his house in peace ! and barzillai the gileadite come down from rogelim and he go on as far a jordan with the king to take him across jordan . now barzillai be a very old man as much a eighty year old and he have give the king everything he have need of while he be at mahanaim for he be a very great man . and the king say to barzillai come over with me and i will take care of you in jerusalem . and barzillai say to the king how much of my life be still before me for me to go up to jerusalem with the king ? i be now eighty year old good and bad be the same to me have meat and drink any taste for me now ? be i able to take pleasure in the voice of men or woman in song ? why then be i to be a trouble to my lord the king ? your servant 's desire be only to take the king over jordan why be the king to give me such a reward ? let your servant now go back again so that when death come to me it may be in my town and by the rest place of my father and mother . but here be your servant chimham let him go with my lord the king and do for him what seem good to you . and the king say in answer let chimham go over with me and i will do for him whatever seem good to you and whatever your desire be i will do it for you . then all the people go over jordan and the king go over and the king give barzillai a kiss with his blessing and he go back to his place . so the king go over to gilgal and chimham go with him and all the people of judah as well a half the people of israel take the king on his way . then the men of israel come to the king and say why have our countryman of judah take you away in secret and come over jordan with the king and all his family because all his people be david 's men ? and all the men of judah give this answer to the men of israel because the king be our near relation why then be you angry about this ? have we take any of the king 's food or have he give u any offering ? and in answer to the men of judah the men of israel say we have ten part in the king and we be the first in order of birth why do you make nothing of u ? and be we not the first to make suggestion for get the king back ? and the word of the men of judah be more violent than the word of the men of israel .now by chance there be present a good for nothing person name sheba the son of bichri a benjamite and he sound the horn say we have no part in david or any interest in the son of jesse let every man go to his tent o israel . so all the men of israel turn away from david go after sheba the son of bichri but the men of judah be true to their king go with him from jordan as far a jerusalem . and david come to his house at jerusalem and the king take the ten woman to whom he have give the care of the house and have them shut up and give them the necessary of life but do not go near them . so they be shut up till the day of their death living a widow . then the king say to amasa get all the men of judah together and in three day be here yourself . so amasa go to get all the men of judah together but he take long than the time david have give him . and david say to abishai sheba the son of bichri will do u more damage than absalom do so take some of your lord 's servant and go after him before he make himself safe in the walled town and get away before our eye . so there go after abishai joab and the cherethites and the pelethites and all the fight men they go out of jerusalem to overtake sheba the son of bichri . when they be at the great stone which be in gibeon amasa come face to face with them . now joab have on his war dress and round him a band from which his sword be hang in it cover and while he be walk it come out fall to the earth . and joab say to amasa be it well my brother ? and with his right hand he take him by the hair of his chin to give him a kiss . but amasa do not see danger from the sword which be now in joab 's left hand and joab put it through his stomach so that his inside come out on to the earth and he do not give him another blow . so joab and his brother abishai go on after sheba the son of bichri . and one of joab 's young men take his place at amasa 's side say whoever be for joab and for david let him go after joab ! and amasa be stretch out in a pool of blood in the middle of the highway . and when the man saw that all the people be stop he take amasa out of the highway and put him in a field with a cloth over him when he saw that everyone who go by come to a stop . when he have be take off the road all the people go on after joab in search of sheba the son of bichri . and sheba go through all the tribe of israel to abel of beth maacah and all the bichrites come together and go in after him . and joab and his men get him shut up in abel of beth maacah and put up an earthwork against the town and all joab 's men do their best to get the wall break down . then a wise woman get up on the wall and cry out from the town say give ear give ear say now to joab come near so that i may have talk with you . and he come near and the woman say be you joab ? and he say in answer i be . then she say give ear to your servant 's word . and he say i be give ear . then she say in the old day there be a say let them put the question in abel and in dan say have what be order by men of good faith in israel ever come to an end ? your purpose be the destruction of a mother town in israel why would you put an end to the heritage of the lord ? and joab answer her say far far be it from me to be a cause of death or destruction not so but a man of the hill country of ephraim sheba son of bichri by name have take up arm against the king against david give up this man only and i will go away from the town . and the woman say to joab his head will be drop over the wall to you . then the woman in her wisdom have talk with all the town . and they have sheba 's head cut off and send out to joab . and he have the horn sound and send them all away from the town every man to his tent . and joab go back to jerusalem to the king . now joab be over all the army and benaiah the son of jehoiada be at the head of the cherethites and the pelethites and adoram be overseer of the forced work and jehoshaphat the son of ahilud be the recorder and sheva be the scribe and zadok and abiathar be priest and in addition ira the jairite be a priest to david .in the day of david they be short of food for three year year after year and david go before the lord for direction . and the lord say on saul and on his family there be blood because he put the gibeonites to death . then the king sent for the gibeonites now the gibeonites be not of the child of israel but be the last of the amorites to whom the child of israel have give an oath but saul in his passion for the child of israel and judah have make an attempt on their life so david say to the gibeonites what may i do for you ? how be i to make up to you for your wrong so that you may give a blessing to the heritage of the lord ? and the gibeonites say to him it be not a question of silver and gold between u and saul or his family and it be not in our power to put to death any man in israel . and he say say then what be i to do for you ? and they say to the king a for the man by whom we be waste and who make design against u to have u completely cut off from the land of israel let seven men of his family be give up to u and we will put an end to them by hang them before the lord in gibeon on the hill of the lord . and the king say i will give them . but the king do not give up mephibosheth the son of saul 's son jonathan because of the lord 's oath make between david and jonathan the son of saul . but the king take armoni and mephibosheth the two son of saul to whom rizpah the daughter of aiah have give birth and the five son of saul 's daughter merab whose father be adriel the son of barzillai the meholathite and he give them up to the gibeonites and they put them to death hang them on the mountain before the lord all seven come to their end together in the first day of the grain cutting at the start of the cutting of the barley . and rizpah the daughter of aiah take haircloth place it on the rock a a bed for herself from the start of the grain cutting till rain come down on them from heaven and she do not let the bird of the air come near them by day or the beast of the field by night . and news be give to david of what rizpah the daughter of aiah one of saul 's wife have do . and david go and take the bone of saul and his son jonathan from the men of jabesh gilead who have take them away secretly from the public place of beth shan where the philistine have put them hang up the body there on the day when they put saul to death in gilboa and he take the bone of saul and his son jonathan from that place and they get together the bone of those who have be put to death by hang . and they put them with the bone of saul and his son jonathan in the rest place of kish his father in zela in the country of benjamin they do all the king have give them order to do . and after that god give ear to their prayer for the land . and the philistine go to war again with israel and david go down with his people and while they be at gob they have a fight with the philistine and there come against david one of the offspring of the rephaim whose spear be three hundred shekel of brass in weight and have a new sword he make an attempt to put david to death . but abishai the son of zeruiah come to his help and turn on the philistine give him his death blow . then david 's men take an oath and say never again be you to go out with u to the fight so that you may not put out the light of israel . now after this there be war with the philistine again at gob and sibbecai the hushathite put to death saph one of the offspring of the rephaim . and again there be war with the philistine at gob and elhanan the son of jair the beth lehemite put to death goliath the gittite the stem of whose spear be like a cloth worker 's rod . and again there be war at gath where there be a very tall man who have twenty four finger and toe six finger on his hand and six toe on his foot he be one of the offspring of the rephaim . and when he be purpose to put shame on israel jonathan the son of shimei david 's brother put him to death . these four be of the offspring of the rephaim in gath and they come to their end by the hand of david and his servant .and david make a song to the lord in these word on the day when the lord make him free from the hand of all his hater and from the hand of saul and he say the lord be my rock my walled town and my saviour even mine my god my rock in him will i put my faith my breastplate and the horn of my salvation my high tower and my safe place my saviour who keep me safe from the violent man . i will send up my cry to the lord who be to be praise so will i be make safe from those who be against me . for the wave of death come round me and the sea of evil put me in fear the cord of hell be round me the net of death come on me . in my trouble my voice go up to the lord and my cry to my god my voice come to his hearing in his holy temple and my prayer come to his ear . then the earth be move with a violent shock the base of heaven be move and shake because he be angry . there go up a smoke from his nose and a fire of destruction from his mouth coal be light by it . the heaven be bent so that he might come down and it be dark under his foot . and he go through the air seat on a storm cloud go quickly on the wing of the wind . and he make the dark his tent round him a mass of water thick cloud of the sky . before his shin light his dark cloud go past raining ice and coal of fire . the lord make thunder in the heaven and the voice of the high be sound out . and he send out his arrow drive them in all direction by his flame of fire they be trouble . then the deep bed of the sea be see and the base of the world be uncovered because of the lord 's wrath because of the breath of his mouth . he send from on high he take me pull me out of great water . he make me free from my strong hater from those who be against me because they be strong than i. they come on me in the day of my trouble but the lord be my support . he take me out into a wide place he be my saviour because he have delight in me . the lord give me the reward of my righteousness because my hand be clean before him . for i have keep the way of the lord i have not be turn away in sin from my god . for all his decision be before me and i do not put away his law from me . and i be upright before him and i keep myself from sin . because of this the lord have give me the reward of my righteousness because my hand be clean in his eye . on him who have mercy you will have mercy to the upright you will be upright he who be holy will see that you be holy but to the man whose way be not straight you will be a hard judge . for you be the saviour of those who be in trouble but your eye be on men of pride to make them low . for you be my light o lord and the lord will make the dark bright for me . by your help i have make a way through the wall which be shut me in by the help of my god i have go over a wall . a for god his way be all good the word of the lord be test he be a safe cover for all those who put their faith in him . for who be god but the lord ? and who be a rock but our god ? god put a strong band about me guide me in a straight way . he make my foot like roe ' foot and put me on high place . he make my hand expert in war so that a bow of brass be bent by my arm . you have give me the breastplate of your salvation and your mercy have make me great . you have make my step wide under me so that my foot make no slip . i go after my hater and overtake them not turn back till they be all overcome . i have send destruction on them and give them wound so that they be not able to get up they be stretch under my foot . for i have be arm by you with strength for the fight you have make low under me those who come out against me . by you their back be turn in flight so that my hater be cut off . they be cry out but there be no one to come to their help even to the lord but he give them no answer . then they be crush as small a the dust of the earth stamp down under my foot like the waste of the street . you have make me free from the fighting of my people you have make me the head of the nation a people of whom i have no knowledge will be my servant . men of other country will with false heart put themselves under my authority from the time when my name come to their ear they will be rule by me . they will be waste away they will come out of their secret place shake with fear . the lord be live praise be to my rock and let the god of my salvation be honour it be god who send punishment on my hater and put people under my rule . he make me free from my hater i be lift up over those who come up against me you have make me free from the violent man . because of this i will give you praise o lord among the nation and will make a song of praise to your name . great salvation do he give to his king he have mercy on the king of his selection david and on his seed for ever .now these be the last word of david . david the son of jesse say the man who be lift up on high the man on whom the god of jacob put the holy oil the love one of israel 's song say the spirit of the lord have voice through me his word be on my tongue . the god of israel say the word of the rock of israel come to me when an upright king be rule over men when he be rule in the fear of god it be a the light of the morning when the sun come up a morning without cloud make young grass come to life from the earth . for be not my house so with god ? for he have make with me an eternal agreement order in all thing and certain a for all my salvation and all my desire will he not give it increase ? but the evil doer all of them will be like thorn to be push away because they may not be grip in the hand but anyone touch them have to be arm with iron and the rod of a spear and they will be burn with fire every one of them . these be the name of david 's men of war ishbaal the hachmonite chief of the three his axe be lift up against eight hundred put to death at one time . after him be eleazar the son of dodai the ahohite one of the three great fighter who be with david in pa dammim when the philistine come together there for the fight and when the men of israel have go in flight he be with david and go on fight the philistine till his hand become tired and stiff from grip his sword and that day the lord give a great salvation and the people come back after him only to take the good of the philistine . after him be shammah the son of ela the hararite . and the philistine come together in lehi where there be a bit of land full of seed and the people go in flight from the philistine . but he keep his place in the middle of the bit of land and keep back their attack and overcome the philistine and the lord give a great salvation . and three of the thirty go down at the start of the grain cutting and they come to david at the strong place of adullam and the band of philistine have take up their position in the valley of rephaim . and at that time david have take cover in the strong place and an armed force of the philistine be in beth lehem . and david move by a strong desire say if only someone would give me a drink of water from the water hole of beth lehem by the doorway into the town ! and the three men force their way through the philistine army get water from the water hole of beth lehem by the doorway into the town and take it back to david but he would not take it but drain it out make an offering of it to the lord . and he say far be it from me o lord to do this how may i take a my drink the life blood of men who have put their life in danger ? so he would not take it . these thing do the three great men of war . and abishai the brother of joab the son of zeruiah be chief of the thirty . he put to death three hundred with his spear and he get for himself a name among the thirty . be he not the noble of the thirty ? so he be make their captain but he be not equal to the first three . and benaiah the son of jehoiada a fight man of kabzeel have do great act he put to death the two son of ariel of moab he go down into a hole and put a lion to death in time of snow and he make an attack on an egyptian a tall man and the egyptian have a spear in his hand but he go down to him with a stick and pull the spear out of the hand of the egyptian put him to death with that same spear . these be the act of benaiah the son of jehoiada who have a great name among the thirty men of war . he be honour over the rest of the thirty but he be not equal to the first three . and david put him over the fight men who keep him safe . asahel the brother of joab be one of the thirty and elhanan the son of dodai of beth lehem shammah the harodite elika the harodite helez the paltite ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite abiezer the anathothite sibbecai the hushathite zalmon the ahohite maharai the netophathite heldai the son of baanah the netophathite ittai the son of ribai of gibeah of the child of benjamin benaiah the pirathonite hiddai of the valley of gaash abiel the arbathite azmaveth of bahurim eliahba the shaalbonite jashen the gunite jonathan the son of shammah the hararite ahiam the son of sharar the hararite eliphelet the son of ahasbai the maacathite eliam the son of ahithophel the gilonite hezrai the carmelite paarai the archite igal the son of nathan of zobah ban the gadite zelek the ammonite naharai the beerothite who have the care of the arm of joab son of zeruiah ira the ithrite gareb the ithrite uriah the hittite thirty seven in number .again the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and move david against them he say go take the number of israel and judah . and the king say to joab and the captain of the army who be with him go now through all the tribe of israel from dan as far a beer sheba and have all the people number so that i may be certain of the number of the people . and joab say to the king whatever the number of the people may the lord make it a hundred time a much and may the eye of my lord the king see it but why do my lord the king take pleasure in do this thing ? but the king 's order be strong than joab and the captain of the army . and joab and the captain of the army go out from the king to take the number of the child of israel . and they go over jordan and start from aroer from the town which be in the middle of the valley they go in the direction of the gadites and on to jazer then they come to gilead and to the land of the hittite under hermon and they come to dan and from dan they come round to zidon and to the walled town of tyre and to all the town of the hivites and the canaanite and they go out to the south of judah at beer sheba . so after go through all the land in every direction they come to jerusalem at the end of nine month and twenty day . and joab give the king the number of all the people there be in israel eight hundred thousand fight men able to take up arm and the men of judah be five hundred thousand . and after the people have be number david 's heart be trouble . and david say to the lord great have be my sin in do this but now o lord be please to take away the sin of your servant for i have do very foolishly and david get up in the morning now the word of the lord have come to the prophet gad david 's seer say go and say to david the lord say three thing be offer to you say which of them you will have and i will do it to you . so gad come to david and give him word of this and say to him be there to be three year when there be not enough food in your land ? or will you go in flight from your hater for three month while they go after you ? or will you have three day of violent disease in your land ? take thought and say what answer i be to give to him who send me . and david say to gad this be a hard decision for me to make let u come into the hand of the lord for great be his mercy let me not come into the hand of men . so david make selection of the disease and the time be the day of the grain cutting when the disease come among the people cause the death of seventy thousand men from dan as far a beer sheba . and when the hand of the angel be stretch out in the direction of jerusalem for it destruction the lord have regret for the evil and say to the angel who be send destruction on the people it be enough do no more . and the angel of the lord be by the grain floor of araunah the jebusite . and when david saw the angel who be cause the destruction of the people he say to the lord truly the sin be mine i have do wrong but these be only sheep what have they do ? let your hand be against me and against my family . and that day gad come to david and say to him go up and put up an altar to the lord on the grain floor of araunah the jebusite . so david go up a gad have say and a the lord have give order . and araunah look out saw the king and his servant come to him and araunah go out and go down on his face to the earth before the king . and araunah say why have my lord the king come to his servant ? and david say to give you a price for your grain floor so that i may put up an altar to the lord and the disease may be stop among the people . and araunah say to david let my lord the king take whatever seem right to him and make an offering of it see here be the ox for the burned offering and the grain cleaning instrument and the ox yoke for wood all this do the servant of my lord the king give to the king . and araunah say may the lord your god be please with your offering ! and the king say to araunah no but i will give you a price for it i will not give to the lord my god burn offering for which i have give nothing . so david get the grain floor and the ox for fifty shekel of silver . and there david put up an altar to the lord making burn offering and peace offering . so the lord give ear to his prayer for the land and the disease come to an end in israel .now king david be old and far on in year and though they put cover over him his body be cold . so his servant say to him let search be make for a young virgin for my lord the king to take care of him and be wait on him and you may take her in your arm and so my lord the king will be warm . so after search through all the land of israel for a fair young girl they saw abishag the shunammite and take her to the king . now she be very beautiful and she take care of the king wait on him at all time but the king have no connection with her . then adonijah the son of haggith lift himself up in pride say i will become king and he make ready his carriage of war and his horseman with fifty runner to go before him . now all his life his father have never go against him or say to him why have you do so ? and he be a very good look man and young than absalom . and he have talk with joab the son of zeruiah and with abiathar the priest and they be on his side and give him their support . but zadok the priest and benaiah the son of jehoiada and nathan the prophet and shimei and rei and david 's men of war do not take the side of adonijah . then adonijah put to death sheep and ox and fat beast by the stone of zoheleth by en rogel and he send for all his brother the king 's son and all the men of judah the king 's servant to come to him but he do not send for nathan the prophet and benaiah and the other men of war and solomon his brother . then nathan say to bath sheba the mother of solomon have it not come to your ear that adonijah the son of haggith have make himself king without the knowledge of david our lord ? so now let me make a suggestion so that you may keep your life safe and the life of your son solomon . come now go to king david and say to him do you not o my lord take an oath to me your servant say truly solomon your son will be king after me seat on the seat of my kingdom ? why then be adonijah act a king ? and while you be still talk there with the king see i will come in after you and say that your story be true . then bath sheba go into the king 's room now the king be very old and abishag the shunammite be wait on him . and bath sheba go down on her face on the earth before the king give him honour . and he say what be your desire ? and she say to him my lord you take an oath by the lord your god and give your word to your servant say truly solomon your son will be king after me seat on the seat of my kingdom . and now see adonijah have make himself king without my lord 's knowledge and have put to death ox and fat beast and sheep in great number and have send for all the son of the king and abiathar the priest and joab the captain of the army but he have not send for solomon your servant . and now my lord the king the eye of all israel be on you wait for you to say who be to take the place of my lord the king after him . for a thing be it will come about when my lord the king be sleep with his father that i and solomon my son will be make outlaws . and while she be still talk with the king nathan the prophet come in . and they say to the king here be nathan the prophet . and when he come in before the king he go down on his face on the earth . and nathan say o my lord king have you say adonijah be to be king after me seat on the seat of my kingdom ? because today he have go down and have put to death ox and fat beast and sheep in great number and have send for all the king 's son to come to him with the captain of the army and abiathar the priest and they be feast before him and cry long life to king adonijah ! but me your servant and zadok the priest and benaiah the son of jehoiada and your servant solomon he have not send for . have this thing be do by my lord the king without give word to your servant who be to be place on my lord the king 's seat after him ? then king david in answer say send for bath sheba to come to me . and she come in and take her place before the king . and the king take an oath and say by the living lord who have be my saviour from all my trouble a i take an oath to you by the lord the god of israel say certainly solomon your son will become king after me seat on my seat in my place so will i do this day . then bath sheba go down on her face on the earth before the king give him honour and say may my lord king david go on living for ever . and king david say send for zadok the priest and nathan the prophet and benaiah the son of jehoiada . and they come before the king . and the king say to them take with you the servant of your lord and put solomon my son on my beast yes mine and take him down to gihon and there let zadok the priest and nathan the prophet put the holy oil on him to make him king over israel and sound the horn say long life to king solomon ! then come up after him and he will come in and take his place on the seat of my kingdom for he be to be king in my place and i have give order that he be to be ruler over israel and over judah . and benaiah the son of jehoiada answer the king say so be it and may the lord the god of my lord the king say so . a the lord have be with my lord the king even so may he be with solomon and make the seat of his authority great than that of my lord king david . so zadok the priest and nathan the prophet and benaiah the son of jehoiada and the cherethites and the pelethites go down and put solomon on king david 's beast and take him to gihon . and zadok the priest take the vessel of oil out of the tent and put the holy oil on solomon . and when the horn be sound all the people say long life to king solomon ! and all the people come up after him pip with pipe and they be glad with great joy so that the earth be shake with the sound . and it come to the ear of adonijah and all the guest who be with him when their meal be end . and joab hear the sound of the horn say what be the reason of this noise a if the town be work up ? and while the word be on his lip jonathan the son of abiathar the priest come and adonijah say come in for you be a man of good faith and the news which you have for u will be good . and jonathan answering say to adonijah not so but our lord king david have make solomon king and he send with him zadok the priest and nathan the prophet and benaiah the son of jehoiada and the cherethites and the pelethites and they put him on the king 's beast and zadok the priest and nathan the prophet put the holy oil on him and make him king in gihon and they come back from there with joy and the town be all work up . this be the noise which have come to your ear . and now solomon be seat on the seat of the kingdom . and the king 's servant come to our lord king david bless him and say may god make the name of solomon well than your name and the seat of his authority great than your seat and the king be bent low in worship on his bed . then the king say may the god of israel be praise who have give one of my seed to be king in my place this day and have let my eye see it . and all the guest of adonijah get up in fear and go away every man to his place . and adonijah himself be full of fear because of solomon and he get up and go to the altar and put his hand on it horn . and they give solomon word of it say see adonijah go in such fear of king solomon that he have put his hand on the horn of the altar say let king solomon first give me his oath that he will not put his servant to death with the sword . and solomon say if he be see to be a man of good faith not a hair of him will be touch but if any wrongdoing be see in him he be to be put to death . so king solomon send and they take him down from the altar . and he come and give honour to king solomon and solomon say to him go to your house .now the time of david 's death come near and he give order to solomon his son say i be go the way of all the earth so be strong and be a man and keep the order of the lord your god walking in his way keep his law and his order and his rule and his word a they be record in the law of moses so that you may do well in all you do and wherever you go so that the lord may give effect to what he say of me if your child give attention to their way live uprightly before me with all their heart and their soul you will never be without a man to be king in israel . now you have knowledge of what joab the son of zeruiah do to me and to the two captain of the army of israel abner the son of ner and amasa the son of jether whom he put to death take payment for the blood of war in time of peace and make the band of my clothing and the shoe on my foot red with the blood of one put to death without cause . so be guide by your wisdom and let not his white head go down to the underworld in peace . but be good to the son of barzillai the gileadite and let them be guest at your table for so they come to me when i go in flight from absalom your brother . now you have with you shimei the son of gera the benjamite of bahurim who put a bitter curse on me on the day when i go to mahanaim but he come down to see me at jordan and i give him my oath by the lord say i will not put you to death by the sword . but do not let him be free from punishment for you be a wise man and it will be clear to you what you have to do with him see that his white head go down to the underworld in blood . then david go to rest with his father and his body be put into the earth in the town of david . david be king over israel for forty year for seven year he be king in hebron and for thirty three year in jerusalem . and solomon take his place on the seat of david his father and his kingdom be make safe and strong . then adonijah the son of haggith come to bath sheba the mother of solomon . and she say come you in peace ? and he say yes in peace . then he say i have something to say to you . and she say say on . and he say you saw how the kingdom be mine and all israel have the idea that i would be their king but now the kingdom be turn about and have become my brother 's for it be give to him by the lord . now i have one request to make to you and do not say no to me . and she say to him say on . then he say will you go to solomon the king for he will not say no to you and put before him my request that he will give me abishag the shunammite for a wife ? and bath sheba say good ! i will make your request to the king . so bath sheba go to king solomon to have talk with him on adonijah 's account . and the king get up to come to her and go down low to the earth before her then he take his place on the king 's seat and have a seat make ready for the king 's mother and she take her place at his right hand . then she say i have one small request to make to you do not say no to me . and the king say say on my mother for i will not say no to you . and she say let abishag the shunammite be give to adonijah your brother for a wife . then king solomon make answer and say to his mother why be you request me to give abishag the shunammite to adonijah ? take the kingdom for him in addition for he be my old brother and abiathar the priest and joab the son of zeruiah be on his side . then king solomon take an oath by the lord say may god 's punishment be on me if adonijah do not give payment for these word with his life . now by the living lord who have give me my place on the seat of david my father and make me one of a line of king a he give me his word truly adonijah will be put to death this day . and king solomon sent benaiah the son of jehoiada and he make an attack on him and put him to death . and to abiathar the priest the king say go to anathoth to your field for death would be your right reward but i will not put you to death now because you take up the ark of the lord god before david my father and you be with him in all his trouble . so solomon let abiathar be priest no longer so that he might make the word of the lord come true which he say about the son of eli in shiloh . and news of this come to joab for joab have be one of adonijah 's supporter though he have not be on absalom 's side . then joab go in flight to the tent of the lord and put his hand on the horn of the altar . and they say to king solomon joab have go in flight to the tent of the lord and be by the altar . then solomon send benaiah the son of jehoiada say go make an attack on him . and benaiah come to the tent of the lord and say to him the king say come out . and he say no but let death come to me here . and benaiah go back to the king and give him word of the answer which joab have give . and the king say do a he have say and make an attack on him there and put his body into the earth so that you may take away from me and from my family the blood of one put to death by joab without cause . and the lord will send back his blood on his head because of the attack he make on two men more upright and good than himself put them to the sword without my father 's knowledge even abner the son of ner captain of the army of israel and amasa the son of jether captain of the army of judah . so their blood will be on the head of joab and on the head of his seed for ever but for david and his seed and his family and the seat of his kingdom there will be peace for ever from the lord . so benaiah the son of jehoiada go up and fall on him put him to death and his body be put to rest in his house in the waste land . and the king put benaiah the son of jehoiada in his place over the army and zadok the priest he put in the place of abiathar . then the king sent for shimei and say to him make a house for yourself in jerusalem and keep there and go to no other place . for be certain that on the day when you go out and go over the stream kidron death will overtake you and your blood will be on your head . and shimei say to the king very well ! a my lord the king have say so will your servant do . and for a long time shimei go on living in jerusalem . but after three year two of the servant of shimei go in flight to achish son of maacah king of gath . and word be give to shimei that his servant have go to gath . then shimei get up and make ready his as he go to gath to achish in search of his servant and he send and get them from gath . and news be give to solomon that shimei have go from jerusalem to gath and have come back again . then the king sent for shimei and say to him do i not make you take an oath by the lord protest to you and say be certain that on the day when you go out from here wherever you go death will overtake you ? and you say to me very well ! why then have you not keep the oath of the lord and the order which i give you ? and the king say to shimei you have knowledge of all the evil which you do to david my father and now the lord have send back your evil on yourself . but a blessing will be on king solomon and the kingdom of david will keep it place before the lord for ever . so the king give order to benaiah the son of jehoiada and he go out and fall on him put him to death . and solomon 's authority over the kingdom be complete .solomon become the son in law of pharaoh king of egypt and take pharaoh 's daughter a his wife keep her in the town of david till the house he be build for himself and the house of the lord and the wall round jerusalem be complete . but all this time the people be make their offering in the high place because no house have be put up to the name of the lord till those day . and solomon in his love for the lord keep the law of david his father but he make offering and let them go up in smoke on the high place . and the king go to gibeon to make an offering there because that be the chief high place it be solomon 's way to make a thousand burn offering on that altar . in gibeon solomon have a vision of the lord in a dream by night and god say to him say what i be to give you . and solomon say great be your mercy to david my father a his life before you be true and upright and his heart be true to you and you have keep for him this great mercy a son to take his place this day . and now o lord my god you have make your servant king in the place of david my father and i be only a young boy with no knowledge of how to go out or come in . and your servant have round him the people of your selection a people so great that they may not be number and no account of them may be give . give your servant then a wise heart for judge your people able to see what be good and what evil for who be able to be the judge of this great people ? now these word and solomon 's request be please to the lord . and god say to him because your request be for this thing and not for long life for yourself or for wealth or for the destruction of your hater but for wisdom to be a judge of cause i have do a you say i have give you a wise and far see heart so that there have never be your equal in the past and never will there be any like you in the future . and with this i have give you what you make no request for wealth and honour so that no king be ever your equal . and if you go on in my way keep my law and my order a your father david do i will give you a long life . and solomon awakening saw that it be a dream then he come to jerusalem where he go before the ark of the agreement of the lord offering burn offering and peace offering and he make a feast for all his servant . then two loose woman of the town come and take their place before the king and one of them say o my lord i and this woman be live in the same house and i give birth to a child by her side in the house . and three day after the birth of my child this woman have a child we be together no other person be with u in the house but we two only . in the night this woman sleep on her child be the cause of it death . and she get up in the middle of the night and take my son from my side while your servant be sleep and she take it in her arm and put her dead child in my arm . and when i get up to give my child the breast i saw that it be dead but in the morning look at it with care i saw that it be not my son . and the other woman say no but the living child be my son and the dead one yours . but the first say no the dead child be your son and the live one mine . so they keep on talk before the king . then the king say one say the living child be my son and yours be the dead and the other say not so but your son be the dead one and mine be the living . then he say get me a sword . so they go and put a sword before the king . and the king say let the living child be cut in two and one half give to one woman and one to the other . then the mother of the living child come forward for her heart go out to her son and she say o my lord give her the child do not on any account put it to death . but the other woman say it will not be mine or yours let it be cut in two . then the king make answer and say give her the child and do not put it to death she be the mother of it . and news of this decision which the king have make go through all israel and they have fear of the king for they saw that the wisdom of god be in him to give decision .now solomon be king over all israel . and these be his chief men azariah the son of zadok be the priest elihoreph and ahijah the son of shisha be scribe jehoshaphat the son of ahilud be the recorder benaiah the son of jehoiada be head of the army zadok and abiathar be priest azariah the son of nathan be over those in authority in the different division of the country zabud the son of nathan be priest and the king 's friend ahishar be controller of the king 's house adoniram the son of abda be overseer of the forced work . and solomon put twelve overseer over all israel to be responsible for the store need for the king and those of his house every man be responsible for one month in the year . and these be their name ... the son of hur in the hill country of ephraim ... the son of deker in makaz and shaalbim and beth shemesh and elonbeth hanan ... the son of hesed in arubboth socoh and all the land of hepher be under his control ... the son of abinadab in all naphath dor his wife be taphath the daughter of solomon . baana the son of ahilud in taanach and megiddo and all beth shean which be by the side of zarethan under jezreel from beth shean to abel meholah as far a the far side of jokmeam ... the son of geber in ramoth gilead he have the town of jair the son of manasseh which be in gilead and the country of argob which be in bashan sixty great town with wall and lock of brass . ahinadab the son of iddo in mahanaim ahimaaz in naphtali he take basemath the daughter of solomon a his wife baana the son of hushai in asher and aloth jehoshaphat the son of paruah in issachar shimei the son of ela in benjamin geber the son of uri in the land of gilead the country of sihon king of the amorites and og king of bashan and one overseer have authority over all the overseer who be in the land . judah and israel be as great in number a the sand by the seaside and they take their food and drink with joy in their heart . and solomon be ruler over all the kingdom from the river to the land of the philistine and as far a the edge of egypt men give him offering and be his servant all the day of his life . and the amount of solomon 's food for one day be thirty measure of crushed grain and sixty measure of meal ten fat ox and twenty ox from the field and a hundred sheep in addition to hart and gazelle and roe and fat fowl . for he have authority over all the country on this side of the river from tiphsah to gaza over all the king on this side of the river and he have peace round him on every side . so judah and israel be live safely every man under his vine and his fig tree from dan as far a beer sheba all the day of solomon . and solomon have four thousand box off space for horse for his carriage and twelve thousand horseman . and those overseer every man in his month saw that food be produce for solomon and all his guest they take care that nothing be overlook . and they take grain and dry grass for the horse and the carriage horse to the right place every man a he be order . and god give solomon a great store of wisdom and good sense and a mind of wide range as wide a the sand by the seaside . and solomon 's wisdom be great than the wisdom of all the people of the east and all the wisdom of egypt . for he be wise than all men even than ethan the ezrahite and heman and calcol and darda the son of mahol and he have a great name among all the nation round about . he be the maker of three thousand wise saying and of song to the number of a thousand and five . he make saying about all plant from the cedar in lebanon to the hyssop hang on the wall and about all beast and bird and fish and the small thing of the earth . people come from every nation to give ear to the wisdom of solomon from all the king of the earth who have word of his wisdom .now hiram king of tyre hearing that solomon have be make king in place of his father send his servant to him for hiram have ever be a friend to david . and solomon send back word to hiram say you have knowledge that david my father be not able to make a house for the name of the lord his god because of the war which be round him on every side till the lord put all those who be against him under his foot . but now the lord my god have give me rest on every side no one be make trouble and no evil be take place . and so it be my purpose to make a house for the name of the lord my god a he say to david my father your son whom i will make king in your place will be the builder of a house for my name . so now will you have cedar tree from lebanon cut down for me and my servant will be with your servant and i will give you payment for your servant at whatever rate you say for it be common knowledge that we have no such wood cutter among u a the men of zidon . and these word of solomon make hiram glad and he say now may the lord be praise who have give to david a wise son to be king over this great people . then hiram sent to solomon say the word you send have be give to me i will do all your desire in the question of cedar wood and cypress wood . my men will take them down from lebanon to the sea where i will have them cord together to go by sea to whatever place you say and i will have them cut up there so that you may take them away a for payment it will be enough if you give me food for my people . so hiram give solomon all the cedar wood and cypress wood he have need of and solomon give hiram twenty thousand measure of grain a food for his people and twenty measure of clear oil this he do every year . now the lord have give solomon wisdom a he have say to him and there be peace between hiram and solomon and they make an agreement together . then king solomon get together men for the forced work through all israel thirty thousand men in number and send them to lebanon in band of ten thousand every month for a month they be work in lebanon and for two month in their country and adoniram be in control of them . then he have seventy thousand for the work of transport and eighty thousand stone cutter in the mountain in addition to the chief of the responsible men put by solomon to oversee the work three thousand and three hundred in authority over the workman . by the king 's order great stones stone of high price be cut out so that the base of the house might be make of squared stone . solomon 's builder and hiram 's builder do the work of cut them and put edge on them and get the wood and the stone ready for the building of the house .in the four hundred and eightieth year after the child of israel come out of the land of egypt in the fourth year that solomon be king of israel in the month ziv which be the second month the building of the lord 's house be start . the house which solomon make for the lord be sixty cubit long twenty cubit wide and thirty cubit high . the covered way before the temple of the house be twenty cubit long as wide a the house and ten cubit wide in front of the house . and for the house he make window with network across . and against the wall all round and against the wall of the temple and of the inmost room he put up wing with side room all round the low line of them be five cubit wide the middle six cubit wide and the third seven cubit for there be a space all round the outside wall of the house so that the board support the room do not have to be fix in the wall of the house . and the stone use in the building of the house be square at the place where they be cut out there be no sound of hammer or axe or any iron instrument while they be build the house . the door to the low side room be in the right side of the house and they go up by twist step into the middle room and from the middle into the third . so he put up the house and make it complete roof it with board of cedar wood . and he put up the line of side room against the wall of the house fifteen cubit high rest against the house on board of cedar wood . and the word of the lord come to solomon say about this house which you be build if you will keep my law and give effect to my decision and be guide by my rule i will give effect to my word which i give to david your father . and i will be ever among the child of israel and will not go away from my people . so solomon make the building of the house complete . the wall of the house be cover inside with cedar wood board from the floor to the roof of the house they be cover inside with wood and the floor be cover with board of cypress wood . and at the back of the house a further space of twenty cubit be shut in with board of cedar wood for the inmost room . and the house that be the temple in front of the holy place be forty cubit long . all the inside of the house be cedar wood ornament with design of bud and flower no stonework be to be see inside . and he make ready an inmost room in the middle of the house in which to put the ark of the agreement of the lord . and the inmost room be twenty cubit square and twenty cubit high plat over with clear gold and he make an altar of cedar wood plat it with gold . solomon have all the inside of the house cover with gold and he put chain of gold across in front of the inmost room which itself be cover with gold . plate of gold be put all through the house till it be cover completely and the altar in the inmost room be all cover with gold . in the inmost room he make two winged being of olive wood ten cubit high with outstretched wing five cubit wide the distance from the edge of one wing to the edge of the other be ten cubit . the two wing one be ten cubit high of the same size and form . the two of them be ten cubit high . these be place inside the inner house their outstretched wing touch the wall of the house one touch one wall and one the other while their other wing be touch in the middle . these winged one be plat over with gold . and all the wall of the house inside and out be ornament with form of winged one and palm tree and open flower . and the floor of the house be cover with gold inside and out . for the way into the inmost room he make door of olive wood the arch and the door support form a five sided opening . on the olive wood door be cut design of winged one and palm tree and open flower all of them with the door plat with gold . then he make pillar of olive wood for the way into the temple the pillar be square and two fold door of cypress wood with two leaf . these be ornament with design of winged one and palm tree and open flower plat over with gold . and the inner space be wall with three line of squared stone and a line of cedar wood board . in the fourth year the base of the house be put in it place in the month ziv . and in the eleventh year in the month bul which be the eighth month the building of the house be complete in every detail a it have be design . so he be seven year build it .solomon be thirteen year build a house for himself till it be complete . and he make the house of the wood of lebanon which be a hundred cubit long and fifty cubit wide and thirty cubit high rest on four line of cedar wood pillar with cedar wood support on the pillar . and it be cover with cedar over the forty five support which be on the pillar fifteen in a line . there be three line of window frame window face window in every line . and all the door and window have square frame with the window face one another in three line . and he make a covered room of pillar fifty cubit long and thirty cubit wide and ... with step before it . then he make a covered room for his high seat when he give decision this be the covered room of judge it be cover with cedar wood from floor to roof . and the house for his living place the other open square in the covered room be make in the same way . and then he make a house like it for pharaoh 's daughter whom solomon have take a his wife . all these building be make inside and out from base to crown stone and outside to the great walled square of highly price stone cut to different size with cut instrument . and the base be of great mass of highly price stone some ten cubit and some eight cubit square . overhead be highly price stone cut to measure and cedar wood . the great outer square all round be wall with three line of squared stone and a line of cedar wood board round about the open square inside the house of the lord and the covered room of the king 's house . then king solomon sent and get hiram from tyre . he be the son of a widow of the tribe of naphtali and his father be a man of tyre a worker in brass he be full of wisdom and knowledge and an expert worker in brass . he come to king solomon and do all his work for him . he it be who make the two brass pillars the first pillar be eighteen cubit high and a line of twelve cubit go round it and the second be the same . and he make the two crown to be put on the top of the pillar of brass make soft in the fire the crown be five cubit high . there be net of open work for the crown on the top of the pillar a net of open work for one and a net of open work for the other . and he make ornament of apple and two line of apple all round over the network cover the crown of the pillar the two crown in the same way . the crown on the top of the pillar be ornament with a design of flower and be four cubit across . and there be crown on the two pillar near the round part by the network and there be two hundred apple in line round every crown . he put up the pillar at the doorway of the temple name the one on the right jachin and that on the left boaz . the top of the pillar have a design of flower and the work of make the pillar be complete . and he make a great metal water vessel ten cubit across from edge to edge five cubit high and thirty cubit round . and under the edge of it circle it all round for ten cubit be two line of flower bud make together with it from liquid metal . it be support on twelve ox with their back part turn to the middle of it three of them face to the north three to the west three to the south and three to the east the vessel be rest on top of them . it be as thick a a man 's open hand and be curve like the edge of a cup like the flower of a lily it would take two thousand bath . and he make ten wheeled base of brass every one four cubit long four cubit wide and three cubit high . and the base be make in this way their side be square fix in a framework and on the square side between the frame be lion ox and wing one and the same on the frame and over and under the lion and the ox and the winged one be step . every base have four wheel of brass turn on brass rod and their four angle have angle plate under them the angle plat under the base be of metal and there be ornament at the side of every one . the mouth of it inside the angle plate be one cubit across it be round like a pillar a cubit and a half across it have design cut on it the side be square not round . the four wheel be under the frame and the rod on which the wheel be fix be in the base the wheel be a cubit and a half high . the wheel be make like carriage wheel the rod on which they be fix the part form their edge their rod and the middle point of them be all form out of liquid metal . and there be four angle plate at the four angle of every base form part of the structure of the base . and at the top of the base there be a round vessel half a cubit high in the space of the flat side and on the frame of them he make design of winged one lion and palm tree with ornamented edge all round . all the ten base be make in this way after the same design of the same size and form . and he make ten brass wash vessel everyone take forty bath and measure four cubit one vessel be place on every one of the ten base . and he put the base by the house five on the right side and five on the left and he put the great water vessel on the right side of the house to the east facing south . and hiram make the pot and spade and the basin . so hiram come to the end of all the work he do for king solomon in the house of the lord the two pillar and the two cup of the crown which be on the top of the two pillar and the network cover the two cup of the crown on the top of the pillar and the four hundred apple for the network two line of apple for every network cover the two cup of the crown on the pillar and the ten base with the ten wash vessel on them and the great water vessel with the twelve ox under it and the pot and the spade and the basin all the vessel which hiram make for king solomon for the house of the lord be of polished brass . he make them of liquid metal in the lowland of jordan at the way across the river at adama between succoth and zarethan . the weight of all these vessel be not measure because there be such a number of them it be not possible to get the weight of the brass . and solomon have all the vessel make for use in the house of the lord the altar of gold and the gold table on which the holy bread be place and the support for the light five on the right side and five on the left before the inmost room of clear gold and the flower and the light and all the instrument of gold and the cup and the scissors and the basin and the spoon and the fire trays all of gold and the pin on which the door be turn the door of the inner house the most holy place and the door of the temple all of gold . so all the work king solomon have do in the house of the lord be complete . then solomon take the holy thing which david his father have give the silver and the gold and all the vessel and put them in the store house of the house of the lord .then solomon sent for all the responsible men of israel and all the chief of the tribe and the head of family of the child of israel to come to him in jerusalem to take the ark of the lord 's agreement up out of the town of david which be zion . and all the men of israel come together to king solomon at the feast in the month ethanim the seventh month . and all the responsible men of israel come and the priest take up the ark . they take up the ark of the lord and the tent of meeting and all the holy vessel which be in the tent all these the priest and the levite take up . and king solomon and all the men of israel who have come together there be with him before the ark make offering of sheep and oxen more than might be number . and the priest take the ark of the agreement of the lord and put it in it place in the inner room of the house in the most holy place under the wing of the winged one . for their wing be outstretched over the place where the ark be cover the ark and it rod . the rod be so long that their end be see from the holy place in front of the inmost room but they be not see from outside and there they be to this day . there be nothing in the ark but the two flat stone which moses put there at horeb where the lord make an agreement with the child of israel when they come out of the land of egypt . now when the priest have come out of the holy place the house of the lord be full of the cloud so that the priest be not able to keep their place to do their work because of the cloud for the house of the lord be full of the glory of the lord . then solomon say o lord to the sun you have give the heaven for a living place but your living place be not see by men so i have make for you a live place a house in which you may be for ever present . then turn his face about the king give a blessing to all the men of israel and they be all on their foot together . and he say praise be to the lord the god of israel who himself give his word to david my father and with his strong hand have make his word come true say from the day when i take my people israel out of egypt no town in all the tribe of israel have be mark out by me for the building of a house for the rest place of my name but i make selection of david to be king over my people israel . now it be in the heart of david my father to put up a house for the name of the lord the god of israel . but the lord say to david my father you do well to have in your heart the desire to make a house for my name but you yourself will not be the builder of my house but your son the offspring of your body he it be who will put up a house for my name . and the lord have make his word come true for i have take my father david 's place on the seat of the kingdom of israel a the lord give his word and i have make a house for the name of the lord the god of israel . in it i have make a place for the ark in which be the agreement which the lord make with our father when he take them out of the land of egypt . then solomon take his place before the altar of the lord all the men of israel be present and stretch out his hand to heaven say o lord the god of israel there be no god like you in heaven or on the earth keep faith and mercy unchanging for your servant while they go in your way with all their heart . and you have keep the word which you give to your servant david my father with your mouth you say it and with your hand you have make it come true this day . so now o lord the god of israel let your word to your servant david my father come true when you say you will never be without a man to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of israel before me if only your child give attention to their way walk before me a you have do . so now o god of israel it be my prayer that you will make your word come true which you say to your servant david my father . but be it truly possible that god may be house on earth ? see heaven and the heaven of heaven be not wide enough to be your rest place how much less this house which i have make ! still let your heart be turn to the prayer of your servant o lord god and to his prayer for grace give ear to the cry and the prayer which your servant send up to you this day that your eye may be open to this house night and day to this place of which you have say my name will be there hear the prayer which your servant may make turn to this place . give ear to the prayer of your servant and the prayer of your people israel when they make their prayer turn to this place give ear in heaven your living place and hearing have mercy . if a man do wrong to his neighbour and have to take an oath and come before your altar to take his oath in this house then let your ear be open in heaven and be the judge of your servant give your decision against the wrongdoer so that punishment for his sin may come on his head and by your decision keep from evil him who have do no wrong . when your people israel be overcome in war because of their sin against you if they be turn to you again honour your name make prayer to you and request your grace in this house then give ear in heaven and let the sin of your people israel have forgiveness and take them back again into the land which you give to their father . when heaven be shut up and there be no rain because of their sin against you if they make prayer with their face turn to this place honour your name and turn away from their sin when you send trouble on them then give ear in heaven so that the sin of your servant and of your people israel may have forgiveness when you make clear to them the good way in which they be to go and send rain on your land which you have give to your people for their heritage . if there be no food in the land or if there be disease or if the fruit of the earth be damage through heat or water locust or worm if their town be shut in by their attacker whatever trouble whatever disease there may be whatever prayer or request for your grace be make by any man or by all your people israel whatever his trouble may be whose hand be stretch out to this house give ear in heaven your live place act in mercy and give to every man whose secret heart be open to you the reward of all his way for you and you only have knowledge of the heart of all the child of men so that they may give you worship all the day of their life in the land which you give to our father . and a for the man from a strange land who be not of your people israel when he come from a far country because of the glory of your name for they will have news of your great name and your strong hand and your out stretch arm when he come to make his prayer turn to this house give ear in heaven your living place and give him his desire whatever it may be so that all the people of the earth may have knowledge of your name worship you a do your people israel and that they may see that this house which i have put up be truly name by your name . if your people go out to war against their attacker by whatever way you may send them if they make their prayer to the lord turn their face to this town of yours and to this house which i have make for your name give ear in heaven to their prayer and their cry for grace and see right do to them . if they do wrong against you for no man be without sin and you be angry with them and give them up into the power of those who be fight against them so that they take them away a prisoner into a strange land far off or near and if they take think in the land where they be prisoner and be turn again to you cry out in prayer to you in that land and say we be sinner we have do wrong we have do evil and with all their heart and soul be turn again to you in the land of those who take them prisoner and make their prayer to you turn their eye to this land which you give to their father and to the town which you take for yourself and the house which i make for your name then give ear to their prayer and to their cry in heaven your living place and see right do to them answer with forgiveness the people who have do wrong against you and overlook the evil which they have do against you let those who make them prisoner be move with pity for them and have pity on them for they be your people and your heritage which you take out of egypt out of the iron fireplace let your eye be open to your servant 's prayer for grace and to the prayer of your people israel hear them when their cry come to you . for you make them separate from all the people of the earth to be your heritage a you say by moses your servant when you take our father out of egypt o lord god . then solomon after make all these prayer and request for grace to the lord get up from his knee before the altar of the lord where his hand have be stretch out in prayer to heaven and get on his foot he give a blessing to all the men of israel say with a loud voice praise be to the lord who have give rest to his people israel a he give them his word to do every word of all his oath which he give by the hand of moses his servant have come true . now may the lord our god be with u a he be with our father let him never go away from u or give u up turn our heart to himself guide u to go in all his way to keep his order and his law and his decision which he give to our father . and may these my word the word of my prayer to the lord be before the lord our god day and night so that he may see right do to his servant and to his people israel day by day a we have need . so that all the people of the earth may see that the lord be god and there be no other . then let your heart be without sin before the lord our god walking in his law and keep his order as at this day . now the king and all israel with him be make offering before the lord . and solomon give to the lord for peace offering twenty two thousand ox and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep . so the king and all the child of israel keep the feast of the opening of the lord 's house . the same day the king make holy the middle of the open square in front of the house of the lord offering there the burned offering and the meal offering and the fat of the peace offering for there be not room on the brass altar of the lord for the burned offering and the meal offering and the fat of the peace offering . so solomon and all israel with him a very great meeting for the people have come together from the way into hamath to the river of egypt keep the feast at that time before the lord our god for two week even fourteen day . and on the eighth day he send the people away and bless the king they go to their tent full of joy and glad in their heart because of all the good which the lord have do to david his servant and to israel his people .now when solomon come to the end of build the house of the lord and the king 's house and all solomon 's desire which he have in mind be effect the lord come to him again in a vision a he have do at gibeon and the lord say to him your prayer and your request for grace have come to my ear i have make holy this house which you have make and i have put my name there for ever my eye and my heart will be there at all time . a for you if you will go on your way before me a david your father do uprightly and with a true heart do what i have give you order to do keep my law and my decision then i will make the seat of your rule over israel certain for ever a i give my word to david your father say you will never be without a man to be king in israel . but if you be turn from my way you or your child and do not keep my order and my law which i have put before you but go and make yourselves servant to other god and give them worship then i will have israel cut off from the land which i have give them and this house which i have make holy for myself i will put away from before my eye and israel will be a public example and a word of shame among all people . and this house will become a mass of broken wall and everyone who go by will be overcome with wonder at it and make whistling sound and they will say why have the lord do so to this land and to this house ? and their answer will be because they be turn away from the lord their god who take their father out of the land of egypt they take for themselves other god and give them worship and become their servant that be why the lord have send all this evil on them . now at the end of twenty year in which time solomon have put up the two house the house of the lord and the king 's house hiram king of tyre have give solomon cedar tree and cypress tree and gold as much a he have need of king solomon give hiram twenty town in the land of galilee . but when hiram come from tyre to see the town which solomon have give him he be not pleased with them . and he say what sort of town be these which you have give me my brother ? so they be name the land of cabul to this day . and hiram send the king a hundred and twenty talent of gold . now this be the way of solomon 's system of forced work for the building of the lord 's house and of the king 's house and the millo and the wall of jerusalem and megiddo and gezer . ... pharaoh king of egypt come and take gezer burn it down and put to death the canaanite live in the town and he give it for a bride offering to his daughter solomon 's wife . ... ... and solomon be the builder of gezer and beth horon the low and baalath and tamar in the waste land in that land and all the store town and the town which solomon have for his war carriage and for his horseman and everything which it be his pleasure to put up in jerusalem and in lebanon and in all the land under his rule . a for the rest of the amorites the hittite the perizzites the hivites and the jebusites who be not child of israel their child who be still in the land and whom the child of israel have not be able to put to complete destruction them do solomon put to force work to this day . but solomon do not put the child of israel to force work they be the men of war his servant his captain and his chief captain of his war carriage and of his horseman . these be the chief of the overseer of solomon 's work five hundred and fifty in authority over the people who do the work . at that time solomon make pharaoh 's daughter come up from the town of david to the house which he have make for her then he make the millo . three time in the year it be solomon 's way to give burn offering and peace offering on the altar he have make to the lord cause his fire offering to go up on the altar before the lord . and king solomon make a sea force of ship in ezion geber by eloth on the red sea in the land of edom . hiram send his servant who be experience seaman in the sea force with solomon 's men . and they come to ophir where they get four hundred and twenty talent of gold and take it back to king solomon .now the queen of sheba hear great thing of solomon come to put his wisdom to the test with hard question . and she come to jerusalem with a very great train with camel weight down with spice and store of gold and jewel and when she come to solomon she have talk with him of everything in her mind . and solomon give her answer to all her question there be no secret which the king do not make clear to her . and when the queen of sheba have see all the wisdom of solomon and the house which he have make and the food at his table and all his servant seat there and those who be wait on him in their place and their robe and his wine servant and the burn offering which he make in the house of the lord there be no more spirit in her . and she say to the king the account which be give to me in my country of your act and your wisdom be true . but i have no faith in what be say about you till i come and saw for myself and now i see that it be not half the story your wisdom and your wealth be much great than they say . happy be your wife happy be these your servant whose place be ever before you hear your word of wisdom . may the lord your god be praise whose pleasure it be to put you on the seat of the kingdom of israel because the lord 's love for israel be eternal he have make you king to be their judge in righteousness . and she give the king a hundred and twenty talent of gold and a great store of spice and jewel never again be such a wealth of spice see a that which the queen of sheba give king solomon . and the sea force of hiram in addition to gold from ophir come back with much sandal wood and jewel . and from the sandal wood the king make pillar for the house of the lord and for the king 's house and instrument of music for the maker of melody never have such sandal wood be see to this day . and king solomon give the queen of sheba all her desire whatever she make request for in addition to what he give her freely from the impulse of his heart . so she go back to her country she and her servant . now the weight of gold which come to solomon in one year be six hundred and sixty six talent in addition to what come to him from the business of the trader and from all the king of the arabian and from the ruler of the country . and solomon make two hundred body cover of hammered gold every one have six hundred shekel of gold in it . and he make three hundred small body cover of hammered gold with three pound of gold in every cover and the king put them in the house of the wood of lebanon . then the king make a great ivory seat plat with the best gold . there be six step go up to it and the top of it be round at the back there be arm on the two side of the seat and two lion by the side of the arm and twelve lion be place on the one side and on the other side on the six step there be nothing like it in any kingdom . and all king solomon 's drinking vessel be of gold and all the vessel of the house of the wood of lebanon be of the best gold not one be of silver for no one give a thought to silver in the day of king solomon . for the king have tarshish ship at sea with the ship of hiram once every three year the tarshish ship come with gold and silver and ivory and monkey and peacock . and king solomon be great than all the king of the earth in wealth and in wisdom . and from all over the earth they come to see solomon and to give ear to his wisdom which god have put in his heart . and everyone take with him an offering vessel of silver and vessel of gold and robe and coat of metal and spice and horse and beast of transport regularly year by year . and solomon get together war carriage and horseman he have one thousand four hundred carriage and twelve thousand horseman whom he keep some in the carriage town and some with the king at jerusalem . and the king make silver as common a stone in jerusalem and cedar like the sycamore tree of the lowland in number . and solomon 's horse come from egypt and from kue the king 's trader get them at a price from kue . a war carriage might be get from egypt for six hundred shekel of silver and a horse for a hundred and fifty they get them at the same rate for all the king of the hittite and the king of aram .now a number of strange woman be love by solomon woman of the moabites ammonites edomites zidonians and hittites the nation of which the lord have say to the child of israel you be not to take wife from them and they be not to take wife from you or they will certainly make you go after their god to these solomon be unite in love . he have seven hundred wife daughter of king and three hundred other wife and through his wife his heart be turn away . for it come about that when solomon be old his heart be turn away to other god by his wife and his heart be no longer true to the lord his god a the heart of his father david have be . for solomon go after ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians and milcom the disgusting god of the ammonite . and solomon do evil in the eye of the lord not walk in the lord 's way with all his heart a david his father do . then solomon put up a high place for chemosh the disgust god of moab in the mountain before jerusalem and for molech the disgusting god worship by the child of ammon . and so he do for all his strange wife who make offering with burning of perfume to their god . and the lord be angry with solomon because his heart be turn away from the lord the god of israel who have twice come to him in a vision and have give him order about this very thing that he be not to go after other god but he do not keep the order of the lord . so the lord say to solomon because you have do this and have not keep my agreement and my law which i give you i will take the kingdom away from you by force and will give it to your servant . i will not do it in your life time because of your father david but i will take it from your son . still i will not take all the kingdom from him but i will give one tribe to your son because of my servant david and because of jerusalem the town of my selection . so the lord send hadad the edomite to make trouble for solomon he be of the king 's seed in edom . and when david have send destruction on edom and joab the captain of the army have go to put the dead into the earth and have put to death every male in edom for joab and all israel be there six month till every male in edom have be cut off hadad be still a young boy go in flight to egypt with certain edomites servant of his father and they go on from midian and come to paran and take men from paran with them they come to egypt to pharaoh king of egypt who give him a house and give order for his food and give him land . now hadad be very please to pharaoh so that he give him the sister of his wife tahpenes the queen for his wife . and the sister of tahpenes have a son by him genubath whom tahpenes take care of in pharaoh 's house and genubath be live in pharaoh 's house among pharaoh 's son . now when hadad have news in egypt that david have be put to rest with his father and that joab the captain of the army be dead he say to pharaoh send me back to my country . but pharaoh say to him what have you be short of while you have be with me that you be desire to go back to your country ? and he say nothing but even so send me back . and god sent another trouble maker rezon the son of eliada who have go in flight from his lord hadadezer king of zobah he get some men together and make himself captain of a band of outlaw and go to damascus and become king there . he be a trouble to israel all through the day of solomon . and this be the damage hadad do he be cruel to israel while he be ruler over edom . and there be jeroboam the son of nebat an ephraimite from zeredah a servant of solomon whose mother be zeruah a widow and his hand be lift up against the king . the way in which his hand come to be lift up against the king be this solomon be build the millo and make good the damage part of the town of his father david and jeroboam be an able and responsible man and solomon saw that he be a good worker and make him overseer of all the work give to the son of joseph . now at that time when jeroboam be go out of jerusalem the prophet ahijah the shilonite come across him on the road now ahijah have put on a new robe and the two of them be by themselves in the open country . and ahijah take his new robe in his hand part it violently into twelve . and he say to jeroboam take ten of the part for this be what the lord have say see i will take the kingdom away from solomon by force and will give ten tribe to you but one tribe will be his because of my servant david and because of jerusalem the town which out of all the tribe of israel i have make mine because they be turn away from me to the worship of ashtoreth the goddess of the zidonians and chemosh the god of moab and milcom the god of the ammonite they have not be walk in my way or do what be right in my eye or keep my law and my decision a his father david do . but i will not take the kingdom from him i will let him be king all the day of his life because of david my servant in whom i take delight because he keep my order and my law . but i will take the kingdom from his son and give it to you . and one tribe i will give to his son so that david my servant may have a light for ever burn before me in jerusalem the town which i have make mine to put my name there . and you i will take and you will be king over israel ruling over whatever be the desire of your soul . and if you give attention to the order i give you walk in my way and do what be right in my eye and keep my law and my order a david my servant do then i will be with you build up for you a safe house a i do for david and i will give israel to you . so that i may send trouble for this on the seed of david but not for ever . and solomon be look for a chance to put jeroboam to death but he go in flight to egypt to shishak king of egypt and be in egypt till the death of solomon . now the rest of the act of solomon and all he do and his wisdom be they not record in the book of the act of solomon ? and the time solomon be king in jerusalem over all israel be forty year . and solomon go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the town of david his father and solomon go to rest with his father and rehoboam his son become king in his place .and rehoboam go to shechem where all israel have come together to make him king and hearing of it jeroboam the son of nebat who be still in egypt where he have go in flight from solomon and be live there come back to his town zeredah in the hill country of ephraim and all the men of israel come to rehoboam and say your father put a hard yoke on u if you will make the condition under which your father keep u down less cruel and the weight of the yoke he put on u less hard then we will be your servant . and he say to them go away for three day and then come back to me again . so the people go away . then king rehoboam take the opinion of the old men who have be with solomon his father when he be live and say in your opinion what answer be i to give to this people ? and they say to him if you will be a servant to this people today care for them and give them a gentle answer then they will be your servant for ever . but he give no attention to the opinion of the old men and go to the young men of his generation who be wait before him and say to them what be your opinion ? what answer be we to give to this people who have say to me make less the weight of the yoke which your father put on u ? and the young men of his generation say to him this be the answer to give to the people who come to you say your father put a hard yoke on u will you make it less ? say to them my little finger be thick than my father 's body if my father put a hard yoke on you i will make it hard my father give you punishment with whip but i will give you blow with snake . so all the people come to rehoboam on the third day a the king have give order say come back to me the third day . and the king give them a rough answer give no attention to the suggestion of the old men but give them the answer put forward by the young men say my father make your yoke hard but i will make it hard my father give you punishment with whip but i will give it with snake . so the king do not give ear to the people and this come about by the purpose of the lord so that what he have say by ahijah the shilonite to jeroboam son of nebat might be effect . and when all israel saw that the king would give no attention to them the people in answer say to the king what part have we in david ? what be our heritage in the son of jesse ? to your tent o israel now see to your people david . so israel go away to their tent . but rehoboam be still king over those of the child of israel who be live in the town of judah . then king rehoboam send adoniram the overseer of the forced work and he be stone to death by all israel . and king rehoboam go quickly and get into his carriage to go in flight to jerusalem . so israel be turn away from the family of david to this day . now when all israel have news that jeroboam have come back they send for him to come before the meeting of the people and make him king over israel not one of them be join to the family of david but only the tribe of judah . when rehoboam come to jerusalem he get together all the men of judah and the tribe of benjamin a hundred and eighty thousand of his best fight men to make war against israel and get the kingdom back for rehoboam the son of solomon . but the word of god come to shemaiah the man of god say say to rehoboam the son of solomon king of judah and to all the men of judah and benjamin and the rest of the people the lord have say you be not to go to war against your brother the child of israel go back every man to his house because this thing be my purpose . so they give ear to the word of the lord and go back a the lord have say . then jeroboam make the town of shechem in the hill country of ephraim a strong place and be live there and from there he go out and do the same to penuel . and jeroboam say in his heart now the kingdom will go back to the family of david if the people go up to make offering in the house of the lord at jerusalem their heart will be turn again to their lord to rehoboam king of judah and they will put me to death and go back to rehoboam king of judah . so after take think the king make two ox of gold and he say to the people you have be go up to jerusalem long enough see ! these be your god o israel who take you out of the land of egypt . and he put one in beth el and the other in dan . and this become a sin in israel for the people go to give worship to the one at beth el and to the other at dan . and he make place for worship at the high place and make priest who be not levites from among all the people . and jeroboam give order for a feast in the eighth month on the fifteenth day of the month like the feast which be keep in judah and he go up to the altar . and in the same way in beth el he give offering to the ox which he have make placing in beth el the priest of the high place he have make . he go up to the altar he have make in beth el on the fifteenth day of the eighth month the month fix by him at his pleasure and he give order for a feast for the people of israel and go up to the altar and there he make the smoke of his offering go up .then a man of god come from judah by the order of the lord to beth el where jeroboam be by the altar burning offering . and by the order of the lord he make an outcry against the altar say o altar altar the lord have say from the seed of david will come a child name josiah and on you he will put to death the priest of the high place who be burn offering on you and men 's bone will be burn on you . the same day he give them a sign say this be the sign which the lord have give see the altar will be break and the burn waste on it overturn . then the king hear the man of god cry out against the altar at beth el put out his hand from the altar say take him prisoner . and his hand stretch out against him become dead and he have no power of pull it back . and the altar be break and the burn waste on it overturn this be the sign which the man of god have give by the word of the lord . then the king make answer and say to the man of god make a prayer now for the grace of the lord your god and for me that my hand may be make well . and in answer to the prayer of the man of god the king 's hand be make well again a it be before . and the king say to the man of god come with me to my house for food and rest and i will give you a reward . but the man of god say to the king even if you give me half of all you have i would not go in with you and i would not take food or a drink of water in this place for so i be order by the word of the lord who say you be not to take food or a drink of water and you be not to go back the way you come . so he go another way and not by the way he come to beth el . now there be an old prophet living in beth el and one of his son come and give him word of all the man of god have do that day in beth el and they give their father an account of the word he have say to the king . then their father say to them which way do he go ? now his son have see which way the man of god who come from judah have go . so the prophet say to his son make ready an as for me . so they make an as ready and he get on it and go after the man of god and come up with him while he be seat under an oak tree . and he say to him be you the man of god who come from judah ? and he say i be . then he say to him come back to the house with me and have a meal . but he say i may not go back with you or go into your house and i will not take food or a drink of water with you in this place for the lord say to me you be not to take food or water there or go back again by the way you come . then he say to him i be a prophet like you and an angel say to me by the word of the lord take him back with you and give him food and water . but he say false word to him . so he go back with him and have a meal in his house and a drink of water . but while they be seat at the table the word of the lord come to the prophet who have take him back and cry out to the man of god who come from judah he say the lord say because you have go against the voice of the lord and have not do a you be order by the lord but have come back and have take food and water in this place where he say you be to take no food or water your dead body will not be put to rest with your father . now after the meal he make ready the as for him for the prophet whom he have take back . and he go on his way but on the road a lion come rush at him and put him to death and his dead body be stretch in the road with the as by it side and the lion be there by the body . and some men go by saw the body stretch out in the road with the lion by it side and they come and give news of it in the town where the old prophet be live . then the prophet who have make him come back hear it say it be the man of god who go against the word of the lord that be why the lord have give him to the lion to be wound to death a the lord say . and he say to his son make ready the as for me . and they do so . and he go and saw the dead body stretch out in the road with the as and the lion by it side the lion have not take the body for it food or do any damage to the as . then the prophet take up the body of the man of god and put it on the as and take it back and he come to the town to put the body to rest with weep . and he put the body in the resting place make ready for himself weep and sorrow over it say o my brother ! and when he have put it to rest he say to his son when i be dead then you be to put my body into the earth with the body of this man of god and put me by his bone so that my bone may be keep safe with his bone . for the outcry he make by the word of the lord against the altar in beth el and against all the house of the high place in the town of samaria will certainly come about . after this jeroboam not turn back from his evil way still make priest for his altar from among all the people he make a priest of anyone desire it so that there might be priest of the high place . and this become a sin in the family of jeroboam cause it to be cut off and send to destruction from the face of the earth .at that time abijah the son of jeroboam become ill. and jeroboam say to his wife now come put on different clothing so that you may not seem to be the wife of jeroboam and go to shiloh see ahijah be there the prophet who say i would be king over this people . and take with you ten cake of bread and dry cake and a pot of honey and go to him he will give you word of what be to become of the child . so jeroboam 's wife do so and get up and go to shiloh and come to the house of ahijah . now ahijah be unable to see because he be very old . and the lord have say to ahijah the wife of jeroboam be come to get news from you about her son who be ill give her such and such an answer for she will make herself seem to be another woman . then ahijah hear the sound of her footstep come in at the door say come in o wife of jeroboam why do you make yourself seem like another ? for i be send to you with bitter news . go say to jeroboam these be the word of the lord the god of israel though i take you from among the people lift you up to be a ruler over my people israel and take the kingdom away by force from the seed of david and give it to you you have not be like my servant david who keep my order and be true to me with all his heart do only what be right in my eye . but you have do evil more than any before you and have make for yourself other god and image of metal move me to wrath and turn your back on me . so i will send evil on the line of jeroboam cut off from his family every male child those who be shut up and those who go free in israel the family of jeroboam will be brush away like a man brush away waste till it be all go . those of the family of jeroboam who come to death in the town will become food for the dog and those on whom death come in the open country will be food for the bird of the air for the lord have say it . up then ! go back to your house and in the hour when your foot go into the town the death of the child will take place . and all israel will put his body to rest weep over him because he only of the family of jeroboam will be put into his rest place in the earth for of all the family of jeroboam in him only have the lord the god of israel see some good . and the lord will put up a king over israel who will send destruction on the family of jeroboam in that day and even now the hand of the lord have come down on israel shake it like a river grass in the water and uproot israel from this good land which he give to their father he will send them this way and that on the other side of the river because they have make for themselves image move the lord to wrath . and he will give israel up because of the sin which jeroboam have do and make israel do . then jeroboam 's wife get up and go away and come to tirzah and when she come to the doorway of the house death come to the child . and all israel put his body to rest weep over him a the lord have say by his servant ahijah the prophet . now the rest of the act of jeroboam how he make war and how he become king be record in the book of the history of the king of israel . and jeroboam be king for twenty two year and be put to rest with his father and nadab his son become king in his place . and rehoboam the son of solomon be king in judah . rehoboam be forty one year old when he become king and he be king for seventeen year in jerusalem the town which the lord have make his out of all the tribe of israel to put his name there his mother 's name be naamah an ammonite woman . and judah do evil in the eye of the lord and make him more angry than their father have do by their sin . for they make high place and upright stone and wood pillar on every high hill and under every green tree and more than this there be those in the land who be use for sex purpose in the worship of the god do the same disgust crime a the nation which the lord have send out before the child of israel . now in the fifth year of king rehoboam shishak king of egypt come up against jerusalem and take away all the stored wealth from the house of the lord and from the king 's house and all the gold body cover which solomon have make . so in their place king rehoboam have other body cover make of brass and give them into the care of the captain of the arm men who be station at the door of the king 's house . and whenever the king go into the house of the lord the arm men go with him take the body cover and then take them back to their room . now the rest of the act of rehoboam and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and there be war between rehoboam and jeroboam all their day . and rehoboam go to rest with his father and be put into the earth with his father in the town of david his mother 's name be naamah an ammonite woman . and abijam his son become king in his place .now in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam the son of nebat abijam become king over judah . for three year he be king in jerusalem and his mother 's name be maacah the daughter of abishalom . and he do the same sin which his father have do before him his heart be not completely true to the lord his god like the heart of david his father . but because of david the lord give him a light in jerusalem make his son king after him so that jerusalem might be safe because david do what be right in the eye of the lord and never in all his life go against his order but only in the question of uriah the hittite . ... now the rest of the act of abijam and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and there be war between abijam and jeroboam . then abijam go to rest with his father and they put him into the earth in the town of david and asa his son become king in his place . in the twentieth year that jeroboam be king of israel asa become king over judah . and he be king for forty one year in jerusalem his mother 's name be maacah the daughter of abishalom . asa do what be right in the eye of the lord a david his father do . those use for sex purpose in the worship of the god he send out of the country and he take away all the image which his father have make . and he would not let maacah his mother be queen because she have make a disgusting image for asherah and asa have the image cut down and burn by the stream kidron . the high place however be not take away but still the heart of asa be true to the lord all his life . he take into the house of the lord all the thing which his father have make holy and those which he himself have make holy silver and gold and vessel . now there be war between asa and baasha king of israel all their day . and baasha king of israel go up against judah building ramah so that no one be able to go out or in to asa king of judah . then asa take all the silver and gold which be still store in the lord 's house and in the king 's house and send them in the care of his servant to ben hadad son of tabrimmon son of rezon king of aram at damascus say let there be an agreement between me and you a there be between my father and your father see i have send you an offering of silver and gold go and put an end to your agreement with baasha king of israel so that he may give up attack me . so ben hadad do a king asa say and send the captain of his army against the town of israel attack ijon and dan and abel beth maacah and all chinneroth as far a all the land of naphtali . and baasha hearing of it put a stop to the building of ramah and be live in tirzah . then king asa get all judah together make every man come and they take away the stone and the wood with which baasha be build ramah and king asa make use of them for build geba in the land of benjamin and mizpah . now the rest of the act of asa and his power and all he do and the town of which he be the builder be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? but when he be old he have a disease of the foot . so asa go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the town of david his father and jehoshaphat his son become king in his place . nadab the son of jeroboam become king over israel in the second year that asa be king of judah and he be king of israel for two year . he do evil in the eye of the lord copy the evil way of his father and the sin which he do and make israel do . and baasha the son of ahijah of the family of issachar make a secret design against him attack him at gibbethon a town of the philistine for nadab and the army of israel be make war on gibbethon . in the third year of the rule of asa king of judah baasha put him to death and become king in his place . and straight away when he become king he send destruction on all the offspring of jeroboam there be not one live person of all the family of jeroboam whom he do not put to death so the word of the lord which he say by his servant ahijah the shilonite come about because of the sin which jeroboam do and make israel do move the lord the god of israel to wrath . now the rest of the act of nadab and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and there be war between asa and baasha king of israel all their day . in the third year of the rule of asa king of judah baasha the son of ahijah become king over all israel in tirzah and be king for twenty four year . he do evil in the eye of the lord copy the evil way of jeroboam and the sin which he make israel do .and the word of the lord come to jehu son of hanani protest against baasha and say because i take you up out of the dust and make you ruler over my people israel and you have go in the way of jeroboam and make my people israel do evil move me to wrath by their sin truly i will see that baasha and all his family be completely brush away i will make your family like the family of jeroboam the son of nebat . anyone of the family of baasha who come to death in the town will become food for the dog and he to whom death come in the open country will be food for the bird of the air . now the rest of the act of baasha and what he do and his power be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and baasha go to rest with his father and be put into the earth at tirzah and elah his son become king in his place . and the lord send his word against baasha and his family by the mouth of the prophet jehu the son of hanani because of all the evil he do in the eye of the lord move him to wrath by the work of his hand because he be like the family of jeroboam and because he put it to death . in the twenty sixth year that asa be king of judah elah the son of baasha become king of israel in tirzah and he be king for two year . and his servant zimri captain of half his war carriage make secret design against him now he be in tirzah drink hard in the house of arza controller of the king 's house in tirzah . and zimri go in and make an attack on him and put him to death in the twenty seventh year that asa be king of judah and make himself king in his place . and straight away when he become king and take his place on the seat of the kingdom he put to death all the family of baasha not one male child of his relation or his friend keep his life . so zimri put to death all the family of baasha so that the word which the lord say against him by the mouth of jehu the prophet come about because of all the sin of baasha and the sin of elah his son which they do and make israel do move the lord the god of israel to wrath by their foolish act . now the rest of the act of elah and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? in the twenty seventh year of asa king of judah zimri be king for seven day in tirzah . now the people be attack gibbethon in the land of the philistine . and news come to the people in the tent that zimri have make a secret design and have put the king to death so all israel make omri the captain of the army king that day in the tent . then omri go up from gibbethon with all the army of israel and they make an attack on tirzah shutting in the town on every side . and when zimri saw that the town be take he go into the inner room of the king 's house and burn the house over his head come to his end because of his sin in do evil in the eye of the lord in go in the way of jeroboam and in his sin which he make israel do . now the rest of the act of zimri and the secret design he make be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? then there be a division among the people of israel half the people be for make tibni son of ginath king and half be support omri . but the supporter of omri overcame those who be on the side of tibni the son of ginath and death come to tibni and to his brother joram at that time and omri become king in the place of tibni . in the thirty first year of asa king of judah omri become king over israel and he be king for twelve year for six year he be rule in tirzah . he get the hill samaria from shemer for the price of two talent of silver and he make a town there build it on the hill and name it samaria after shemer the owner of the hill . and omri do evil in the eye of the lord even bad than all those before him copy all the evil way of jeroboam the son of nebat and all the sin he do and make israel do move the lord the god of israel to wrath by their foolish way . now the rest of the act which omri do and his great power be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? so omri go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in samaria and ahab his son become king in his place . in the thirty eighth year that asa be king of judah ahab the son of omri become king over israel and ahab be king in samaria for twenty two year . and ahab the son of omri do evil in the eye of the lord even bad than all who go before him . and a if copy the evil way of jeroboam the son of nebat be a small thing for him he take a his wife jezebel daughter of ethbaal king of zidon and become a servant and worshipper of baal . and he put up an altar for baal in the house of baal which he have make in samaria . and ahab make an image of asherah and do more than all the king of israel before him to make the lord the god of israel angry . in his day hiel make jericho he put it base in position at the price of abiram his old son and he put it door in place at the price of his young son segub even a the lord have say by joshua the son of nun .and elijah the tishbite of tishbe in gilead say to ahab by the living lord the god of israel whose servant i be there will be no dew or rain in these year but only at my word . then the word of the lord come to him say go from here in the direction of the east and keep yourself in a secret place by the stream cherith east of jordan . the water of the stream will be your drink and by my order the raven will give you food there . so he go and do a the lord say living by the stream cherith east of jordan . and the raven take him bread in the morning and meat in the evening and the water of the stream be his drink . now after a time the stream become dry because there be no rain in the land . then the word of the lord come to him say up ! go now to zarephath in zidon and make your live place there i have give order to a widow woman there to see that you have food . so he get up and go to zarephath and when he come to the door of the town he saw a widow woman get stick together and cry out to her he say will you give me a little water in a vessel for my drink ? and when she be go to get it he say to her and get me with it a small bit of bread . then she say by the life of the lord your god i have nothing but a little meal in my store and a drop of oil in the bottle and now i be get two stick together so that i may go in and make it ready for me and my son so that we may have a meal before our death . and elijah say to her have no fear go and do a you have say but first make me a little cake of it and come and give it to me and then make something for yourself and your son . for this be the word of the lord the god of israel the store of meal will not come to an end and the bottle will never be without oil till the day when the lord send rain on the earth . so she go and do a elijah say and she and he and her family have food for a long time . the store of meal do not come to an end and the bottle be never without oil a the lord have say by the mouth of elijah . now after this the son of the woman of the house become ill so ill that there be no breath in him . and she say to elijah what have i to do with you o man of god ? have you come to put god in mind of my sin and to put my son to death ? and he say to her give your son to me . and lift him out of her arm he take him up to his room and put him down on his bed . and cry to the lord he say o lord my god have you send evil even on the widow whose guest i be by cause her son 's death ? and stretch herself out on the child three time he make his prayer to the lord say o lord my god be please to let this child 's life come back to him again . and the lord give ear to the voice of elijah and the child 's spirit come into him again and he come back to life . and elijah take the child down from his room into the house and give him to his mother and say to her see your son be live . then the woman say to elijah now i be certain that you be a man of god and that the word of the lord in your mouth be true .now after a long time the word of the lord come to elijah in the third year say go and let ahab see you so that i may send rain on the earth . so elijah go to let ahab see him . now there be no food to be have in samaria . and ahab sent for obadiah the controller of the king 's house . now obadiah have the fear of the lord before him greatly for when jezebel be cut off the prophet of the lord obadiah take a hundred of them and keep them secretly in a hole in the rock fifty at a time and give them bread and water . and ahab say to obadiah come let u go through all the country to all the fountain of water and all the river and see if there be any grass to be have for the horse and the transport beast so that we may be able to keep some of the beast from destruction . so they go through all the country cover it between them ahab go in one direction by himself and obadiah go in another by himself . and while obadiah be on his way he come face to face with elijah and seeing who it be he go down on his face and say be it you my lord elijah ? and elijah in answer say it be i now go and say to your lord elijah be here . and he say what sin have i do that you would give up your servant into the hand of ahab and be the cause of my death ? by the life of the lord your god there be not a nation or kingdom where my lord have not send in search of you and when they say he be not here he make them take an oath that they have not see you . and now you say go say to your lord elijah be here . and straight away when i have go from you the spirit of the lord will take you away i have no idea where so that when i come and give word to ahab and he see you not he will put me to death though i your servant have be a worshipper of the lord from my early year . have my lord not have word of what i do when jezebel be put the lord 's prophet to death ? how i keep a hundred of them in a secret hole in the rock fifty at a time and give them bread and water ? and now you say go and say to your lord elijah be here and he will put me to death . and elijah say by the life of the lord of army whose servant i be i will certainly let him see me today . so obadiah go to ahab and give him the news and ahab go to see elijah . and when he saw elijah ahab say to him be it you you troubler of israel ? then he say in answer i have not be trouble israel but you and your family because turn away from the order of the lord you have go after the baal . now send and get israel together before me at mount carmel with the four hundred and fifty prophet of baal who get their food at jezebel 's table . so ahab sent for all the child of israel and get the prophet together at mount carmel . and elijah come near to all the people and say how long will you go on balance between two opinion ? if the lord be god then give worship to him but if baal give worship to him . and the people say not a word in answer . then elijah say to the people i even i be the only living prophet of the lord but baal 's prophet be four hundred and fifty men . now let them give u two ox and let them take one for themselves and have it cut up and put it on the wood but put no fire under it i will get the other ox ready and put it on the wood and put no fire under it . and do you make prayer to your god and i will make a prayer to the lord and it will be clear that the one who give an answer by fire be god . and all the people in answer say it be well say . then elijah say to the prophet of baal take one ox for yourselves and get it ready first for there be more of you and make your prayer to your god but put no fire under . so they take the ox which be give them and make it ready cry out to baal from morning till the middle of the day and say o baal give ear to u . but there be no voice and no answer . and they be jump up and down before the altar they have make . and in the middle of the day elijah make sport of them say give louder cry for he be a god he may be deep in thought or he may have go away for some purpose or he may be on a journey or by chance he be sleep and have to be make awake . so they give loud cry cut themselves with knife and sword a be their way till the blood come stream out all over them . and from the middle of the day they go on with their prayer till the time of the offering but there be no voice or any answer or any who give attention to them . then elijah say to all the people come near to me and all the people come near . and he put up again the altar of the lord which have be break down . and elijah take twelve stone the number of the tribe of the son of jacob to whom the lord have say israel will be your name and with the stone he make an altar to the name of the lord and he make a deep drain all round the altar great enough to take two measure of seed . and he put the wood in order and cut up the ox put it on the wood . then he say get four vessel full of water and put it on the burn offering and on the wood . and he say do it a second time and they do it a second time and he say do it a third time and they do it a third time . and the water go all round the altar till the drain be full . then at the time of the offering elijah the prophet come near and say o lord the god of abraham of isaac and of israel let it be see this day that you be god in israel and that i be your servant and that i have do all these thing by your order . give me an answer o lord give me an answer so that this people may see that you be god and that you have make their heart come back again . then the fire of the lord come down burn up the offering and the wood and the stone and the dust and drinking up the water in the drain . and when the people saw it they all go down on their face and say the lord he be god the lord he be god . and elijah say to them take the prophet of baal let not one of them get away . so they take them and elijah make them go down to the stream kishon and put them to death there . then elijah say to ahab up ! take food and drink for there be a sound of much rain . so ahab go up to have food and drink while elijah go up to the top of carmel and he go down on the earth put his face between his knee . and he say to his servant go now and take a look in the direction of the sea . and he go up and after look say there be nothing . and he say go again seven time and he go seven time . and the seventh time he say i see a cloud come up out of the sea as small a a man 's hand . then he say go up and say to ahab get your carriage ready and go down or the rain will keep you back . and after a very little time the heaven become black with cloud and wind and there be a great rain . and ahab go in his carriage to jezreel . and the hand of the lord be on elijah and he make himself strong and go run before ahab till they come to jezreel .ahab give jezebel news of all elijah have do and how he have put all the prophet to death with the sword . then jezebel send a servant to elijah say may the god ' punishment be on me if i do not make your life like the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time . and he get up fear for his life and go in flight and come to beer sheba in judah part there from his servant while he himself go a day 's journey into the waste land and take a seat under a broom plant desire for himself only death for he say it be enough now o lord take away my life for i be no good than my father . and stretch himself on the earth he go to sleep under the broom plant but an angel touching him say to him get up and have some food . and look up he saw by his head a cake cook on the stone and a bottle of water . so he take food and drink and go to sleep again . and the angel of the lord come again a second time and touch him say get up and have some food or the journey will be overmuch for your strength . so he get up and take food and drink and in the strength of that food he go on for forty day and night to horeb the mountain of god . and there he go into a hole in the rock for the night then the word of the lord come to him say what be you do here elijah ? and he say i have be burn for the honour of the lord the god of army for the child of israel have not keep your agreement they have make destruction of your altar and have put your prophet to death with the sword till i even i be the only one living and now they be attempt to take away my life . then he say go out and take your place on the mountain before the lord . then the lord go by and mountain be part by the force of a great wind and rock be break before the lord but the lord be not in the wind . and after the wind there be an earth shock but the lord be not in the earth shock . and after the earth shock a fire but the lord be not in the fire . and after the fire the sound of a soft breath . and elijah hearing it go out cover his face with his robe and take his place in the opening of the hole . and there a voice come to him say what be you do here elijah ? and he say i have be burn for the honour of the lord the god of army for the child of israel have not keep your agreement they have have your altar break down and have put your prophet to death with the sword till i even i be the only one living and now they be attempt to take away my life . and the lord say to him go back on your way through the waste land to damascus and when you come there put the holy oil on hazael to make him king over aram and on jehu son of nimshi make him king over israel and on elisha the son of shaphat of abel meholah to be prophet in your place . and it will come about that the man who get away safe from the sword of hazael jehu will put to death and whoever get away safe from the sword of jehu elisha will put to death . but i will keep safe seven thousand in israel all those whose knee have not be bent to baal and whose mouth have give him no kiss . so he go away from there and come across elisha the son of shaphat plough with twelve yoke of ox he himself walk with the twelfth and elijah go up to him and put his robe on him . and let the ox be where they be he come run after elijah and say only let me give a kiss to my father and mother and then i will come after you . but he say to him go back again for what have i do to you ? and he go back and take the ox and put them to death and cook their flesh with the yoke of the ox he give the people a feast . then he get up and go after elijah and become his servant .now ben hadad king of aram get all his army together and thirty two king with him and horse and carriage of war he go up and make war on samaria shut it in . and he send representative into the town to ahab king of israel and they say to him ben hadad say your silver and your gold be mine and your wife and child be mine . and the king of israel send him an answer say a you say my lord king i be yours with all i have . then the representative come back again and say these be the word of ben hadad i send to you say give up to me your silver and your gold your wife and your child but i will send my servant to you tomorrow about this time to make a search through your house and the house of your people and everything which be please in your eye they will take away in their hand . then the king of israel sent for all the responsible men of the land and say now will you take note and see the evil purpose of this man he send for my wife and my child my silver and my gold and i do not keep them back . and all the responsible men and the people say to him do not give attention to him or do what he say . so he say to the representative of ben hadad say to my lord the king all the order you send the first time i will do but this thing i may not do . and the representative go back with this answer . then ben hadad send to him say may the god ' punishment be on me if there be enough of the dust of samaria for all the people at my foot to take some in their hand . and the king of israel say in answer say to him the time for loud talk be not when a man be put on his arm but when he be take them off . now when this answer be give to ben hadad he be drink with the king in the tent and he say to his men take up your position . so they put themselves in position for attack the town . then a prophet come up to ahab king of israel and say the lord say have you see all this great army ? see i will give it into your hand today and you will see that i be the lord . and ahab say by whom ? and he say the lord say by the servant of the chief who be over the division of the land . then he say by whom be the fighting to be start ? and he make answer by you . then he get together the servant of all the chief who be over the division of the land two hundred and thirty two of them and after them he get together all the people all the child of israel seven thousand . and in the middle of the day they go out . but ben hadad be drink in the tent with the thirty two king who be help him . and the servant of the chief who be over the division of the land go forward first and when ben hadad send out they give him the news say men have come out from samaria . and he say if they have come out for peace take them live and if they have come out for war take them live . so the servant of the chief of the division of the land go out of the town with the army come after them . and every one of them put his man to death and the aramaean go in flight with israel after them and ben hadad king of aram get away safely on a horse with his horseman . and the king of israel go out and take the horse and the war carriage and make great destruction among the aramaean . then the prophet come up to the king of israel and say to him now make yourself strong and take care what you do or a year from now the king of aram will come up against you again . then the king of aram 's servant say to him their god be a god of the hill that be why they be strong than we but if we make an attack on them in the lowland we will certainly be strong than they . this be what you have to do take away the king from their position and put captain in their place and get together another army like the one which come to destruction horse for horse and carriage for carriage and let u make war on them in the lowland and certainly we will be strong than they . and he give ear to what they say and do so . so a year later ben hadad get the aramaean together and go up to aphek to make war on israel . and the child of israel get themselves together and food be make ready and they go against them the tent of the child of israel be like two little flock of goat before them but all the country be full of the aramaean . and a man of god come up and say to the king of israel the lord say because the aramaean have say the lord be a god of the hill and not of the valley i will give all this great army into your hand and you will see that i be the lord . now the two army keep their position face one another for seven day . and on the seventh day the fight be start and the child of israel put to the sword a hundred thousand aramaean footman in one day . but the rest go in flight to aphek into the town where a wall come down on the twenty seven thousand who be still live . and ben hadad go in flight into the town into an inner room . then his servant say to him it be say that the king of israel be full of mercy let u then put on haircloth and cord on our head and go to the king of israel it may be that he will give you your life . so they put on haircloth and cord on their head and come to the king of israel and say your servant ben hadad say let me now keep my life . and he say be he still live ? he be my brother . now the men take it a a sign and quickly take up his word and they say ben hadad be your brother . then he say go and get him . so ben hadad come out to him and he make him get up into his carriage . and ben hadad say to him the town my father take from your father i will give back and you may make street for yourself in damascus a my father do in samaria . and a for me at the price of this agreement you will let me go . so he make an agreement with him and let him go . and a certain man of the son of the prophet say to his neighbour by the word of the lord give me a wound . but the man would not . then he say to him because you have not give ear to the voice of the lord straight away when you have go from me a lion will put you to death . and when he have go straight away a lion come rush at him and put him to death . then he come across another man and say give me a wound . and the man give him a blow wound him . so the prophet go away and pull his head band over his eye to keep his face cover take his place by the road wait for the king . and when the king go by cry out to him he say your servant go out into the fight and a man come out to me with another man and say keep this man if by any chance he get away your life will be the price of his life or you will have to give a talent of silver in payment . but while your servant be turn this way and that he be go . then the king of israel say to him you be responsible you have give the decision against yourself . then he quickly take the head band from his eye and the king of israel saw that he be one of the prophet . and he say to him these be the word of the lord because you have let go from your hand the man whom i have put to the curse your life will be take for his life and your people for his people . then the king of israel go back to his house bitter and angry and come to samaria .now naboth the jezreelite have a vine garden in jezreel near the house of ahab king of samaria . and ahab say to naboth give me your vine garden so that i may have it for a garden of sweet plant for it be near my house and let me give you a good vine garden in exchange or if it seem good to you let me give you it value in money . but naboth say to ahab by the lord far be it from me to give you the heritage of my father . so ahab come into his house bitter and angry because naboth the jezreelite have say to him i will not give you the heritage of my father . and stretch himself on the bed with his face turn away he would take no food . but jezebel his wife come to him and say why be your spirit so bitter that you have no desire for food ? and he say to her because i be talk to naboth the jezreelite and i say to him let me have your vine garden for a price or if it be please to you i will give you another vine garden for it and he say i will not give you my vine garden . then jezebel his wife say be you now the ruler of israel ? get up take food and let your heart be glad i will give you the vine garden of naboth the jezreelite . so she send a letter in ahab 's name stamp with his stamp to the responsible men and the chief who be in authority with naboth . and in the letter she say let a time of public sorrow be fix and put naboth at the head of the people and get two good for nothing person to come before him and give witness that he have be curse god and the king . then take him out and have him stone to death . so the responsible men and the chief who be in authority in his town do a jezebel have say in the letter she send them . they give order for a day of public sorrow and put naboth at the head of the people . and the two good for nothing person come in and take their seat before him and give witness against naboth in front of the people say naboth have be curse god and the king . then they take him outside the town and have him stone to death . and they send word to jezebel say naboth have be stone and be dead . then jezebel hearing that naboth have be stone and be dead say to ahab get up and take a your heritage the vine garden of naboth the jezreelite which he would not give you for money for naboth be no longer live but be dead . so ahab hearing that naboth be dead go down to the vine garden of naboth the jezreelite to take it a his heritage . and the word of the lord come to elijah the tishbite say go down to ahab king of israel in samaria see he be in the vine garden of naboth the jezreelite where he have go to take it a his heritage . say to him the lord say have you put a man to death and take his heritage ? then say to him the lord say in the place where dog have be drink the blood of naboth there will your blood become the drink of dog . and ahab say to elijah have you come face to face with me o my hater ? and he say i have come to you because you have give yourself up to do evil in the eye of the lord . see i will send evil on you and put an end to you completely cut off from ahab every male child him who be shut up and him who go free in israel and i will make your family like the family of jeroboam the son of nebat and like the family of baasha the son of ahijah because you have make me angry and have make israel do evil . and of jezebel the lord say jezebel will become food for dog in the heritage of jezreel . any man of the family of ahab who come to his death in the town will become food for the dog and he who come to his death in the open country will be food for the bird of the air . there be no one like ahab who give himself up to do evil in the eye of the lord move to it by jezebel his wife . he do a very disgusting thing in go after false god do all the thing the amorites do whom the lord send out before the child of israel . hear these word ahab in great grief put haircloth on his flesh and go without food sleeping in haircloth and go about quietly . then the word of the lord come to elijah the tishbite say do you see how ahab have make himself low before me ? because he have make himself low before me i will not send the evil in his life time but in his son 's time i will send the evil on his family .now for three year there be no war between aram and israel . and it come about in the third year that jehoshaphat king of judah come down to the king of israel . and the king of israel say to his servant do you not see that ramoth gilead be ours ? and we be do nothing to get it back from the hand of the king of aram . and he say to jehoshaphat will you go with me to ramoth gilead to make war ? and jehoshaphat say to the king of israel i be a you be my people a your people my horse a your horse . then jehoshaphat say to the king of israel let u now get direction from the lord . so the king of israel get all the prophet together about four hundred men and say to them be i to go to ramoth gilead to make war or not ? and they say go up for the lord will give it into the hand of the king . but jehoshaphat say be there no other prophet of the lord here from whom we may get direction ? and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat there be still one man by whom we may get direction from the lord micaiah son of imlah but i have no love for him for he be a prophet of evil to me and not of good . and jehoshaphat say let not the king say so . then the king of israel sent for one of his unsexed servant and say go quickly and come back with micaiah the son of imlah . now the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah be seat on their seat of authority dress in their robe by the doorway into samaria and all the prophet be act a prophet before them . and zedekiah the son of chenaanah make himself horn of iron and say the lord say push back the aramaean with these you will put an end to them completely . and all the prophet say the same thing say go up to ramoth gilead and it will go well for you for the lord will give it into the hand of the king . now the servant who have go to get micaiah say to him see now all the prophet with one voice be say good thing to the king so let your word be like theirs and say good thing . and micaiah say by the living lord whatever the lord say to me i will say . when he come to the king the king say to him micaiah be we to go to ramoth gilead to make war or not ? and in answer he say go up and it will go well for you and the lord will give it into the hand of the king . then the king say to him have i not again and again put you on your oath to say nothing to me but what be true in the name of the lord ? then he say i saw all israel wandering on the mountain like sheep without a keeper and the lord say these have no master let them go back every man to his house in peace . and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat do i not say that he would not be a prophet of good but of evil ? and he say give ear now to the word of the lord i saw the lord seat on his seat of power with all the army of heaven in their place round him at his right hand and at his left . and the lord say how may ahab be trick into go up to ramoth gilead to his death ? and one say one thing and one another . then a spirit come forward and take his place before the lord and say i will get him to do it by a trick . and the lord say how ? and he say i will go out and be a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all his prophet . and he say your trick will have it effect on him go out and do so . and now see the lord have put a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all these your prophet and the lord have say evil against you . then zedekiah the son of chenaanah come near and give micaiah a blow on the side of the face say where be the spirit of the lord whose word be in you ? and micaiah say truly you will see on that day when you go into an inner room to keep yourself safe . and the king of israel say take micaiah and send him back to amon the ruler of the town and to joash the king 's son and say it be the king 's order that this man be to be put in prison and give prison food till i come again in peace . and micaiah say if you come back at all in peace the lord have not send his word by me . so the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah go up to ramoth gilead . and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat i will make a change in my clothing so that i do not seem to be the king and will go into the fight but do you put on your robe . so the king of israel make a change in his dress and go into the fight . now the king of aram have give order to the thirty two captain of his war carriage say make no attack on small or great but only on the king of israel . so when the captain of the war carriages saw jehoshaphat they say truly this be the king of israel and turn against him they come round him but jehoshaphat give a cry . and when the captain of the war carriages saw that he be not the king of israel they go back from go after him . and a certain man send an arrow from his bow without thought of it direction and give the king of israel a wound where his breastplate be join to his clothing so he say to the driver of his war carriage go to one side and take me away out of the army for i be badly wound . but the fight become more violent while the day go on and the king be support in his war carriage face the aramaean and the floor of the carriage be cover with the blood from his wound and by even he be dead . and about sundown a cry go up from all part of the army say let every man go back to his town and his country for the king be dead . and they come to samaria and put the king 's body to rest in samaria . and the war carriage be wash by the pool of samaria which be the bathing place of the loose woman and the dog be drink his blood there a the lord have say . now the rest of the act of ahab and all he do and his ivory house and all the town of which he be the builder be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? so ahab be put to rest with his father and ahaziah his son become king in his place . and jehoshaphat the son of asa become king over judah in the fourth year of ahab 's rule over israel . jehoshaphat be thirty five year old when he become king and he be king for twenty five year in jerusalem . his mother 's name be azubah the daughter of shilhi . he do a asa his father have do not turn away from it but do what be right in the eye of the lord but the high place be not take away the people go on make offering and burn them in the high place . and jehoshaphat make peace with the king of israel . now the rest of the act of jehoshaphat and his great power and how he go to war be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? he put an end to the rest of those who be use for sex purpose in the worship of the god all those who be still in the land in the time of his father asa . at that time there be no king in edom and the representative of king jehoshaphat make a tarshish ship to go to ophir for gold but it do not go because it be break at ezion geber . then ahaziah the son of ahab say to jehoshaphat let my men go with yours in the ship . but jehoshaphat would not let them . then jehoshaphat go to rest with his father and his body be put into the earth in the town of david his father and jehoram his son become king in his place . ahaziah the son of ahab become king over israel in samaria in the seventeenth year of the rule of jehoshaphat the king of judah and he be king over israel for two year . he do evil in the eye of the lord go in the way of his father and his mother and in the way of jeroboam the son of nebat who make israel do evil . he be a servant and worshipper of baal move the lord the god of israel to wrath a his father have do .after the death of ahab moab make itself free from the authority of israel . now ahaziah have a fall from the window of his room in samaria and be ill. and he send men and say to them put a question to baal zebub the god of ekron about the outcome of my disease to see if i will get well or not . but the angel of the lord say to elijah the tishbite go now and meet the men send by the king of samaria say to them be it because there be no god in israel that you be go to get direction from baal zebub the god of ekron ? give ear then to the word of the lord you will never again get down from the bed on to which you have go up but death will certainly come to you . then elijah go away . and the men he have send come back to the king and he say to them why have you come back ? and they say to him on our way we have a meeting with a man who say go back to the king who send you and say to him the lord say be it because there be no god in israel that you send to put a question to baal zebub the god of ekron ? for this reason you will not come down from the bed on to which you have go up but death will certainly come to you . and he say to them what sort of a man be it who come and say these word to you ? and they say in answer he be a man clothe in a coat of hair with a leather band about his body . then he say it be elijah the tishbite . then the king send to him a captain of fifty with his fifty men and he go up to him where he be seat on the top of a hill and say to him o man of god the king have say come down . and elijah in answer say to the captain of fifty if i be a man of god may fire come down from heaven on you and on your fifty men and put an end to you . then fire come down from heaven and put an end to him and his fifty men . then the king send another captain of fifty with his fifty men and he say to elijah o man of god the king say come down quickly . and elijah in answer say if i be a man of god may fire come down from heaven on you and on your fifty men and put an end to you . and the fire of god come down from heaven and put an end to him and his fifty men . then he send a third captain of fifty with his fifty men and the third captain of fifty go up and fall on his knee before elijah request mercy of him say o man of god let my life and the life of these your fifty servant be of value to you . for fire come down from heaven and put an end to the first two captain of fifty and their fifty but now let my life be of value in your eye . then the angel of the lord say to elijah go down with him have no fear of him . so he get up and go down with him to the king . and he say to him this be the word of the lord because you send men to put a question to baal zebub the god of ekron for this reason you will never again get down from the bed on to which you have go up but death will certainly come to you . so death come to him a the lord have say by the mouth of elijah . and jehoram become king in his place in the second year of the rule of jehoram son of jehoshaphat king of judah because he have no son . now the rest of the act of ahaziah be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ?now when the lord be about to take elijah up to heaven in a great wind elijah go with elisha from gilgal . and elijah say to elisha come no farther for the lord have send me to beth el . but elisha say a the lord be live and a your soul be live i will not be part from you . so they go down to beth el . and at beth el the son of the prophet come out to elisha and say have it be make clear to you that the lord be go to take away your master from over you today ? and he say yes i have knowledge of it say no more . then elijah say to him come no farther for the lord have send me to jericho . but he say a the lord be live and a your soul be live i will not be part from you . so they go on to jericho . and at jericho the son of the prophet come up to elisha and say to him have it be make clear to you that the lord be go to take away your master from over you today ? and he say in answer yes i have knowledge of it say no more . then elijah say to him come no farther for the lord have send me to jordan . but he say a the lord be live and a your soul be live i will not be part from you . so they go on together . and fifty men of the son of the prophet go out and take their place face them a long way off while the two of them be by the edge of jordan . then elijah take off his robe and roll it up give the water a blow with it and the water be part flow back this way and that so that they go over on dry land . and when they have come to the other side elijah say to elisha say what you would have me do for you before i be take from you . and elisha say be please to let a special measure of your spirit be on me . and he say you have make a hard request still if you see me when i be take from you you will get your desire but if not it will not be so . and while they go on their way go on talk together suddenly there be carriage and horse of fire separate them from one another and elijah go up to heaven in a great wind . and when elisha saw it he give a cry my father my father the carriage of israel and it horseman ! and he saw him no longer and he be full of grief . then he take up elijah 's robe which have be drop from him and go back till he come to the edge of jordan . and he take elijah 's robe which have be drop from him and give the water a blow with it say where be the lord the god of elijah ? and at his blow the water be part this way and that and elisha go over . and when the son of the prophet who be face him at jericho saw him they say the spirit of elijah be rest on elisha . and they come out to him and go down on the earth before him . and they say your servant have with u here fifty strong men be please to let them go in search of elijah for it may be that the spirit of the lord have take him up and put him down on some mountain or in some valley . but he say do not send them . but when they keep on request him he be sham and say send then . so they send fifty men but after search for three day they come back without have see him . and they come back to him while he be still at jericho and he say to them do i not say to you go not ? now the men of the town say to elisha you see that the position of this town be good but the water be bad cause the young of the cattle to come to birth dead . so he say get me a new vessel and put salt in it and they take it to him . then he go out to the spring from which the water come and put salt in it and say the lord say now i have make this water sweet no long will it be death give or unfertile . and the water be make sweet again to this day a elisha say . then from there he go up to beth el and on his way some little boy come out from the town and make sport of him cry go up old no hair ! go up old no hair ! and turn back he saw them and put a curse on them in the name of the lord . and two she bear come out of the wood and put forty two of the child to death . from there he go to mount carmel and come back from there to samaria .and jehoram the son of ahab become king over israel in samaria in the eighteenth year of the rule of jehoshaphat king of judah and he be king for twelve year . he do evil in the eye of the lord but not like his father and his mother for he put away the stone pillar of baal which his father have make . but still he do the same sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do he go on in them . now mesha king of moab be a sheep farmer and he give regularly to the king of israel the wool from a hundred thousand lamb and a hundred thousand sheep . but when ahab be dead the king of moab get free from the authority of the king of israel . at that time king jehoram go out from samaria and get all israel together in fight order . and he send to jehoshaphat king of judah say the king of moab have get free from my authority will you go with me to make war on moab ? and he say i will go with you i be a you be my people a your people and my horse a your horse . and he say which way be we to go ? and he say in answer by the waste land of edom . so the king of israel go with the king of judah and the king of edom by a roundabout way for seven day and there be no water for the army or for the beast they have with them . and the king of israel say here be trouble for the lord have get these three king together to give them into the hand of moab . but jehoshaphat say be there no prophet of the lord here through whom we may get direction from the lord ? and one of the king of israel 's men say in answer elisha the son of shaphat be here who be servant to elijah . and jehoshaphat say the word of the lord be with him . so the king of israel and jehoshaphat and the king of edom go down to him . but elisha say to the king of israel what have i to do with you ? go to the prophet of your father and your mother . and the king of israel say no for the lord have get these three king together to give them up into the hand of moab . then elisha say by the life of the lord of army whose servant i be if it be not for the respect i have for jehoshaphat king of judah i would not give a look at you or see you . but now get me a player of music and it will come about that while the man be play the hand of the lord will come on me and i will give you the word of the lord and they get a player of music and while the man be play the hand of the lord be on him . and he say the lord say i will make this valley full of water hole . for the lord say though you see no wind or rain the valley will be full of water and you and your army and your beast will have drink . and this will be only a small thing to the lord in addition he will give the moabites into your hand . and you be to put every walled town to destruction cut down every good tree and stop up every water spring and make all the good land rough with stone . now in the morning about the time when the offering be make they saw water flow from the direction of edom till the country be full of water . now all moab hearing that the king have come to make war against them get together all who be able to take up arm and go forward to the edge of the country . and early in the morning they get up when the sun be shin on the water and they saw the water face them as red a blood . then they say this be blood it be clear that destruction have come on the king they have be fight one another now come moab let u take their good . but when they come to the tent of israel the israelite come out and make a violent attack on the moabites so that they go in flight before them and they go forward still attack them pull down the town cover every good field with stone stop up all the water spring and cut down all the good tree they go on drive moab before them till only in kir hareseth be there any moabites and the fight men go round the town rain stone on it . and when the king of moab saw that the fight be go against him he take with him seven hundred men arm with sword with the idea of force a way through to the king of aram but they be not able to do so . then he take his old son who would have be king after him offer him a a burned offering on the wall . so there be great wrath against israel and they go away from him back to their country .now a certain woman the wife of one of the son of the prophet come cry to elisha and say your servant my husband be dead and to your knowledge he be a worshipper of the lord but now the creditor have come to take my two child a servant in payment of his debt . then elisha say to her what be i to do for you ? say now what have you in the house ? and she say your servant have nothing in the house but a pot of oil . then he say go out to all your neighbour and get vessel a very great number of them . then go in and shut the door on yourself and your son put oil into all these vessel put on one side the full one . so she go away and when the door be shut on her and her son they take the vessel to her and she put oil into them . and when all the vessel be full she say to her son get me another vessel . and he say there be no more . and the flow of oil be stop . so she come to the man of god and give him word of what she have do . and he say go and get money for the oil and make payment of your debt and let the rest be for the need of yourself and your son . now there come a day when elisha go to shunem and there be a woman of high position living there who make him come in and have a meal with her . and after that every time he go by he go into her house for a meal . and she say to her husband now i see that this be a holy man of god who come by day after day . so let u make a little room on the wall and put a bed there for him and a table and a seat and a light so that when he come to u he will be able to go in there . now one day when he have go there he go into the little room and take his rest there . and he say to gehazi his servant send for this shunammite . so in answer to his voice she come before him . and he say to him now say to her see you have take all this trouble for u what be to be do for you ? will you have any request make for you to the king or the captain of the army ? but she say i be live among my people . so he say what then be to be do for her ? and gehazi make answer still there be this she have no son and her husband be old . then he say send for her . and in answer to his voice she take her place at the door . and elisha say at this time in the come year you will have a son in your arm . and she say no my lord o man of god do not say what be false to your servant . then the woman become with child and give birth to a son at the time name in the year after a elisha have say to her . now one day when the child be old he go out to his father to where the grain be be cut . and he say to his father my head my head ! and the father say to a servant take him in to his mother . and he take him in to his mother and she take him on her knee and keep him there till the middle of the day when his life go from him . then she go up and put him on the bed of the man of god shut the door on him and go out . and she say to her husband send me one of the servant and one of the ass so that i may go quickly to the man of god and come back again . and he say why be you go to him today ? it be not a new moon or a sabbath . but she say it be well . then she make the as ready and say to her servant keep driving on do not make a stop without order from me . so she go and come to mount carmel to the man of god . and when the man of god saw her come in his direction he say to gehazi his servant see there be the shunammite go quickly to her and on meet her say to her be you well ? and your husband and the child be they well ? and she say in answer all be well . and when she come to where the man of god be on the hill she put her hand round his foot and gehazi come near with the purpose of push her away but the man of god say let her be for her soul be bitter in her and the lord have keep it secret from me and have not give me word of it . then she say do i make a request to my lord for a son ? do i not say do not give me false word ? then he say to gehazi make yourself ready and take my stick in your hand and go if you come across anyone on the way give him no blessing and if anyone give you a bless give him no answer . and put my stick on the child 's face . but the mother of the child say a the lord be live and a your soul be live i will not go back without you . so he get up and go with her . and gehazi go on before them and put the stick on the child 's face but there be no voice and no one give attention . so he go back and meet him give him the news say the child be not awake . and when elisha come into the house he saw the child dead stretch on his bed . so he go in and shut the door on the two of them make prayer to the lord . then he get up on the bed stretch himself out on the child and put his mouth on the child 's mouth his eye on his eye and his hand on his hand and the child 's body become warm . then he come back and after walk once through the house and back he go up stretch himself out on the child seven time and the child 's eye become open . and he give order to gehazi and say send for the shunammite . and she come in answer to his voice . and he say take up your son . and she come in and go down on her face to the earth at his foot then she take her son in her arm and go out . and elisha go back to gilgal now there be very little food in the land and the son of the prophet be seat before him . and he say to his servant put the great pot on the fire and make soup for the son of the prophet . and one go out into the field to get green plant and saw a vine of the field and pull off the fruit of it till the fold of his robe be full he come back and put the fruit cut up small into the pot of soup have no idea what it be . then they give the men soup from the pot . and while they be drink the soup they give a cry and say o man of god there be death in the pot and they be not able to take any more food . but he say get some meal . and he put it into the pot and say now give it to the people so that they may have food . and there be nothing bad in the pot . now a man come from baal shalishah with an offering of first fruit for the man of god twenty barley cake and garden fruit in his bag . and he say give these to the people for food . but his servant say how be i to put this before a hundred men ? but he say give it to the people for food for the lord say there will be food for them and some over . so he put it before them and they have a meal and there be more than enough a the lord have say .now naaman chief of the army of the king of aram be a man of high position with his master and greatly respect because by him the lord have give salvation to aram but he be a leper . now the aramaean have go out in band and take prisoner from israel a little girl who become servant to naaman 's wife . and she say to her master 's wife if only my lord would go to the prophet in samaria he would make him well . and someone go and say to his lord this be what the girl from the land of israel say . so the king of aram say go then and i will send a letter to the king of israel . and he go take with him ten talent of silver and six thousand shekel of gold and ten change of clothing . and he take the letter to the king of israel in which the king of aram have say see i have send my servant naaman to you to be make well for he be a leper . but the king of israel after read the letter be greatly troubled and say be i god to give death and life ? why do this man send a leper to me to be make well ? be it not clear that he be look for a cause of war ? now elisha the man of god hearing that the king of israel have do this sent to the king say why be you trouble ? send the man to me so that he may see that there be a prophet in israel . so naaman with all his horse and his carriage come to the door of elisha 's house . and elisha send a servant to him say go to jordan and after wash seven time in it water your flesh will be well again and you will be clean . but naaman be angry and go away and say i have the idea that he would come out to see such an important person a i be and make prayer to the lord his god and with a wave of his hand over the place make the leper well . be not abana and pharpar river of damascus well than all the water of israel ? may i not be wash in them and become clean ? so turn he go away in wrath . then his servant come to him and say if the prophet have give you order to do some great thing would you not have do it ? how much more then when he say to you be wash and become clean ? then he go down seven time into the water of jordan a the man of god have say and his flesh become like the flesh of a little child again and he be clean . then he go back to the man of god with all his train and take his place before him say now i be certain that there be no god in all the earth but only in israel now then take an offering from me . but he say by the life of the lord whose servant i be i will take nothing from you . and he do his best to make him take it but he would not . then naaman say if you will not then let there be give to your servant a much earth a two beast be able to take on their back because from now on your servant will make no offering or burn offering to other god but only to the lord . but may your servant have the lord 's forgiveness for this one thing when my master go into the house of rimmon for worship there support on my arm and my head be bent in the house of rimmon when his head be bent in the house of rimmon may your servant have the lord 's forgiveness for this thing . and he say to him go in peace . and he go from him some distance . but gehazi the servant of elisha the man of god say now my master have take nothing from naaman this aramaean of what he would have give him by the living lord i will go after him and get something from him . so gehazi go after naaman . and when naaman saw him run after him he get down from his carriage and go back to him and say be all well ? and he say all be well but my master have send me say even now two young men of the son of the prophet have come to me from the hill country of ephraim will you give me a talent of silver and two change of clothing for them ? and naaman say be good enough to take two talent . and force him to take them he put two talent of silver in two bag with two change of clothing and give them to his two servant to take before him . when he come to the hill he take them from their hand and put them away in the house and he send the men away and they go . then he come in and take his place before his master . and elisha say to him where have you come from gehazi ? and he say your servant go nowhere . and he say to him do not my heart go with you when the man get down from his carriage and go back to you ? be this a time for get money and clothing and olive garden and vine garden and sheep and ox and men servant and woman servant ? because of what you have do the disease of naaman the leper will take you in it grip and your seed after you for ever . and he go out from before him a leper as white a snow .now the son of the prophet say to elisha there be not room enough for u in the place where we be live under your care so let u go to jordan and let everyone get to work cutting board and we will make a living place for ourselves there . and he say to them go then . and one of them say be please to go with your servant . and he say i will go . so he go with them . and when they come to jordan they get to work cut down tree . but one of them while cut a board let the head of his axe go into the water and he give a cry and say this be a bad business my master for it be another 's . and the man of god say where do it go in ? and when he saw the place where it have go into the water cut a stick he put it into the water and the iron come up to the top of the water . then he say take it up . so he put out his hand and take it . at that time the king of aram be make war against israel and he have a meeting with the chief of his army and say i will be wait in secret in some named place . and the man of god sent to the king of israel say take care to keep away from that place for the aramaean be wait there in secret . so the king of israel sent to the place where the man of god have say there be danger and keep clear of it more than once . and at this the mind of the king of aram be greatly troubled and he send for his servant and say to them will you not make clear to me which of u be help the king of israel ? and one of them say not one of u my lord king but elisha the prophet in israel give the king of israel news of the word you say even in your bedroom . then he say go and see where he be so that i may send and get him . and news come to him that he be in dothan . so he send there horse and carriage and a great army and they come by night circle the town . now the servant of the man of god have get up early and go out saw an army with horse and carriage of war all round the town . and the servant say to him o my master what be we to do ? and he say in answer have no fear those who be with u be more than those who be with them . then elisha make a prayer to the lord say lord let his eye be open so that he may see . and the lord make the young man 's eye open and he saw that all the mountain be full of horse and carriage of fire round elisha . now when the aramaean come down to elisha he make a prayer to the lord say lord make this people blind . and he make them blind at elisha 's request . and elisha say to them this be not the way and this be not the town come after me so that i may take you to the man you be search for . and he take them to samaria . and when they have come into samaria elisha say lord let the eye of these men be open so that they may see . and the lord make their eye open and they saw that they be in the middle of samaria . and the king of israel when he saw them say to elisha my father be i to put them to the sword ? but he say in answer you be not to put them to death have you any right to put to death those whom you have not take prisoner with your sword and your bow ? put bread and water before them so that they may have food and drink and go to their master . so he make ready a great feast for them and when they have have food and drink he send them away and they go back to their master . and no more band of aramaean come into the land of israel . now after this ben hadad king of aram get together all his army and go up to make an attack on samaria shut the town in on all side with his force . and they become very short of food in samaria for they keep it shut in till the price of an as 's head be eighty shekel of silver and a small measure of dove ' droppings be five shekel of silver . and when the king of israel be go by on the wall a woman come cry out to him and say help ! my lord king . and he say if the lord do not give you help where be i to get help for you ? from the grain floor or the grape crusher ? and the king say to her what be trouble you ? and she say in answer this woman say to me give your son to be our food today and we will have my son tomorrow . so boiling my son we have a meal of him and on the day after i say to her now give your son for our food but she have put her son in a secret place . then the king hear what the woman say take his robe in his hand violently part them and while he be walk on the wall the people look saw that under his robe he have haircloth on his flesh . then he say may god 's punishment come on me if elisha the son of shaphat keep his head on his body after this day . but elisha be in his house and the responsible men be seat there with him and before the king get there elisha say to those who be with him do you see how this cruel and violent man have send to take away my life ? while he be still talk to them the king come down and say this evil be from the lord why be i to go on wait any long for the lord ?then elisha say give ear to the word of the lord the lord say tomorrow about this time a measure of good meal will be offer for the price of a shekel and two measure of barley for a shekel in the market place of samaria . then the captain whose arm be support the king say to the man of god even if the lord make window in heaven would such a thing be possible ? and he say your eye will see it but you will not have a taste of the food . now there be four leper seat at the doorway into the town and they say to one another why be we wait here for death ? if we say we will go into the town there be no food in the town and we will come to our end there and if we go on wait here death will come to u . come then let u give ourselves up to the army of aram if they let u go on living then life will be ours and if they put u to death then death will be ours . so in the half light they get up to go to the tent of aram but when they come to the out line of tent there be no one there . for the lord have make the sound of carriage and horse and the noise of a great army come to the ear of the aramaean so that they say to one another truly the king of israel have get the king of the hittite and of the egyptian for a price to make an attack on u . so they get up and go in flight in the half light without their tent or their horse or their ass or any of their good they go in flight fear for their life . and when those leper come to the out line of tent they go into one tent and have food and drink and take from it silver and gold and clothing which they put in a secret place then they come back and go into another tent from which they take more good which they put away in a secret place . then they say to one another we be not do right . today be a day of good news and we say nothing if we go on wait here till the morning punishment will come to u . so let u go and give the news to those of the king 's house . so they come in and cry out to the door keeper of the town they give them the news say we come to the tent of the aramaean and there be no one there and no voice of man only the horse and the ass in their place and the tent a they be . then the door keeper cry out give the news to those inside the king 's house . then the king get up in the night and say to his servant this be my idea of what the aramaean have do to u . they have knowledge that we be without food and so they have go out of their tent and be wait secretly in the open country say when they come out of the town we will take them live and get into the town . and one of his servant say in answer send men and let them take five of the horse which we still have in the town if they keep their life they will be the same a those of israel who be still live here if they come to their death they will be the same a all those of israel who have go to destruction let u send and see . so they take two horseman and the king send them after the army of the aramaean say go and see . and they go after them as far a jordan and all the road be cover with clothing and vessel drop by the aramaean in their flight . so those who be send go back and give the news to the king . then the people go out and take the good from the tent of the aramaean . so a measure of good meal be to be have for the price of a shekel and two measure of barley for a shekel a the lord have say . and the king give authority to that captain on whose arm he be support to have control over the doorway into the town but he be crush to death there under the foot of the people a the man of god have say when the king go down to him . so the word of the man of god come true which he say to the king two measure of barley will be offer for the price of a shekel and a measure of good meal for a shekel tomorrow about this time in the market place of samaria . and that captain say to the man of god even if the lord make window in heaven would such a thing be possible ? and he say to him your eye will see it but you will not have a taste of the food . and such be his fate for he be crush to death under the foot of the people in the doorway into the town .now elisha have say to the woman whose son he have give back to life go now with all the people of your house and get a living place for yourselves wherever you be able for by the word of the lord there will be great need of food in the land and this will go on for seven year . so the woman get up and do a the man of god say and she and the people of her house be live in the land of the philistine for seven year . and when the seven year be end the woman come back from the land of the philistine and go to the king with a request for her house and her land . now the king be talk with gehazi the servant of the man of god say now give me an account of all the great thing elisha have do . and while he be give the king the story of how elisha have give life to the dead the woman whose son have come back to life come to the king with a request for her house and her land . and gehazi say my lord king this be the woman and this be her son whose life elisha give back to him . and in answer to the king 's question the woman give him all the story . so the king give order to one of his unsexed servant say give her back all her property and all the produce of her field from the day when she go away from the land up till now . and elisha come to damascus and ben hadad king of aram be ill and they say to him the man of god have come . then the king say to hazael take an offering with you and go to see the man of god and get direction from the lord by him say be i go to get well from my disease ? so hazael go to see him take with him forty camel with offering on their back of every sort of good thing from damascus and when he come before him he say your son ben hadad king of aram have send me to you say will i get well from this disease ? and elisha say to him go say to him you will certainly get good but the lord have make it clear to me that only death be before him . and he keep his eye fix on him till he be sham and the man of god be overcome with weep . and hazael say why be my lord weep ? then he say in answer because i see the evil which you will do to the child of israel burn down their strong town put their young men to death with the sword smash their little one against the stone and cut open the woman who be with child . and hazael say how be it possible that your servant who be only a dog will do this great thing ? and elisha say the lord have make it clear to me that you will be king over aram . then he go away from elisha and come in to his master who say to him what do elisha say to you ? and his answer be he say that you would certainly get well . now on the day after hazael take the bed cover and make it wet with water put it over ben hadad 's face cause his death and hazael become king in his place . in the fifth year of joram the son of ahab king of israel jehoram the son of jehoshaphat king of judah become king . he be thirty two year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for eight year . he go in the way of the king of israel a the family of ahab do for the daughter of ahab be his wife and he do evil in the eye of the lord . but it be not the lord 's purpose to send destruction on judah because of david his servant to whom he have give his word that he would have a light for ever . in his time edom make themselves free from the rule of judah and take a king for themselves . then joram go over to zair with all his war carriage ... make an attack by night on the edomites whose force be all round him ... the captain of the war carriage and the people go in flight to their tent . so edom make themselves free from the rule of judah to this day . and at the same time libnah make itself free . now the rest of the act of joram and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and joram go to rest with his father and be put into the earth with his father in the town of david and ahaziah his son become king in his place . in the twelfth year that joram the son of ahab be king of israel ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah become king ahaziah be twenty two year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for one year . his mother 's name be athaliah the daughter of omri king of israel . he go in the way of the family of ahab and do evil in the eye of the lord a the family of ahab do for he be a son in law of the family of ahab . he go with joram the son of ahab to make war on hazael king of aram at ramoth gilead and joram be wound by the aramaean . so king joram go back to jezreel to get well from the wound which the bowman have give him at ramah when he be fight against hazael king of aram . and ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah go down to see joram the son of ahab in jezreel because he be ill .and elisha the prophet send for one of the son of the prophet and say to him make yourself ready for a journey and take this bottle of oil in your hand and go to ramoth gilead . and when you get there go in search of jehu the son of jehoshaphat the son of nimshi and go in and make him get up from among his brother and take him to an inner room . then take the bottle and put the oil on his head and say the lord say i have put the holy oil on you to make you king over israel . then open the door go in flight without wait . so the young prophet go to ramoth gilead . and when he come he saw the captain of the army seat together and he say i have something to say to you o captain . and jehu say to which of u ? and he say to you o captain . and he get up and go into the house then he put the holy oil on his head and say to him the lord the god of israel say i have make you king over the people of the lord over israel . you be to see that the family of ahab your master be cut off so that i may take from jezebel payment for the blood of my servant the prophet and for the blood of all the servant of the lord . for the family of ahab will come to an end every male of ahab 's family will be cut off he who be shut up and he who go free in israel . i will make the family of ahab like that of jeroboam the son of nebat and baasha the son of ahijah . and jezebel will become food for the dog in the heritage of jezreel and there will be no one to put her body into the earth . then open the door he go in flight . then jehu come out again to the servant of his lord and one say to him be all well ? why do this man who be off his head come to you ? and he say to them you have knowledge of the man and of his talk . and they say that be not true now give u his story . then he say this be what he say to me the lord say i have make you king over israel . then straight away everyone take his robe and put it under him on the top of the step and sound the horn they say jehu be king . so jehu the son of jehoshaphat the son of nimshi make design against joram . now joram and all the army of israel be keep watch on ramoth gilead because of hazael king of aram but king joram have go back to jezreel to get well from the wound which the aramaean have give him when he be fight against hazael king of aram . and jehu say if this be your purpose then let no one get away and go out of the town to give news of it in jezreel . so jehu get into his carriage and go to jezreel for joram be ill in bed there and ahaziah king of judah have come down to see joram . and the watchman on the tower in jezreel saw jehu and his band come and say i see a band of people . and joram say send out a horseman to them and let him say be it peace ? so a horseman go out to them and say the king say be it peace ? and jehu say what have you to do with peace ? come after me . and the watchman give them word say the horseman go up to them but have not come back . then he send out a second horseman who come up to them and say the king say be it peace ? and jehu say in answer what have you to do with peace ? come after me . and the watchman give them word say he go up to them and have not come back again and the driving be like the driving of jehu son of nimshi for he be drive violently . then joram say make ready . so they make his carriage ready and joram king of israel with ahaziah king of judah go out in their carriage for the purpose of meet jehu and they come face to face with him at the field of naboth the jezreelite . now when joram saw jehu he say be it peace jehu ? and he say in answer what peace be possible while all the land be full of the disgusting sin of your mother jezebel and her secret art ? then joram turn his horse in flight say to ahaziah broken faith o ahaziah ! then jehu take his bow in his hand and with all his strength send an arrow wound joram between the arm and the arrow come out at his heart and he go down on his face in his carriage . then jehu say to bidkar his captain take him up and put him in the field of naboth the jezreelite for be not that day in your memory when you and i together on our horse be go after ahab his father and the lord put this fate on him say i saw the blood of naboth and of his son yesterday and i will give you full payment in this field say the lord ? so now take him and put him in this field a the lord say . now when ahaziah king of judah saw this he go in flight by the way of the garden house . and jehu come after him and say put him to death in the same way and they give him a death wound in his carriage on the slope up to gur by ibleam and he go in flight to megiddo where death come to him . and his servant take him in a carriage to jerusalem and put him into the earth with his father in the town of david . in the eleventh year of the rule of joram the son of ahab ahaziah become king over judah . and when jehu come to jezreel jezebel have news of it and paint her eye and dress her hair with ornament she put her head out of the window . and when jehu be come into the town she say be all well o zimri taker of your master 's life ? then look up to the window he say who be on my side who ? and two or three unsexed servant put out their head . and he say take her and put her out of the window . so they send her down with force and her blood go in a shower on the wall and on the horse and she be crush under their foot . and he come in and take food and drink then he say now see to this curse woman and put her body into the earth for she be a king 's daughter . and they go out to put her body into the earth but nothing of her be to be see only the bone of her head and her foot and part of her hand . so they come back and give him word of it . and he say this be what the lord say by his servant elijah the tishbite say in the heritage of jezreel the flesh of jezebel will become food for dog and the dead body of jezebel will be like waste drop on the face of the earth in the heritage of jezreel so that they will not be able to say this be jezebel .now there be in samaria seventy of ahab 's son . and jehu sent letter to samaria to the ruler of the town and to the responsible men and to those who have the care of the son of ahab say straight away when you get this letter see that your master 's son be with you and that you have carriage and horse and a walled town and arm take the best and most upright of your master 's son and make him king in his father 's place and put up a fight for your master 's family . but they be full of fear and say the two king have go down before him how may we keep our place ? so the controller of the king 's house with the ruler of the town and the responsible men and those who have the care of ahab 's son send to jehu say we be your servant and will do all your order we will not make any man king do whatever seem best to you . then he send them a second letter say if you be on my side and if you will do my order come to me at jezreel by this time tomorrow with the head of your master 's son . now the king 's seventy son be with the great men of the town who have the care of them . and when the letter come to them they take the king 's son and put them to death all the seventy and put their head in basket and send them to him at jezreel . and a man come and say to him they have come with the head of the king 's son . and he say put them down in two mass at the doorway of the town till the morning . and in the morning he go out and stop say to all the people there you be upright men it be true that i make design against my master and put him to death but who be responsible for the death of all these ? you may be certain that nothing which the lord have say about the family of ahab will be without effect for the lord have do what he say by his servant elijah . so jehu put to death all the rest of the seed of ahab in jezreel and all his relation and his near friend and his priest till there be no more of them . then he get up and come to samaria . and he be at the meeting place of the keeper of sheep by the way when he come across the brother of ahaziah king of judah and say who be you ? and they say we be the brother of ahaziah king of judah we be go down to see the child of the king and of the queen . and he say take them live . so they take them live and put them to death in the water hole of beth eked of the forty two men he put every one to death and when he have go away from there he come across jehonadab the son of rechab and he say good day to him and say to him be your heart true to mine a mine be to yours ? and jehonadab in answer say it be and jehu say if it be give me your hand . and he give him his hand and he make him come up into his carriage . and he say come with me and see how i be on fire for the lord 's cause . so he make him go with him in his carriage . and when he come to samaria he put to death all those of ahab 's family who be still in samaria till there be no more of them a the lord have say to elijah . then jehu get all the people together and say to them ahab be baal 's servant in a small way but jehu will be his servant on a great scale . now send for all the prophet of baal and all his servant and all his priest to come to me let no one keep away for i have a great offering to make to baal anyone who be not present will be put to death . this jehu do with deceit his purpose be the destruction of the servant of baal . and jehu say let there be a special holy meeting for the worship of baal . so a public statement be make . and jehu send out through all israel and all the servant of baal come not one keep away . and they come into the house of baal so that it be full from end to end . and jehu say to him who keep the robe get out robe for all the servant of baal . so he get out robe for them . and jehu with jehonadab the son of rechab go into the house of baal and he say to the servant of baal make a search with care to see that no servant of the lord be with you but only servant of baal . then they go in to make offering and burn offering . now jehu have put eighty men outside and say to them if any man whom i give into your hand get away the life of him who let him go will be the price of his life . then when the burn offering be end straight away jehu say to the arm men and the captain go in and put them to death let not one come out . so they put them to the sword and pull the image to the earth they go into the holy place of the house of baal . and they take out the image of asherah from the house of baal and have it burn . the altar of baal be pull down and the house of baal be break up and make an unclean place a it be to this day . so jehu put an end to the worship of baal in israel . but jehu do not keep himself from all the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat and the evil he make israel do the gold ox be still in beth el and in dan . and the lord say to jehu because you have do well in do what be right in my eye and effect all my purpose for the family of ahab your son will be king of israel to the fourth generation . but jehu do not take care to keep the law of the lord with all his heart he do not keep himself from the sin which jeroboam do and make israel do . in those day the lord be angry first with israel and hazael make attack on all the land of israel east of jordan in all the land of gilead the gadites and the reubenites and the manassites from aroer by the valley of the arnon all gilead and bashan . now the rest of the act of jehu and all he do and his great power be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and jehu go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in samaria . and jehoahaz his son become king in his place . and the time of jehu 's rule over israel in samaria be twenty eight year .now when athaliah the mother of ahaziah saw that her son be dead she have all the rest of the seed of the kingdom put to death . but jehosheba the daughter of king joram sister of ahaziah secretly take joash the son of ahaziah with the woman who take care of him away from among the king 's son who be put to death and put him in the bedroom and they keep him safe from athaliah so that he be not put to death . and for six year she keep him safe in the house of the lord while athaliah be rule over the land . then in the seventh year jehoiada send for the captain of hundred of the carians and the arm men and take them into the house of the lord make an agreement with them and make them take an oath in the house of the lord and let them see the king 's son . and he give them order say this be what you be to do the third part of you who come in on the sabbath and keep the watch of the king 's house ... and the two division of you who go out on the sabbath and keep the watch of the house of the lord will make a circle round the king every man be arm and whoever come inside your line be to be put to death keep with the king when he go out and when he come in . and the captain of hundred do a jehoiada the priest give them order every one take with him his men those who come in and those who go out on the sabbath and they come in to jehoiada the priest . and the priest give to the captain of hundred the spear and body cover which have be king david 's and which be keep in the house of the lord . then the arm men take up their position every man with his instrument of war in his hand from the right side of the house to the leave round about the altar and the house . then he make the king 's son come out and put the crown on him and the arm band and make him king and put the holy oil on him and they all make sound of joy with their hand say long life to the king . now athaliah hear the noise make by the people come to the people in the house of the lord and look she saw the king in his regular place by the pillar and the captain and the horn near him and all the people of the land give sign of joy and sound the horn . then athaliah violently part her robe give a cry say break faith break faith ! then jehoiada the priest give order to those who be place in authority over the army say take her outside the line and let anyone who go after her be put to death with the sword for he say let her not be put to death in the house of the lord . so they put their hand on her and she go to the king 's house by the doorway of the horse and there she be put to death . and jehoiada make an agreement between the lord and the king and the people that they would be the lord 's people and in the same way between the king and the people . then all the people of the land go to the house of baal and have it pull down it altar and image be all break to bit and mattan the priest of baal they put to death before the altar . and the priest put overseer over the lord 's house . then he take the captain of hundred and the carians and the arm men and all the people of the land and they come down with the king from the house of the lord through the doorway of the arm men to the king 's house . and he take his place on the seat of the king . so all the people of the land be glad and the town be quiet and they have put athaliah to death with the sword at the king 's house . and jehoash be seven year old when he become king .in the seventh year of jehu 's rule jehoash become king and he be rule for forty year in jerusalem his mother 's name be zibiah of beer sheba . jehoash do what be right in the eye of the lord all his day because he be guide by the teaching of jehoiada the priest . but the high place be not take away the people go on make offering and burn them in the high place . and jehoash say to the priest all the money of the holy thing which come into the house of the lord the amount fix for every man 's payment and all the money give by any man freely from the impulse of his heart let the priest take every man from his friend and neighbour to make good what be damage in the house wherever it be to be see . but in the twenty third year of king jehoash the priest have not make good the damage part of the house . then king jehoash send for jehoiada the priest and the other priest and say to them why have you not make good what be damage in the house ? now take no more money from your neighbour but give it for the building up of the house . so the priest make an agreement to take no more money from the people and not to make good what be damage in the house . but jehoiada the priest take a chest and make a hole in the cover of it put it by the altar on the right side when one come into the house of the lord and the priest who keep the door put in it regularly all the money which be take into the house of the lord . and when they saw that there be much money in the chest the king 's scribe and the high priest come and put it in bag note the amount of all the money there be in the house of the lord . and the money which be measure out they give regularly to those who be responsible for oversee the work and these give it in payment to the woodworker and the builder who be work on the house of the lord and to the wall builder and the stone cutter and to get wood and cut stone for build up the broken part of the house of the lord and for everything need to put the house in good order . but the money be not use for make silver cup or scissors or basin or wind instrument or any vessel of gold or silver for the house of the lord but it be all give to the workman who be build up the house . and they do not get any statement of account from the men to whom the money be give for the workman for they make use of it with good faith . the money of the offering for error and the sin offering be not take into the house of the lord it be the priest ' . then hazael king of aram go up against gath and take it and his purpose be to go up to jerusalem . then jehoash king of judah take all the holy thing which jehoshaphat and jehoram and ahaziah his father the king of judah have give to the lord together with the thing he himself have give and all the gold in the temple store and in the king 's house and send it to hazael king of aram and he go away from jerusalem . now the rest of the act of joash and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and his servant make a secret design and put joash to death at the house of millo on the way down to silla . and jozacar the son of shimeath and jehozabad the son of shomer his servant come to him and put him to death and they put him into the earth with his father in the town of david and amaziah his son become king in his place .in the twenty third year of joash the son of ahaziah king of judah jehoahaz the son of jehu become king over israel in samaria ruling for seventeen year . he do evil in the eye of the lord copy the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat which he do and make israel do he do not keep himself from them . so the wrath of the lord be burn against israel and he give them up into the power of hazael king of aram and into the power of ben hadad the son of hazael again and again . then jehoahaz make prayer to the lord and the lord give ear to him for he saw how cruelly israel be crush by the king of aram . and the lord give israel a saviour so that they become free from the hand of the aramaean and the child of israel be live in their tent a in the past . but still they do not give up the sin of jeroboam which he make israel do but go on with it and there be an image of asherah in samaria . for out of all his army jehoahaz have only fifty horseman and ten carriage and ten thousand footman the king of aram have give them up to destruction crush them like dust . now the rest of the act of jehoahaz and all he do and his great power be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and jehoahaz go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in samaria and joash his son become king in his place . in the thirty seventh year of the rule of joash king of judah joash the son of jehoahaz become king over israel in samaria ruling for sixteen year . he do evil in the eye of the lord not turn away from the sin of jeroboam the son of nebat which he do and make israel do but he go on with it . now the rest of the act of joash and all he do and the force with which he go to war against amaziah king of judah be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and joash go to rest with his father and jeroboam take his place a king and joash be put into the earth in samaria with the king of israel . now elisha become ill with the disease which be the cause of his death and joash king of israel come down to him and weep over him say my father my father the war carriage of israel and it horseman ! then elisha say to him take bow and arrow and he take bow and arrow . and he say to the king of israel put your hand on the bow and he put his hand on it and elisha put his hand on the king 's hand . then he say let the window be open to the east and he get it open . then elisha say let the arrow go and he let it go . and he say the lord 's arrow of salvation of salvation over aram for you will overcome the aramaean in aphek and put an end to them . and he say take the arrow and he take them . and he say to the king of israel send them down into the earth and he do so three time and no more . then the man of god be angry with him and say if you have do it five or six time then you would have overcome aram completely but now you will only overcome them three time . and death come to elisha and they put his body into the earth . now in the spring of the year arm band of moabites frequently come overrun the land . and while they be put a dead man into the earth they saw a band come and they put the man quickly into the place where elisha 's body be and the dead man on touch elisha 's bone come to life again and get up on his foot . and israel be crush under the power of hazael king of aram all the day of jehoahaz . but the lord be kind to them and have pity on them care for them because of his agreement with abraham isaac and jacob he would not put them to destruction or send them away from before his face till now . then hazael king of aram come to his end and ben hadad his son become king in his place . and jehoash the son of jehoahaz take again from ben hadad the son of hazael the town which he have take from jehoahaz his father in war . three time jehoash overcame him and get back the town of israel .in the second year of joash son of joahaz king of israel amaziah the son of joash become king of judah . he be twenty five year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for twenty nine year his mother 's name be jehoaddin of jerusalem . he do what be right in the eye of the lord though not like david his father he do a joash his father have do . but still the high place be not take away the people go on make offering and burn them in the high place . now when he become strong in the kingdom straight away he put to death those servant who have take the life of the king his father but he do not put their child to death for the order of the lord record in the book of the law of moses say the father be not to be put to death for the child or the child for their father but a man be to be put to death for the sin which he himself have do . he put to the sword twelve thousand men of edom in the valley of salt and take sela in war name it joktheel a it be to this day . then amaziah send representative to jehoash the son of jehoahaz son of jehu king of israel say come let u have a meeting face to face . and jehoash king of israel sent to amaziah king of judah say the thorn tree in lebanon sent to the cedar in lebanon say give your daughter to my son for a wife and a beast from the woodland in lebanon go by crush the thorn under his foot . it be true that you have overcome edom and your heart be uplifted let that glory be enough for you and keep in your country why do you make cause of trouble put yourself and judah with you in danger of downfall ? but amaziah give no attention . so jehoash king of israel go up and he and amaziah king of judah come face to face at beth shemesh which be in judah . and judah be overcome before israel so that they go in flight every man to his tent . and jehoash king of israel make amaziah king of judah the son of jehoash son of ahaziah prisoner at beth shemesh and come to jerusalem and have the wall of jerusalem pull down from the doorway of ephraim to the door in the angle four hundred cubit . and he take all the gold and silver and all the vessel which be in the house of the lord and in the store house of the king together with those whose life would be the price of broken faith and go back to samaria . now the rest of the act of jehoash and his power and how he go to war with amaziah king of judah be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and jehoash go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in samaria with the king of israel and jeroboam his son become king in his place . amaziah the son of joash king of judah go on living for fifteen year after the death of jehoash son of jehoahaz king of israel . and the rest of the act of amaziah be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? now they make a secret design against him in jerusalem and he go in flight to lachish but they send after him to lachish and put him to death there . and they take his body on horseback and put it into the earth with his father in jerusalem the town of david . then all the people of judah take azariah who be sixteen year old and make him king in place of his father amaziah . he be the builder of elath which he get back for judah after the death of the king . in the fifteenth year of the rule of amaziah son of joash king of judah jeroboam the son of joash king of israel become king in samaria ruling for forty one year . he do evil in the eye of the lord not turn away from the sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do . he get back the old limit of israel from the way into hamath to the sea of the arabah a the lord have say by his servant jonah the son of amittai the prophet of gath hepher . for the lord saw how bitter be the trouble of israel and that everyone be cut off he who be shut up and he who go free and that israel have no helper . and the lord have not say that the name of israel be to be take away from the earth but he give them a saviour in jeroboam the son of joash . now the rest of the act of jeroboam and all he do and his power and how he go to war with damascus cause the wrath of the lord to be turn away from israel be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and jeroboam go to rest with his father and be put into the earth with the king of israel and zechariah his son become king in his place .in the twenty seventh year of the rule of jeroboam king of israel azariah son of amaziah become king of judah . he be sixteen year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for fifty two year his mother 's name be jecoliah of jerusalem . and he do what be right in the eye of the lord a his father amaziah have do . but he do not take away the high place and the people still go on make offering and burn them in the high place . and the lord send disease on the king and he become a leper and to the day of his death he be live separately in his private house . and jotham his son be over his house judge the people of the land . now the rest of the act of azariah and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and azariah go to rest with his father and be put into the earth with his father in the town of david and jotham his son become king in his place . in the thirty eighth year of azaliah king of judah zechariah son of jeroboam be king over israel for six month . and he do evil in the eye of the lord a his father have do not turn away from the sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do . and shallum the son of jabesh make a secret design against him and attack him in ibleam put him to death and become king in his place . now the rest of the act of zechariah be record in the book of the history of the king of israel . this be what the lord have say to jehu your son to the fourth generation will be king of israel . and so it come about . shallum the son of jabesh become king in the thirty ninth year of uzziah king of judah and he be rule in samaria for the space of one month . then menahem the son of gadi go up from tirzah and come to samaria and attack shallum son of jabesh in samaria put him to death and make himself king in his place . now the rest of the act of shallum and the secret design which he make be record in the book of the history of the king of israel . then menahem send destruction on tappuah and all the people in it and it limit from tirzah because they would not let him come in and he have all the woman who be with child cut open . in the thirty ninth year of azariah king of judah menahem the son of gadi become king over israel and be rule in samaria for ten year . he do evil in the eye of the lord he do not keep himself from the sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do . in his day pul the king of assyria come up against the land and menahem give pul a thousand talent of silver so that he might let him keep the kingdom . and menahem get the money from israel from all the men of wealth fifty silver shekel from every man to give to the king of assyria . so the king of assyria go back without stop in the land . now the rest of the act of menahem and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of israel ? and menahem go to rest with his father and pekahiah his son become king in his place . in the fiftieth year of azariah king of judah pekahiah the son of menahem become king over israel in samaria ruling for two year . he do evil in the eye of the lord not turn from the sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do . and pekah the son of remaliah his captain make a secret design against him attack him in the king 's great house in samaria and with him be fifty men of gilead and he put him to death and become king in his place . now the rest of the act of pekahiah and all he do be record in the book of the history of the king of israel . in the fifty second year of azariah king of judah pekah the son of remaliah become king over israel in samaria ruling for twenty year . he do evil in the eye of the lord not turn from the sin which jeroboam the son of nebat do and make israel do . in the day of pekah king of israel tiglath pileser king of assyria come and take ijon and abel beth maacah and janoah and kedesh and hazor and gilead and galilee and all the land of naphtali and he take the people away to assyria . and hoshea the son of elah make a secret design against pekah the son of remaliah and attack him put him to death and become king in his place in the twentieth year of jotham the son of uzziah . now the rest of the act of pekah and all he do be record in the book of the history of the king of israel . in the second year of pekah the son of remaliah king of israel jotham the son of uzziah become king of judah . he be twenty five year old when he become king and he be rule for sixteen year in jerusalem and his mother 's name be jerusha the daughter of zadok . and he do what be right in the eye of the lord a his father uzziah have do . but he do not take away the high place and the people still go on make offering and burn them in the high place . he be the builder of the high doorway of the house of the lord . now the rest of the act of jotham and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? in those day the lord first send against judah rezin the king of aram and pekah the son of remaliah . and jotham go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the town of david his father and ahaz his son become king in his place .in the seventeenth year of pekah the son of remaliah ahaz the son of jotham become king of judah . ahaz be twenty year old when he become king he be rule for sixteen year in jerusalem . he do not do what be right in the eye of the lord his god a david his father do . but he go in the way of the king of israel and even make his son go through the fire copy the disgust way of the nation whom the lord have send out of the land before the child of israel . and he make offering burn them in the high place and on the hill and under every green tree . then rezin king of aram and pekah son of remaliah king of israel come up to jerusalem to make war and they make an attack on ahaz shut him in but be not able to overcome him . at that time the king of edom get elath back for edom and send the jew out of elath and the edomites come back to elath where they be live to this day . so ahaz sent representative to tiglath pileser king of assyria say i be your servant and your son come to my help against the king of aram and israel who have take up arm against me . and ahaz take the silver and gold which be in the house of the lord and in the king 's store house and send them a an offering to the king of assyria . and the king of assyria in answer to his request go up against damascus and take it and take it people away a prisoner to kir and put rezin to death . then king ahaz go to damascus for a meeting with tiglath pileser king of assyria and there he saw the altar which be at damascus and king ahaz send to urijah the priest a copy of the altar give the design of it and all the detail of it structure . and from the copy king ahaz sent from damascus urijah make an altar and have it ready by the time king ahaz come back from damascus . and when the king come from damascus he saw the altar and he go up on it and make an offering on it . he make his burned offering and his meal offering and his drink offering there drain out the blood of his peace offering on the altar . and the brass altar which be before the lord he take from the front of the house from between his altar and the house of the lord and put it on the north side of his altar . and king ahaz give order to urijah the priest say make the morning burn offering and the evening meal offering and the king 's burn offering and meal offering with the burned offering of all the people and their meal offering and drink offering on the great altar and put on it all the blood of the burn offering and of the beast which be offer but the brass altar will be for my use to get direction from the lord . so urijah the priest do everything a the king say and king ahaz take off the side of the wheeled base and take down the great water vessel from off the brass ox which be under it and put it on a floor of stone . the house of the lord because of the king of assyria . now the rest of the thing which ahaz do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and ahaz go to rest with his father and be put into the earth with his father in the town of david and hezekiah his son become king in his place .in the twelfth year of ahaz king of judah hoshea the son of elah become king over israel in samaria ruling for nine year . he do evil in the eye of the lord though not like the king of israel before him . against him come up shalmaneser king of assyria and hoshea become his servant and send him offering . but hoshea 's break faith become clear to the king of assyria because he have send representative to so king of egypt and do not send his offering to the king of assyria a he have do year by year so the king of assyria have him shut up in prison and put in chain . then the king of assyria go through all the land and come up to samaria shut it in with his force for three year . in the ninth year of hoshea the king of assyria take samaria and take israel away to assyria place them in halah and in habor on the river gozan and in the town of the medes . and the wrath of the lord come on israel because they have do evil against the lord their god who take them out of the land of egypt from under the yoke of pharaoh king of egypt and have become worshipper of other god live by the rule of the nation whom the lord have send out from before the child of israel . and the child of israel do secretly against the lord their god thing which be not right build high place for themselves in all their town from the tower of the watchman to the walled town . they put up pillar of stone and wood on every high hill and under every green tree burn their offering in all the high place a those nation do whom the lord send away from before them they do evil thing move the lord to wrath and they make themselves servant of disgust thing though the lord have say you be not to do this . and he give witness to israel and judah by every prophet and seer say come back from your evil way and do my order and keep my rule and be guide by the law which i give to your father and send to you by my servant the prophet . and they do not give ear but become stiff necked like their father who have no faith in the lord their god . and they go against his rule and the agreement which he make with their father and his law which he give them they give themselves up to thing without sense or value and become foolish like the nation round them of whom the lord have say do not a they do . and turn their back on all the order which the lord have give them they make for themselves image of metal and the image of asherah worship all the star of heaven and become servant to baal . and they make their son and their daughter go through the fire and they make use of secret art and unnatural power and give themselves up to do evil in the eye of the lord till he be move to wrath . so the lord be very angry with israel and his face be turn away from them only the tribe of judah keep it place . but even judah do not keep the order of the lord their god but be guide by the rule which israel have make . so the lord would have nothing to do with all the offspring of israel and send trouble on them and give them up into the hand of their attacker till he have send them away from before his face . for israel be break off from the family of david and they make jeroboam the son of nebat king who drive them away from the law of the lord make them do a great sin . and the child of israel go on with all the sin which jeroboam do they do not keep themselves from them till the lord put israel away from before his face a he have say by all his servant the prophet . so israel be take away from their land to assyria to this day . then the king of assyria take men from babylon and from cuthah and avva and hamath and sepharvaim and put them in the town of samaria in place of the child of israel so they get samaria for their heritage living in it town . now when first they be live there they do not give worship to the lord . so the lord send lion among them cause the death of some of them . so they say to the king of assyria the nation whom you have take a prisoner and put in the town of samaria have no knowledge of the way of the god of the land so he have send lion among them cause their death because they have no knowledge of his way . then the king of assyria give order say send there one of the priest whom you take away and let him be live there and teach the people the way of the god of the land . so one of the priest whom they have take away a a prisoner from samaria come back and living in beth el become their teacher in the worship of the lord . and every nation make god for themselves and put them in the house of the high place which the samaritan have make every nation in the town where they be live . the men of babylon make succoth benoth and the men of cuth make nergal and the men of hamath make ashima the avvites make nibhaz and tartak and the sepharvites give their child to be burn in the fire to adrammelech and anammelech the god of sepharvaim . so they go on worship the lord and make for themselves from among all the people priest for the high place to make offering for them in the house of the high place . they give worship to the lord but they give honour to their god like the nation do from whom they have be take a prisoner . so to this day they go on in their old way not worship the lord or keep his order or his way or the law and the rule which the lord give to the child of jacob to whom he give the name israel and the lord make an agreement with them and give them order say you be to have no other god you be not to give worship to them or be their servant or make them offering but the lord who take you out of the land of egypt with his great power and his outstretched arm he be your god to whom you be to give worship and make offering and the rule and the order and the law which he put in write for you you be to keep and do for ever you be to have no other god . and you be to keep in memory the agreement which i have make with you and you be to have no other god . and you be to give worship to the lord your god for it be he who will give you salvation from the hand of all who be against you . but they give no attention but go on in their old way . so these nation worship the lord still be servant to the image they have make their child and their child 's child do the same a their father do so do they to this day .now in the third year of hoshea son of elah king of israel hezekiah the son of ahaz become king of judah . he be twenty five year old when he become king ruling in jerusalem for twenty nine year his mother 's name be abi the daughter of zechariah . he do what be right in the eye of the lord a david his father have do . he have the high place take away and the stone pillars break to bit and the asherah cut down and the brass snake which moses have make be crush to powder at his order because in those day the child of israel have offering burn before it and he give it the name nehushtan . he have faith in the lord the god of israel so that there be no one like him among all the king of judah who be before him . for his heart be fix on the lord not turn from his way and he do his order which the lord give to moses . and the lord be with him he do well in all his undertaking and he take up arm against the king of assyria and be his servant no longer . he overcome the philistine as far a gaza and it limit from the tower of the watchman to the walled town . now in the fourth year of king hezekiah which be the seventh year of hoshea son of elah king of israel shalmaneser king of assyria come up against samaria shut it in with his army . and at the end of three year they take it in the sixth year of hezekiah 's rule which be the ninth year of hoshea king of israel samaria be take . and the king of assyria take israel away a prisoner into assyria place them in halah and in habor on the river gozan and in the town of the medes because they do not give ear to the voice of the lord their god but go against his agreement even against everything order by moses the servant of the lord and they do not give ear to it or do it . now in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah sennacherib king of assyria come up against all the walled town of judah and take them . and hezekiah king of judah send to lachish to the king of assyria say i have do wrong give up attack me and whatever you put on me i will undergo . and the payment he be to make be fix by the king of assyria at three hundred talent of silver and thirty talent of gold . so hezekiah give him all the silver in the house of the lord and in the king 's store house . and at that time hezekiah have the gold from the door of the lord 's house and from the door pillar plat by him cut off and give it to the king of assyria . then the king of assyria send the tartan and the rab sari and the rab shakeh from lachish to jerusalem to king hezekiah with a strong force . and they go up and come to jerusalem and take up their position by the stream of the high pool by the highway of the washerman 's field . and they send for the king and eliakim the son of hilkiah who be over the house and shebna the scribe and joah the son of asaph the recorder come out to them . and the rab shakeh say to them say now to hezekiah these be the word of the great king the king of assyria in what be you place your hope ? you say you have a design and strength for war but these be only word . now to whom be you look for support that you have go against my authority ? see now you be base your hope on that broken rod of egypt which will go through a man 's hand if he make use of it for a support for so be pharaoh king of egypt to all who put their faith in him . and if you say to me our hope be in the lord our god be it not he whose high place and altar hezekiah have take away say to judah and jerusalem that worship may only be give before this altar in jerusalem ? and now take a chance with my master the king of assyria and i will give you two thousand horse if you be able to put horseman on them . how then may you put to shame the least of my master 's servant ? and you have put your hope in egypt for war carriage and horseman and have i now come up to send destruction on this place without the lord 's authority ? it be the lord himself who say to me go up against this land and make it waste . then eliakim the son of hilkiah and shebna and joah say to the rab shakeh will you kindly make use of the aramaean language in talk to your servant for we be use to it and do not make use of the jew ' language in the hearing of the people on the wall . but the rab shakeh say to them be it to your master or to you that my master have send me to say these word ? have he not send me to the men seat on the wall ? for they be the people who will be short of food with you when the town be shut in . then the rab shakeh get up and say with a loud voice in the jew ' language give ear to the word of the great king the king of assyria this be what the king say do not be trick by hezekiah for there be no salvation for you in him . and do not let hezekiah make you put your faith in the lord say the lord will certainly keep u safe and this town will not be give into the hand of the king of assyria . do not give ear to hezekiah for this be what the king of assyria say make peace with me and come out to me and everyone will be free to take the fruit of his vine and of his fig tree and the water of his spring till i come and take you away to a land like yours a land of grain and wine a land of bread and vine garden a land of oil give olive and of honey so that life and not death may be your fate . give no attention to hezekiah when he say to you the lord will keep u safe . have any one of the god of the nation keep his land from fall into the hand of the king of assyria ? where be the god of hamath and of arpad ? where be the god of sepharvaim of hena and ivvah ? have they keep samaria out of my hand ? who among all the god of these country have keep their country from fall into my hand to give cause for the thought that the lord will keep jerusalem from fall into my hand ? but the people keep quiet and give him no answer for the king 's order be give him no answer . then eliakim the son of hilkiah who be over the house and shebna the scribe and joah the son of asaph the recorder come to hezekiah with their clothing part a a sign of grief and give him an account of what the rab shakeh have say .and on hear it king hezekiah take off his robe and put on haircloth and go into the house of the lord . and he send eliakim who be over the house and shebna the scribe and the chief priest dress in haircloth to isaiah the prophet the son of amoz . and they say to him hezekiah say this day be a day of trouble and punishment and shame for the child be ready to come to birth but there be no strength to give birth to them . it may be that the lord your god will give ear to the word of the rab shakeh whom the king of assyria his master send to say evil thing against the living god and will make his word come to nothing so then make your prayer for the rest of the people . so the servant of king hezekiah come to isaiah . and isaiah say to them this be what you be to say to your master the lord say be not trouble by the word which the servant of the king of assyria have say against me in your hearing . see i will put a spirit into him and bad news will come to his ear and he will go back to his land and there i will have him put to death by the sword . so the rab shakeh go back and when he get there the king of assyria be make war against libnah for it have come to his ear that he have go away from lachish . and when news come to him that tirhakah king of ethiopia have make an attack on him he send representative to hezekiah again say this be what you be to say to hezekiah king of judah let not your god in whom be your faith give you a false hope say jerusalem will not be give into the hand of the king of assyria . no doubt the story have come to your ear of what the king of assyria have do to all land put them to the curse and will you be keep safe ? do the god of the nation keep safe those on whom my father send destruction gozan and haran and rezeph and the child of eden who be in telassar ? where be the king of hamath and the king of arpad and the king of the town of sepharvaim of hena and of ivvah ? and hezekiah take the letter from the hand of those who have come with it and after read it hezekiah go up to the house of the lord open the letter there before the lord . and hezekiah make his prayer to the lord say o lord the god of israel seat between the winged one you only be the god of all the kingdom of the earth you have make heaven and earth . let your ear be turn to u o lord and let your eye be open o lord and see take note of all the word of sennacherib who have send men to say evil against the living god . truly o lord the king of assyria have make waste the nation and their land and have give their god to the fire for they be no god but wood and stone the work of men 's hand so they have give them to destruction . but now o lord our god give u salvation from his hand so that it may be clear to all the kingdom of the earth that you and only you o lord be god . then isaiah the son of amoz sent to hezekiah say the lord the god of israel say the prayer which you have make to me against sennacherib king of assyria have come to my ear . this be the word which the lord have say about him in the eye of the virgin daughter of zion you be sham and laugh at the daughter of jerusalem have make sport of you . against whom have you say evil and bitter thing ? against whom have your voice be loud and your eye lift up ? even against the holy one of israel . you have send your servant with evil word against the lord and have say with all my war carriage i have come up to the top of the mountain to the inmost part of lebanon it tall cedar will be cut down and the best tree of it wood i will come up into his high place into his thick wood . i have make water hole and take their water and with my foot i have make all the river of egypt dry . have it not come to your ear how i do it long before purpose it in time long past ? now i have give effect to my design so that by you strong town might be turn into mass of broken wall . this be why their townsman have no power they be break and put to shame they be like the grass of the field and the green plant like grass on the house top . but i have knowledge of your get up and your resting of your go out and your come in . because your wrath against me and your word of pride have come up to my ear i will put my hook in your nose and my cord in your lip and i will make you go back by the way you come . and this will be the sign to you you will get your food this year from what come up of itself and in the second year from the produce of the same and in the third year you will put in your seed and get in the grain and make vine garden and take of their fruit . and those of judah who be still live will again take root in the earth and give fruit . for from jerusalem those who have be keep safe will go out and those who be still live will go out of mount zion by the fixed purpose of the lord of army this will be do . for this cause the lord say about the king of assyria he will not come into this town or send an arrow against it he will not come before it with arm or put up an earthwork against it by the way he come he will go back and he will not get into this town say the lord . for i will keep this town safe for my honour and for the honour of my servant david . and that night the angel of the lord go out and put to death in the army of the assyrian a hundred and eighty five thousand men and when the people get up early in the morning there be nothing to be see but dead body . so sennacherib king of assyria go back to his place at nineveh . and it come about when he be worship in the house of nisroch his god that his son adrammelech and sharezer put him to death with the sword and they go in flight into the land of ararat . and esar haddon his son become king in his place .in those day hezekiah be ill and near death . and isaiah the prophet the son of amoz come to him and say to him the lord say put your house in order for your death be near . then turn his face to the wall he make his prayer to the lord say o lord keep in mind how i have be true to you with all my heart and have do what be good in your eye . and hezekiah give way to bitter weep . now before isaiah have go out of the middle of the town the word of the lord come to him say go back and say to hezekiah the ruler of my people the lord the god of david your father say your prayer have come to my ear and i have see your weep see i will make you well on the third day you will go up to the house of the lord . i will give you fifteen more year of life and i will keep you and this town safe from the hand of the king of assyria i will keep this town safe for my honour and for the honour of my servant david . then isaiah say take a cake of fig . so they take it and put it on his wound and he get well . and hezekiah say to isaiah what be to be the sign that the lord will make me well and that i will go up to the house of the lord on the third day ? and isaiah say this be the sign the lord will give you that he will do what he have say will the shade go forward ten degrees or back ? and hezekiah say in answer it be a simple thing for the shade to go forward but let it go back ten degree . then isaiah the prophet make prayer to the lord and he make the shade go back ten degrees from it position on the step of ahaz . at that time merodach baladan the son of baladan king of babylon send letter with an offering to hezekiah because he have news that hezekiah have be ill. and hezekiah be glad at their coming and let them see all his store of wealth the silver and the gold and the spice and the oil of great price and the house of his arm and everything there be in his store there be nothing in all his house or his kingdom which hezekiah do not let them see . then isaiah the prophet come to king hezekiah and say to him what do these men say and where do they come from ? and hezekiah say they come from a far country even from babylon . and he say what have they see in your house ? and hezekiah say in answer they saw everything in my house there be nothing among my store which i do not let them see . and isaiah say to hezekiah give ear to the word of the lord . truly day be come when everything in your house and whatever your father have put in store till this day will be take away to babylon all will be go say the lord . and your son the offspring of your body they will take away to be unsexed servant in the house of the king of babylon . then hezekiah say to isaiah good be the word of the lord which you have say . then he say ... if in my time there be peace and righteousness ? now the rest of the act of hezekiah and his power and how he make the pool and the stream to take water into the town be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? and hezekiah go to rest with his father and manasseh his son become king in his place .manasseh be twelve year old when he become king for fifty five year he be rule in jerusalem and his mother 's name be hephzi bah . he do evil in the eye of the lord copy the disgust way of those nation whom the lord have send out before the child of israel . he put up again the high place which have be pull down by hezekiah his father he make altar for baal and an asherah a ahab king of israel have do he be a worshipper and servant of all the star of heaven . and he put up altar in the house of the lord of which the lord have say in jerusalem will i put my name . and he put up altar for all the star of heaven in the two outer square of the house of the lord . and he make his son go through the fire and make use of secret art and sign for read the future he give position to those who have control of spirit and to wonder worker he do much evil in the eye of the lord move him to wrath . he put the image of asherah which he have make in the house of which the lord have say to david and to solomon his son in this house and in jerusalem the town which i have make mine out of all the tribe of israel i will put my name for ever . and never again will i send the foot of israel wander from the land which i give to their father if only they will take care to do all my order and keep all the law which my servant moses give them . but they do not give ear and manasseh make them do more evil than those nation do whom the lord give up to destruction before the child of israel . and the lord say by his servant the prophet because manasseh king of judah have do these disgust thing do more evil than all the amorites before him and make judah do evil with his false god for this cause say the lord the god of israel i will send such evil on jerusalem and judah that the ear of all to whom the news come will be burn . and over jerusalem will be stretch the line of samaria and the weight of ahab jerusalem will be wash clean a a plate be wash and turn over on it face . and i will put away from me the rest of my heritage and give them up into the hand of their hater who will take their property and their good for themselves because they have do evil in my eye move me to wrath from the day when their father come out of egypt till this day . more than this manasseh take the life of upright men till jerusalem from one end to the other be full of blood in addition to his sin in make judah do evil in the eye of the lord . now the rest of the act of manasseh and all he do and his sin be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? so manasseh go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the garden of his house in the garden of uzza and amon his son become king in his place . amon be twenty two year old when he become king ruling in jerusalem for two year his mother 's name be meshullemeth the daughter of haruz of jotbah . he do evil in the eye of the lord a manasseh his father have do . he go in all the way of his father be a servant and worshipper of the false god to which his father have be a servant turn away from the lord the god of his father and not walk in his way . and the servant of amon make a secret design against him and put the king to death in his house . but the people of the land put to death all those who have take part in the design against the king and make josiah his son king in his place . now the rest of the act which amon do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? he be put in his last resting place in the garden of uzza and josiah his son become king in his place .josiah be eight year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for thirty one year his mother 's name be jedidah daughter of adaiah of bozkath . he do what be right in the eye of the lord walking in the way of david his father without turn to the right hand or to the left . now in the eighteenth year after he become king josiah send shaphan the son of azaliah the son of meshullam the scribe to the house of the lord say to him go up to hilkiah the chief priest and let him give out the money which be take into the house of the lord which the keeper of the door have get together from the people and let it be give to the overseer of the work of the lord 's house to give to the workman who be make good what be damage in the house of the lord to the woodworker and the builder and the stone cutter and for get wood and cut stone for the building up of the house . they do not have to give any account of the money which be hand to them for they make use of it with good faith . then hilkiah the chief priest say to shaphan the scribe i have make discovery of the book of the law in the house of the lord . so hilkiah give it to shaphan then after read it shaphan the scribe go in to the king and give him an account of what have be do say your servant have give out the money which be in the house and have give it to the overseer of the work of the house of the lord . then shaphan the scribe say to the king hilkiah the priest have give me a book and he be read it before the king . and the king hear the word of the book of the law take his robe in his hand violently part it a a sign of his grief and he give order to hilkiah the priest and ahikam the son of shaphan and achbor the son of micaiah and shaphan the scribe and asaiah the king 's servant say go and get direction from the lord for me and for the people and for all judah about the word of this book which have come to light for great be the wrath of the lord which be burn against u because our father have not give ear to the word of this book to do all the thing which be record in it . so hilkiah the priest and ahikam and achbor and shaphan and asaiah go to huldah the woman prophet the wife of shallum the son of tikvah the son of harhas keeper of the robe now she be live in jerusalem in the second part of the town and they have talk with her . and she say to them the lord the god of israel say say to the man who send you to me these be the word of the lord see i will send evil on this place and on it people even everything which the king of judah have be read in the book because they have give me up burn offering to other god and move me to wrath by all the work of their hand so my wrath will be on fire against this place and will not be put out . but to the king of judah who send you to get direction from the lord say this be what the lord the god of israel have say a to the word which have come to your ear because your heart be soft and you make yourself low before me when you have word of what i say against this place and it people that they would become a waste and a curse and you give sign of grief weep before me truly i have give ear to you say the lord . for this cause i will let you go to your father and be put in your last resting place in peace and your eye will not see all the evil which i will send on this place . so they take this news back to the king .then the king sent and get together all the responsible men of judah and of jerusalem . and the king go up to the house of the lord with all the men of judah and all the people of jerusalem and the priest and the prophet and all the people small and great and they be present at his reading of the book of the law which have come to light in the house of the lord . and the king take his place by the pillar and make an agreement before the lord to go in the way of the lord and keep his order and his decision and his rule with all his heart and all his soul and to keep the word of the agreement record in the book and all the people give their word to keep the agreement . then the king give order to hilkiah the chief priest and to the priest of the second order and to the keeper of the door to take out of the house of the lord all the vessel make for baal and for the asherah and for all the star of heaven and he have them burn outside jerusalem in the field of kidron and take the dust of them to beth el . and he put an end to the false priest who have be put in their position by the king of judah to see to the burning of offering in the high place in the town of judah and the outskirt of jerusalem and all those who make offering to baal and to the sun and the moon and the twelve sign and all the star of heaven . and he take the asherah from the house of the lord outside jerusalem to the stream kidron burn it by the stream and crush it to dust and he put the dust on the place where the body of the common people be put to rest . and he have the house pull down of those who be use for sex purpose in the house of the lord where woman be make robe for the asherah . and he make all the priest from the town of judah come into jerusalem and he make unclean the high place where the priest have be burn offering from geba to beer sheba and he have the high place of the evil spirit pull down which be by the doorway of joshua the ruler of the town on the left side of the way into the town . still the priest of the high place never come up to the altar of the lord in jerusalem but they take their food of unleavened bread among their brother . and topheth in the valley of the son of hinnom he make unclean so that no man might make his son or his daughter go through the fire to molech . and he take away the horse which the king of judah have give to the sun at the way into the house of the lord by the room of nathan melech the unsexed servant which be in the out part of the building and the carriage of the sun he put on fire . and the altar on the roof of the high room of ahaz which the king of judah have make and the altar which manasseh have make in the two outer square of the house of the lord be pull down and crush to bit and the dust of them be put into the stream kidron . and the high place before jerusalem on the south side of the mountain of destruction which solomon king of israel have make for ashtoreth the disgust god of the zidonians and for chemosh the disgust god of moab and for milcom the disgust god of the child of ammon the king make unclean . the stone pillar be break to bit and the wood pillars cut down and the place where they have be be make full of the bone of the dead . and the altar at beth el and the high place put up by jeroboam the son of nebat who make israel do evil that altar and that high place be pull down and the high place be burn and crush to dust and the asherah be burn . then josiah turn round saw on the mountain the place of the dead and he send and have the bone take out of their place and burn on the altar so make it unclean a the lord have say by the man of god when jeroboam be in his place by the altar on that feast day . and he turn his eye to the rest place of the man of god who have give word of these thing say what be that headstone i see over there ? and the men of the town say to him it be the rest place of the man of god who come from judah and give word of all these thing which you have do to the altar of beth el . so he say let him be let not his bone be move . so they let his bone be with the bone of the prophet who come from samaria . then josiah take away all the house of the high place in the town of samaria which the king of israel have put up move the lord to wrath and he do with them a he have do in beth el . and all the priest of the high place there he put to death on the altar burn the bone of the dead on them and then he go back to jerusalem . and the king give order to all the people say keep the passover to the lord your god a it say in this book of the law . truly such a passover have not be keep in all the day of the judge of israel or of the king of israel or the king of judah in the eighteenth year of the rule of king josiah this passover be keep to the lord in jerusalem . and all those who have control of spirit and the wonder worker and the image and the false god and all the disgust thing which be see in the land of judah and in jerusalem josiah put away so that he might give effect to the word of the agreement record in the book which hilkiah the priest make discovery of in the house of the lord . never before have there be a king like him turn to the lord with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his power a the law of moses say and after him there be no king like him . but still the heat of the lord 's wrath be not turn back from judah because of all manasseh have do in move him to wrath . and the lord say i will send judah away from before my face a i have send israel i will have nothing more to do with this town which i have make mine even jerusalem and the holy house of which i say my name will be there . now the rest of the act of josiah and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? in his day pharaoh necoh king of egypt send his army against the king of assyria to the river euphrates and king josiah go out against him and he put him to death at megiddo when he have see him . and his servant take his body in a carriage from megiddo to jerusalem and put him into the earth there . and the people of the land take jehoahaz the son of josiah and put the holy oil on him and make him king in place of his father . jehoahaz be twenty three year old when he become king ruling in jerusalem for three month his mother 's name be hamutal the daughter of jeremiah of libnah . he do evil in the eye of the lord a his father have do . and pharaoh necoh put him in chain at riblah in the land of hamath so that he might not be king in jerusalem and take from the land a tax of a hundred talent of silver and a talent of gold . then pharaoh necoh make eliakim the son of josiah king in place of josiah his father change his name to jehoiakim but jehoahaz he take away to egypt where he be till his death . and jehoiakim give the silver and gold to pharaoh tax the land by his order to get the money the people of the land have to give silver and gold everyone a he be tax to make the payment to pharaoh necoh . jehoiakim be twenty five year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for eleven year his mother 's name be zebidah the daughter of pedaiah of rumah . he do evil in the eye of the lord a his father have do .in his day nebuchadnezzar king of babylon come up and jehoiakim be his servant for three year then he take up arm against him . and the lord send against him band of the chaldaean and of the edomites and of the moabites and of the child of ammon send them against judah for it destruction a he have say by his servant the prophet . only by the word of the lord do this fate come on judah to take them away from before his face because of the sin of manasseh and all the evil he do and because of the death of those who have do no wrong for he make jerusalem full of the blood of the upright and the lord have no forgiveness for it . now the rest of the act of jehoiakim and all he do be they not record in the book of the history of the king of judah ? so jehoiakim go to rest with his father and jehoiachin his son become king in his place . and the king of egypt do not come out of his land again for the king of babylon have take all his country from the stream of egypt to the river euphrates . jehoiachin be eighteen year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for three month and his mother 's name be nehushta the daughter of elnathan of jerusalem . he do evil in the eye of the lord a his father have do . at that time the army of nebuchadnezzar come up to jerusalem and the town be shut in on every side . and nebuchadnezzar king of babylon come there while his servant be shut in the town then jehoiachin king of judah go out to the king of babylon with his mother and his servant and his chief and his unsexed servant and in the eighth year of his rule the king of babylon take him . and he take away all the stored wealth of the lord 's house and the good from the king 's store house cut up all the gold vessel which solomon king of israel have make in the house of the lord a the lord have say . and he take away all the people of jerusalem and all the chief and all the men of war ten thousand prisoner and all the expert workman and the metal worker only the poor sort of the people of the land be not take away . he take jehoiachin a prisoner to babylon with his mother and his wife and his unsexed servant and the great men of the land he take them all a prisoner from jerusalem to babylon . and all the men of war seven thousand of them and a thousand expert workman and metal worker all of them strong and able to take up arm the king of babylon take away a prisoner into babylon . and the king of babylon make mattaniah his father 's brother king in place of jehoiachin change his name to zedekiah . zedekiah be twenty one year old when he become king and he be king in jerusalem for eleven year his mother 's name be hamutal daughter of jeremiah of libnah . he do evil in the eye of the lord a jehoiakim have do . and because of the wrath of the lord this come about in jerusalem and judah till he have send them all away from before him and zedekiah take up arm against the king of babylon .now in the ninth year of his rule on the tenth day of the tenth month nebuchadnezzar king of babylon come against jerusalem with all his army and take up his position before it build earthworks all round the town . and the town be shut in by their force till the eleventh year of king zedekiah . now on the ninth day of the fourth month the store of food in the town be almost go so that there be no food for the people of the land . so an opening be make in the wall of the town and all the men of war go in flight by night through the doorway between the two wall which be by the king 's garden now the chaldaean be station round the town and the king go by the way of the arabah . but the chaldaean army go after the king and overtook him in the lowland of jericho and all his army go in flight from him in every direction . and they make the king a prisoner and take him up to the king of babylon at riblah to be judge . and they put the son of zedekiah to death before his eye and then they put out his eye and chain him with iron band take him to babylon . now in the fifth month on the seventh day of the month in the nineteenth year of nebuchadnezzar king of babylon nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men a servant of the king of babylon come to jerusalem and he have the house of the lord and the king 's house and all the house of jerusalem even every great house burn with fire and the wall round jerusalem be break down by the chaldaean army which be with the captain . and the rest of the people who be still in the town and all those who have give themselves up to the king of babylon and all the rest of the workman nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take away a prisoner but he let the poor of the land go on living there to take care of the vine and the field . and the brass pillar in the house of the lord and the wheeled base and the great brass water vessel in the house of the lord be break up by the chaldaean who take the brass to babylon . and the pot and the spade and the scissors for the light and the spoon and all the brass vessel use in the lord 's house they take away . and the fire tray and the basin the gold of the gold vessel and the silver of the silver vessel be all take away by the captain of the arm men . the two pillar the great water vessel and the wheel base which solomon have make for the house of the lord the brass of all these vessel be without weight . one of the pillar be eighteen cubit high with a crown of brass on it the crown be three cubit high circle with a network and apples all of brass and the second pillar have the same . and the captain of the arm men take seraiah the chief priest and zephaniah the second priest and the three door keeper and from the town he take the unsexed servant who be over the men of war and five of the king 's near friend who be in the town and the scribe of the captain of the army who be responsible for get the people of the land together in military order and sixty men of the people of the land who be in the town . these nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take with him to the king of babylon at riblah . and the king of babylon put them to death at riblah in the land of hamath . so judah be take away prisoner from his land . a for the people who be still live in the land of judah whom nebuchadnezzar king of babylon do not take away he make gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan ruler over them . now the captain of the armed force hear that the king of babylon have make gedaliah ruler come with their men to gedaliah at mizpah ishmael the son of nethaniah and johanan the son of kareah and seraiah the son of tanhumeth the netophathite and jaazaniah the son of the maacathite come with all their men . then gedaliah give his oath to them and their men say have no fear because of the servant of the chaldaean go on living in the land under the rule of the king of babylon and all will be well . but in the seventh month ishmael the son of nethaniah the son of elishama of the king 's seed come with ten men and make an attack on gedaliah cause his death and the death of the jew and the chaldaean who be with him at mizpah . then all the people small and great and the captain of the force get up and go away to egypt for fear of the chaldaean . and in the thirty seventh year after jehoiachin king of judah have be take prisoner in the twelfth month on the twenty seventh day of the month evil merodach king of babylon in the first year of his rule take jehoiachin king of judah out of prison and say kind word to him and put his seat high than the seat of the other king who be with him in babylon . and his prison clothing be change and he be a guest at the king 's table every day for the rest of his life . and for his food the king give him a regular amount every day for the rest of his life .adam seth enosh kenan mahalalel jar enoch methuselah lamech noah shem ham and japheth . the son of japheth gomer and magog and madai and javan and tubal and meshech and tiras . and the son of gomer ashkenaz and diphath and togarmah . and the son of javan elishah and tarshish kittim and rodanim . the son of ham cush and egypt put and canaan . and the son of cush seba and havilah and sabta and raama and sabteca . and the son of raamah sheba and dedan . and cush be the father of nimrod he be the first to be a great man in the earth . and egypt be the father of the ludim and the anamim and the lehabim and the naphtuhim and the pathrusim and the casluhim and the caphtorim from whom come the philistine . and canaan be the father of zidon his old son and heth and the jebusite and the amorite and the girgashite and the hivite and the arkite and the sinite and the arvadite and the zemarite and the hamathite . the son of shem elam and asshur and arpachshad and lud and aram and uz and hul and gether and meshech . and arpachshad be the father of shelah and shelah be the father of eber . and eber have two son the name of the one be peleg because in his day a division be make of the earth and his brother 's name be joktan . and joktan be the father of almodad and sheleph and hazarmaveth and jerah and hadoram and uzal and diklah and ebal and abimael and sheba and ophir and havilah and jobab . all these be the son of joktan . shem arpachshad shelah eber peleg reu serug nahor terah abram that be abraham . the son of abraham isaac and ishmael . these be their generation the old son of ishmael nebaioth then kedar and adbeel and mibsam mishma and dumah massa hadad and tema jetur naphish and kedemah . these be the son of ishmael . and the son of keturah abraham 's servant wife she be the mother of zimran and jokshan and medan and midian and ishbak and shuah . and the son of jokshan sheba and dedan . and the son of midian ephah and epher and hanoch and abida and eldaah . all these be the son of keturah . and abraham be the father of isaac . the son of isaac esau and israel . the son of esau eliphaz reuel and jeush and jalam and korah . the son of eliphaz teman and omar zephi and gatam kenaz and timna and amalek . the son of reuel nahath zerah shammah and mizzah . and the son of seir lotan and shobal and zibeon and anah and dishon and ezer and dishan . and the son of lotan hori and homam and timna be lotan 's sister . the son of shobal alian and manahath and ebal shephi and onam . and the son of zibeon aiah and anah . the son of anah dishon . and the son of dishon hamran and eshban and ithran and cheran . the son of ezer bilhan and zaavan jaakan . the son of dishan uz and aran . now these be the king who be rule in the land of edom before there be any king over israel bela the son of beor his town be name dinhabah . at his death jobab the son of zerah of bozrah become king in his place . at the death of jobab husham from the land of the temanites become king in his place . and at the death of husham hadad the son of bedad who overcome midian in the field of moab become king his town be name avith . and at the death of hadad samlah of masrekah become king in his place . and at the death of samlah shaul of rehoboth by the river become king in his place and at the death of shaul baal hanan the son of achbor become king in his place . and at the death of baal hanan hadad become king in his place his town be name pai and his wife 's name be mehetabel the daughter of matred the daughter of me zahab . and hadad come to his end . now the chief of edom be the chief of timna the chief of aliah the chief of jetheth the chief of oholibamah the chief of elah the chief of pinon the chief of kenaz the chief of teman the chief of mibzar the chief of magdiel the chief of iram . these be the chief of edom .these be the son of israel reuben simeon levi and judah issachar and zebulun dan joseph and benjamin naphtali gad and asher . the son of judah er and onan and shelah these three be his son by bathshua the canaanite woman . and er judah 's old son do evil in the eye of the lord and he put him to death . and tamar his daughter in law have perez and zerah by him . all the son of judah be five . the son of perez hezron and hamul . and the son of zerah zimri and ethan and heman and calcol and dara five of them . and the son of carmi achan the troubler of israel who do wrong about the cursed thing . and the son of ethan azariah . and the son of hezron the offspring of his body jerahmeel and ram and chelubai . and ram be the father of amminadab and amminadab be the father of nahshon chief of the child of judah and nahshon be the father of salma and salma be the father of boaz and boaz be the father of obed and obed be the father of jesse and jesse be the father of eliab his old son and abinadab the second and shimea the third nethanel the fourth raddai the fifth ozem the sixth david the seventh and their sister be zeruiah and abigail . and zeruiah have three son abishai and joab and asahel . and abigail be the mother of amasa and the father of amasa be jether the ishmaelite . and caleb the son of hezron have child by azubah his wife the daughter of jerioth and these be her son jesher and shobab and ardon . and after the death of azubah caleb take a his wife ephrath who be the mother of hur . and hur be the father of uri and uri be the father of bezalel . and after that hezron have connection with the daughter of machir the father of gilead whom he take a his wife when he be sixty year old and she have segub by him . and segub be the father of jair who have twenty three town in the land of gilead . and geshur and aram take the tent town of jair from them with kenath and the small place round it even sixty town . all these be the son of machir the father of gilead . and after the death of hezron caleb have connection with ephrath his father hezron 's wife and she give birth to his son asshur the father of tekoa . and the son of jerahmeel the old son of hezron be ram the old and bunah and oren and ozem and ahijah . and jerahmeel have another wife whose name be atarah she be the mother of onam . and the son of ram the old son of jerahmeel be maaz and jamin and eker . and the son of onam be shammai and jada and the son of shammai nadab and abishur . and the name of abishur 's wife be abihail and she have ahban and molid by him . and the son of nadab seled and appaim but seled come to his end without son . and the son of appaim ishi . and the son of ishi sheshan . and the son of sheshan ahlai . and the son of jada the brother of shammai jether and jonathan and jether come to his end without son . and the son of jonathan peleth and zaza . these be the son of jerahmeel . now sheshan have no son but only daughter . and sheshan have an egyptian servant whose name be jarha . and sheshan give his daughter to jarha his servant a a wife and she have attai by him . and attai be the father of nathan and nathan be the father of zabad and zabad be the father of ephlal and ephlal be the father of obed and obed be the father of jehu and jehu be the father of azariah and azariah be the father of helez and helez be the father of eleasah and eleasah be the father of sismai and sismai be the father of shallum and shallum be the father of jekamiah and jekamiah be the father of elishama . and the son of caleb the brother of jerahmeel be mareshah his old son who be the father of ziph and hebron . and the son of hebron korah and tappuah and rekem and shema . and shema be the father of raham the father of jorkeam and rekem be the father of shammai . and the son of shammai be maon and maon be the father of beth zur . and ephah caleb 's servant wife have haran and moza and gazez and haran be the father of gazez . and the son of jahdai regem and jotham and geshan and pelet and ephah and shaaph . maacah caleb 's servant wife be the mother of sheber and tirhanah and shaaph the father of madmannah sheva the father of machbena and the father of gibea and caleb 's daughter be achsah . these be the son of caleb . the son of hur the old son of ephrathah shobal the father of kiriath jearim salma the father of beth lehem hareph the father of beth gader . and shobal the father of kiriath jearim have son haroeh half of the manahathites . and the family of kiriath jearim the ithrites and the puthites and the shumathites and the mishraites from them come the zorathites and the eshtaolites . the son of salma beth lehem and the netophathites atroth beth joab and half of the manahathites the zorites . and the family of scribe who be live at jabez the tirathites the shimeathites the sucathites . these be the kenites the offspring of hammath the father of the family of rechab .now these be david 's son whose birth take place in hebron the old amnon by ahinoam of jezreel the second daniel by abigail the carmelite woman the third absalom the son of maacah the daughter of talmai king of geshur the fourth adonijah the son of haggith the fifth shephatiah by abital the sixth ithream by eglah his wife . he have six son in hebron he be rule there for seven year and six month and in jerusalem for thirty three year . and in jerusalem he have four son shimea and shobab and nathan and solomon by bath shua the daughter of ammiel and ibhar and elishama and eliphelet and nogah and nepheg and japhia and elishama and eliada and eliphelet nine . all these be the son of david in addition to the son of his servant wife and tamar be their sister . and solomon 's son be rehoboam abijah be his son asa his son jehoshaphat his son joram his son ahaziah his son joash his son amaziah his son azariah his son jotham his son ahaz his son hezekiah his son manasseh his son amon his son josiah his son . and the son of josiah the old johanan the second jehoiakim the third zedekiah the fourth shallum . and the son of jehoiakim jeconiah his son zedekiah his son . and the son of jeconiah who be take prisoner shealtiel his son and malchiram and pedaiah and shenazzar jekamiah hoshama and nedabiah . and the son of pedaiah zerubbabel and shimei and the son of zerubbabel meshullam and hananiah and shelomith be their sister and hashubah and ohel and berechiah and hasadiah jushab hesed five . and the son of hananiah pelatiah and jeshaiah the son of rephaiah the son of arnan the son of obadiah the son of shecaniah . and the son of shecaniah shemaiah and the son of shemaiah hattush and igal and bariah and neariah and shaphat six . and the son of neariah elioenai and hizkiah and azrikam three . and the son of elioenai hodaviah and eliashib and pelaiah and akkub and johanan and delaiah and anani seven .the son of judah perez hezron and carmi and hur and shobal . and reaiah the son of shobal be the father of jahath and jahath be the father of ahumai and lahad . these be the family of the zorathites . and these be the son of hur the father of etam jezreel and ishma and idbash and the name of their sister be hazzelelponi and penuel the father of gedor and ezer the father of hushah . these be the son of hur the old son of ephrathah the father of beth lehem . and ashhur the father of tekoa have two wife helah and naarah . and naarah have ahuzzam by him and hepher and temeni and haahashtari . these be the son of naarah . and the son of helah be zereth izhar and ethnan . and koz be the father of anub and zobebah and the family of aharhel the son of harum . and jabez be honour more than his brother but his mother have give him the name jabez say because i give birth to him with sorrow . and jabez make a prayer to the god of israel say if only you would truly give me a blessing and make wide the limit of my land and let your hand be with me and keep me from evil so that i may not be trouble by it ! and god give him his desire . and chelub the brother of shuhah be the father of mehir who be the father of eshton . and eshton be the father of bethrapha and paseah and tehinnah the father of ir nahash . these be the men of recah . and the son of kenaz othniel and seraiah and the son of othniel hathath . and meonothai be the father of ophrah and seraiah be the father of joab the father of ge harashim they be expert workman . and the son of caleb the son of jephunneh iru elah and naam and the son of elah kenaz . and the son of jehallelel ziph and ziphah tiria and asarel . and the son of ezrah jether and mered and epher and jalon and these be the son of bithiah the daughter of pharaoh the wife of mered . and she become the mother of miriam and shammai and ishbah the father of eshtemoa . and his wife a woman of the tribe of judah become the mother of jered the father of gedor and heber the father of soco and jekuthiel the father of zanoah . and the son of the wife of hodiah the sister of naham be the father of keilah the garmite and eshtemoa the maacathite . and the son of shimon amnon and rinnah ben hanan and tilon . and the son of ishi zoheth and the son of zoheth . ... the son of shelah the son of judah er the father of lecah and laadah the father of mareshah and the family of those who make delicate linen of the family of ashbea and jokim and the men of cozeba and joash and saraph who be ruler in moab and go back to beth lehem . and the record be very old . these be the potter and the people live among planted field with wall round them they be there to do the king 's work . the son of simeon nemuel and jamin jarib zerah shaul shallum his son mibsam his son mishma his son . and the son of mishma hammuel his son zaccur his son shimei his son . and shimei have sixteen son and six daughter but his brother have only a small number of child and their family be not as fertile a the child of judah . and they be live at beer sheba and moladah and hazar shual and at bilhah and at ezem and at tolad and at bethuel and at hormah and at ziklag and at beth marcaboth and at hazarsusim and at beth biri and at shaaraim . these be their town till david become king . and their small town be etam ain rimmon and tochen and ashan five town and all the small place round these town as far a baalath beer the high place of the south . these be their living place and they have list of their generation . and meshobab and jamlech and joshah the son of amaziah and joel and jehu the son of joshibiah the son of seraiah the son of asiel and elioenai and jaakobah and jeshohaiah and asaiah and adiel and jesimiel and benaiah and ziza the son of shiphi the son of allon the son of jedaiah the son of shimri the son of shemaiah these whose name be give be chief in their family and their family become very great in number . and they go to the opening into gedor as far a the east side of the valley in search of grass land for their flock . and they come to some good fertile grass land in a wide quiet country of peace love people for the people who be live there before be of the offspring of ham . and these whose name be give come in the day of hezekiah king of judah and make an attack on the meunim who be live there and put an end to them to this day and take their place because there be grass there for their flock . and some of them five hundred of the son of simeon go to the hill country of seir with pelatiah and neariah and rephaiah and uzziel the son of ishi at their head . and they put to death the rest of the amalekites who have get away safely and make it their living place to this day .and the son of reuben the old son of israel for he be the old son but because he make his father 's bride bed unclean his birthright be give to the son of joseph the son of israel but he be not to be give the place of the old . though judah become strong than his brother and from him come the ruler the birthright be joseph 's the son of reuben the old son of israel hanoch and pallu hezron and carmi . the son of joel shemaiah his son gog his son shimei his son micah his son reaiah his son baal his son beerah his son whom tiglath pileser king of assyria take away a a prisoner he be chief of the reubenites . and his brother by their family when the list of their generation be make up the chief jeiel and zechariah and bela the son of azaz the son of shema the son of joel who be live in aroer as far a nebo and baal meon and to the east his limit go as far a the start point of the waste land end at the river euphrates because their cattle be increase in number in the land of gilead . and in the day of saul they make war on the hagarites and overcome them and they put up their tent through all the land east of gilead . and the son of gad be live opposite to them in the land of bashan as far a salecah joel the chief and shapham the second and janai and shaphat in bashan and their brother the men of their family michael and meshullam and sheba and jorai and jacan and zia and eber seven of them . these be the son of abihail the son of huri the son of jaroah the son of gilead the son of michael the son of jeshishai the son of jahdo the son of buz ahi the son of abdiel the son of guni head of their family . and they be live in gilead in bashan in it small town and in all the grass land of sirion as far a it limit . all these be list under the name of their family in the time of jotham king of judah and in the time of jeroboam king of israel . there be forty four thousand seven hundred and sixty of the son of reuben and of the gadites and of the half tribe of manasseh all strong men expert in the use of the body cover the sword and the bow and in the art of war all able to take up arm . and they go to war against the hagarites with jetur and naphish and nodab . and they be help against them so that the hagarites and those with them be give into their power . for they send up prayer to god in the fight and he give ear to them because they put their faith in him . and they take away their cattle fifty thousand camel two hundred and fifty thousand sheep and two thousand ass and a hundred thousand men . and a very great number go to their death because the war be god 's purpose . and they go on living in their place till they be take away a prisoner . and the men of the half tribe of manasseh be live in the land and their number be increase till all the land from bashan to baal hermon and senir and the mountain hermon be theirs . and these be the head of their family epher and ishi and eliel and azriel and jeremiah and hodaviah and jahdiel men of war of great name head of family . and they do evil against the god of their father worship the god of the people of the land whom god have put to destruction before them . and the god of israel put an impulse into the heart of pul king of assyria and of tiglath pileser king of assyria who take them away a prisoner all the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh to halah and habor and hara and to the river of gozan to this day .the son of levi gershon kohath and merari . and the son of kohath amram izhar hebron and uzziel . and the son of amram aaron and moses and miriam . and the son of aaron nadab and abihu eleazar and ithamar . eleazar be the father of phinehas phinehas be the father of abishua and abishua be the father of bukki and bukki be the father of uzzi and uzzi be the father of zerahiah and zerahiah be the father of meraioth meraioth be the father of amariah and amariah be the father of ahitub and ahitub be the father of zadok and zadok be the father of ahimaaz and ahimaaz be the father of azariah and azariah be the father of johanan and johanan be the father of azariah he be priest in the house which solomon put up in jerusalem and azariah be the father of amariah and amariah be the father of ahitub and ahitub be the father of zadok and zadok be the father of shallum and shallum be the father of hilkiah and hilkiah be the father of azariah and azariah be the father of seraiah and seraiah be the father of jehozadak and jehozadak go a a prisoner when the lord take away judah and jerusalem by the hand of nebuchadnezzar . the son of levi gershom kohath and merari . and these be the name of the son of gershom libni and shimei . and the son of kohath be amram izhar hebron and uzziel . the son of merari mahli and mushi . and these be the family of the levite list by the name of their father . of gershom libni his son jahath his son zimmah his son joah his son iddo his son zerah his son jeatherai his son . the son of kohath amminadab his son korah his son assir his son elkanah his son and ebiasaph his son and assir his son tahath his son uriel his son uzziah his son and shaul his son . and the son of elkanah amasai and ahimoth . elkanah his son zophai his son and nahath his son eliab his son jeroham his son elkanah his son samuel his son . and the son of samuel the old joel and the second abiah . the son of merari mahli libni his son shimei his son uzzah his son shimea his son haggiah his son asaiah his son . and these be those whom david make responsible for the music in the house of the lord after the ark have rest . they give worship with song before the house of the tent of meeting till solomon put up the house of the lord in jerusalem and they take their place for their work in their regular order . and these be those who do this work and their son . of the son of the kohathites heman who make melody the son of joel the son of samuel the son of elkanah the son of jeroham the son of eliel the son of toah the son of zuph the son of elkanah the son of mahath the son of amasai the son of elkanah the son of joel the son of azariah the son of zephaniah the son of tahath the son of assir the son of ebiasaph the son of korah the son of izhar the son of kohath the son of levi the son of israel . and his brother asaph whose place be at his right hand asaph the son of berechiah the son of shimea the son of michael the son of baaseiah the son of malchijah the son of ethni the son of zerah the son of adaiah the son of ethan the son of zimmah the son of shimei the son of jahath the son of gershom the son of levi . and on the leave their brother the son of merari ethan the son of kishi the son of abdi the son of malluch the son of hashabiah the son of amaziah the son of hilkiah the son of amzi the son of ban the son of shemer the son of mahli the son of mushi the son of merari the son of levi . and their brother the levite be responsible for all the work of the tent of the house of god . but aaron and his son make offering on the altar of burned offering and on the altar of perfume for all the work of the most holy place and to take away the sin of israel do everything order by moses the servant of god . and these be the son of aaron eleazar his son phinehas his son abishua his son bukki his son uzzi his son zerahiah his son meraioth his son amariah his son ahitub his son zadok his son ahimaaz his son . now these be their living place the limit inside which they be to put up their tent to the son of aaron of the family of the kohathites because they have the first selection to them they give hebron and it outskirt in the land of judah but the open country of the town and the small place round it they give to caleb the son of jephunneh . and to the son of aaron they give hebron the town to which men might go in flight and be safe and libnah with it outskirt and jattir and eshtemoa with it outskirt and hilen with it outskirt debir with it outskirt and ashan with it outskirt and beth shemesh with it outskirt and from the tribe of benjamin geba with it outskirt and alemeth with it outskirt and anathoth with it outskirt . all their town among their family be thirteen town . and to the rest of the son of kohath there be give by the lord 's decision ten towns out of the family of the tribe of ephraim and out of the tribe of dan and out of the half tribe of manasseh . and to the son of gershom by their family out of the tribe of issachar and out of the tribe of asher and out of the tribe of naphtali and out of the tribe of manasseh in bashan thirteen town . and to the son of merari by their family twelve town be give by the lord 's decision out of the tribe of reuben and out of the tribe of gad and out of the tribe of zebulun . and the child of israel give to the levite the town with their outskirt . and they give by the lord 's decision out of the tribe of the child of judah and out of the tribe of the child of simeon and out of the tribe of the child of benjamin these town whose name be give . and to the family of the son of kohath be give town by the lord 's decision out of the tribe of ephraim . and they give them the town to which men might go in flight and be safe shechem in the hill country of ephraim with it outskirt and gezer with it outskirt and jokmeam with it outskirt and beth horon with it outskirt and aijalon with it outskirt and gath rimmon with it outskirt and out of the half tribe of manasseh aner with it outskirt and bileam with it outskirt for the rest of the family of the son of kohath . to the son of gershom be give out of the family of the half tribe of manasseh golan in bashan with it outskirt and ashtaroth with it outskirt and out of the tribe of issachar kedesh with it outskirt and daberath with it outskirt and ramoth with it outskirt and anem with it outskirt and out of the tribe of asher mashal with it outskirt and abdon with it outskirt and hukok with it outskirt and rehob with it outskirt and out of the tribe of naphtali kedesh in galilee with it outskirt and hammon with it outskirt and kiriathaim with it outskirt . to the rest of the levite the son of merari be give out of the tribe of zebulun rimmono with it outskirt tabor with it outskirt and on the other side of jordan at jericho on the east side of jordan be give them out of the tribe of reuben bezer in the waste land with it outskirt and jahzah with it outskirt and kedemoth with it outskirt and mephaath with it outskirt and out of the tribe of gad ramoth in gilead with it outskirt and mahanaim with it outskirt and heshbon with it outskirt and jazer with it outskirt .and of the son of issachar tola and puah jashub and shimron four . and the son of tola uzzi and rephaiah and jeriel and jahmai and ibsam and shemuel head of their family they be men of war in the record of their generation their number in the time of david be twenty two thousand six hundred . and the son of uzzi izrahiah and the son of izrahiah michael and obadiah and joel and isshiah five all of them chief . and with them record in generation by their family be band of fight men thirty six thousand of them for they have a great number of wife and son . and there be record among all the family of issachar great men of war eighty seven thousand . the son of benjamin bela and becher and jediael three . and the son of bela ezbon and uzzi and uzziel and jerimoth and iri five head of their family great men of war there be twenty two thousand and thirty four of them record by their family . and the son of becher zemirah and joash and eliezer and elioenai and omri and jerimoth and abijah and anathoth and alemeth . all these be the son of becher . and they be record by their generation head of their family great men of war twenty thousand two hundred . and the son of jediael bilhan and the son of bilhan jeush and benjamin and ehud and chenaanah and zethan and tarshish and ahishahar . all these be the son of jediael by the head of their family seventeen thousand two hundred men of war able to go out with the army for war . and shuppim and huppim . the son of dan hushim his son one . the son of naphtali jahziel and guni and jezer and shallum the son of bilhah . the son of manasseh by his servant wife the aramaean woman she give birth to machir the father of gilead and gilead take a wife whose name be maacah and his sister 's name be hammoleketh and the name of his brother be zelophehad who be the father of daughter . and maacah the wife of gilead give birth to a son to whom she give the name peresh and his brother be name sheresh and his son be ulam and rakem . and the son of ulam bedan . these be the son of gilead the son of machir the son of manasseh . and his sister hammoleketh be the mother of ishhod and abiezer and mahlah . and the son of shemida be ahian and shechem and likhi and aniam . and the son of ephraim shuthelah and bered his son and tahath his son and eleadah his son and tahath his son and zabad his son and shuthelah his son and ezer and elead whom the men of gath who have be live in the land from their birth put to death because they come down to take away their cattle . and for a long time ephraim their father go on weep for them and his brother come to give him comfort . after that he have connection with his wife and she become with child and give birth to a son to whom his father give the name of beriah because trouble have come on his family . and his daughter be sheerah the builder of beth horon the low and the high and uzzen sheerah . and rephah be his son and resheph his son be telah and his son be tahan ladan be his son ammihud his son elishama his son nun his son joshua his son . their heritage and their living place be beth el and it daughter town and naaran to the east and gezer to the west with it daughter town as well a shechem and it daughter town as far a azzah and it daughter town and by the limit of the child of manasseh beth shean and it daughter town taanach megiddo and dor with their daughter town . in these the child of joseph the son of israel be live . the son of asher imnah and ishvah and ishvi and beriah and serah their sister . and the son of beriah heber and malchiel who be the father of birzaith . and heber be the father of japhlet and shomer and hotham and shua their sister . and the son of japhlet pasach and bimhal and ashvath . these be the son of japhlet . and the son of shomer ahi and rohgah jehubbah and aram . and the son of hotham his brother zophah and imna and shelesh and amal . the son of zophah suah and harnepher and shual and beri and imrah bezer and hod and shamma and shilshah and ithran and beera . and the son of jether jephunneh and pispah and ara . and the son of ulla arah and hanniel and rizia . all these be the child of asher head of their family specially strong men of war chief of the ruler . they be record in the army for war twenty six thousand men in number .and benjamin be the father of bela his old son ashbel the second and aharah the third nohah the fourth and rapha the fifth . and bela have son addar and gera the father of ehud and abishua and naaman and ahoah and gera and shephuphan and huram . and these be the son of ehud head of family of those live in geba iglaam and alemeth and naaman and ahijah and gera and iglaam be the father of uzza and ahihud . and shaharaim become the father of child in the country of the moabites after drive out hushim and beerah his wife and by hodesh his wife he become the father of jobab and zibia and mesha and malcam . and jeuz and shachia and mirmah . these be his son head of family . and hushim become the father of abitub and elpaal . and the son of elpaal eber and misham and shemed he be the builder of ono and lod and their daughter town and beriah and shema who be head of the family of those who be live in aijalon who put to flight the people live in gath and their brother shashak and jeremoth . and zebadiah and arad and eder and michael and ishpah and joha the son of beriah and zebadiah and meshullam and hizki and heber and ishmerai and izliah and jobab the son of elpaal and jakim and zichri and zabdi and elienai and zillethai and eliel and adaiah and beraiah and shimrath the son of shimei and ishpan and eber and eliel and abdon and zichri and hanan and hananiah and elam and anathothijah and iphdeiah and penuel the son of shashak and shamsherai and shehariah and athaliah and jaareshiah and elijah and zichri the son of jeremoth . these be head of family in their generation chief men these be live in jerusalem . and in gibeon be live the father of gibeon jeiel whose wife 's name be maacah and his old son abdon and zur and kish and baal and ner and nadab and gedor and ahio and zechariah and mikloth . and mikloth be the father of shimeah . and they be live with their brother in jerusalem opposite their brother . and ner be the father of abner and kish be the father of saul and saul be the father of jonathan and malchi shua and abinadab and eshbaal . and the son of jonathan be merib baal and merib baal be the father of micah . and the son of micah pithon and melech and tarea and ahaz . and ahaz be the father of jehoaddah and jehoaddah be the father of alemeth and azmaveth and zimri and zimri be the father of moza and moza be the father of binea raphah be his son eleasah his son azel his son and azel have five son whose name be azrikam his old and ishmael and sheariah and obadiah and hanan . all these be the son of azel . and the son of eshek his brother ulam his old son jeush the second and eliphelet the third . and the son of ulam be men of war bowman and have a great number of son and son ' son a hundred and fifty . all these be the son of benjamin .so all israel be list by their family and truly they be record in the book of the king of israel . and judah be take away a prisoner to babylon because of their sin . now the first to take up their heritage in their town be israel the priest the levite and the nethinim . and in jerusalem there be live some of the son of judah and of benjamin and of ephraim and manasseh uthai the son of ammihud the son of omri the son of imri the son of ban of the son of perez the son of judah . and of the shilonites asaiah the old and his son . and of the son of zerah jeuel and their brother six hundred and ninety . and of the son of benjamin sallu the son of meshullam judah the son of hassenuah and ibneiah the son of jeroham and elah the son of uzzi the son of michri and meshullam the son of shephatiah the son of reuel the son of ibnijah and their brother in the list of their generation nine hundred and fifty six . all these men be head of family list by the name of their father . and of the priest jedaiah and jehoiarib and jachin and azariah the son of hilkiah the son of meshullam the son of zadok the son of meraioth the son of ahitub the ruler of the house of god and adaiah the son of jeroham the son of pashhur the son of malchijah and maasai the son of adiel the son of jahzerah the son of meshullam the son of meshillemith the son of immer and their brother head of their family a thousand and seven hundred and sixty able men do the work of the house of god . and of the levite shemaiah the son of hasshub the son of azrikam the son of hashabiah of the son of merari and bakbakkar heresh and galal and mattaniah the son of mica the son of zichri the son of asaph and obadiah the son of shemaiah the son of galal the son of jeduthun and berechiah the son of asa the son of elkanah who be live in the small town of the netophathites . and the door keeper shallum and akkub and talmon and ahiman and their brother shallum be the chief . up till then they have be at the king 's door to the east . they be door keeper for the tent of the son of levi . and shallum the son of kore the son of ebiasaph the son of korah and his brother of his family the korahites be responsible for everything which have to be do in connection with the order of worship keeper of the door of the tent their father have have the care of the tent of the lord be keeper of the doorway . in the past phinehas the son of eleazar have be ruler over them may the lord be with him ! zechariah the son of meshelemiah be keeper of the door of the tent of meeting . there be two hundred and twelve whose business it be to keep the doorway . these be list by family in the country place where they be live whom david and samuel the seer put in their responsible position . so they and their son have the care of the door of the house of the lord the house of the tent a watcher . there be keeper of the door on the four side to the east west north and south . and their brother in the country place where they be live be to come in every seven day to be with them from time to time . for the four chief door keeper who be levite have a special position look after the room and the store house of the house of god . their sleeping room be round the house of god for they have the care of it and be responsible for open it morning by morning . certain of them have the care of the vessel use in worship to keep an account of them when they come in and when they be take out again . and some of them be responsible for the holy thing and for the vessel of the holy place and the meal and the wine and the oil and the perfume and the spice . and some of the son of the priest be responsible for crush the spice . and mattithiah one of the levite the old son of shallum the korahite be responsible for cook the flat cake . and some of their brother son of the kohathites be responsible for the holy bread which be put in order before the lord to get it ready every sabbath . and these be those who have the ordering of the music and song head of family of the levite who be live in the room and be free from other work for their work go on day and night . these be head of family of the levite in their generation chief men they be live at jerusalem . and in gibeon be live the father of gibeon jeiel whose wife 's name be maacah and abdon his old son and zur and kish and baal and ner and nadab and gedor and ahio and zechariah and mikloth mikloth be the father of shimeam . they be live with their brother in jerusalem opposite their brother . and ner be the father of kish and kish be the father of saul and saul be the father of jonathan and malchi shua and abinadab and eshbaal . and the son of jonathan be merib baal and merib baal be the father of micah . and the son of micah pithon and melech and tahrea and ahaz . and ahaz be the father of jarah and jarah be the father of alemeth and azmaveth and zimri and zimri be the father of moza . and moza be the father of binea and rephaiah be his son eleasah his son azel his son . and azel have five son whose name be azrikam his old son and ishmael and sheariah and obadiah and hanan these be the son of azel .now the philistine be fight against israel and the men of israel go in flight before the philistine fall down wound in mount gilboa . and the philistine go hard after saul and his son and put to death jonathan and abinadab and malchi shua the son of saul . and the fight be go against saul and the archer come across him and he be wound by the archer . then saul say to the servant who have the care of his arm take your sword and put it through me before these men without circumcision come and make sport of me . but his servant full of fear would not do so . then saul take out his sword fall on it himself . and when his servant saw that saul be dead he do the same and come to his death . so death overtook saul and his three son all his family come to an end together . and when all the men of israel who be in the valley saw that the men of israel have go in flight and that saul and his son be dead they go in flight away from their town and the philistine come and take them for themselves . now the day after when the philistine come to take their good from the dead they saw saul and his son dead in mount gilboa . and they take everything off him and take his head and his war dress and send word into the land of the philistine round about to give the news to their god and to the people . and they put his war dress in the house of their god and put up his head in the house of dagon . and when the news come to jabesh gilead of what the philistine have do to saul all the fight men come up and take away saul 's body and the body of his son and take them to jabesh and put their bone to rest under the oak tree in jabesh and take no food for seven day . so death come to saul because of the sin which he do against the lord that be because of the word of the lord which he keep not and because he go for direction to one who have an evil spirit and not to the lord for this reason he put him to death and give the kingdom to david the son of jesse .then all israel come together to david at hebron and say truly we be your bone and your flesh . in the past when saul be king it be you who go at the head of israel when they go out or come in and the lord your god say to you you be to be the keeper of my people israel and their ruler . so all the responsible men of israel come to the king at hebron and david make an agreement with them in hebron before the lord and they put the holy oil on david and make him king over israel a the lord have say by samuel . then david and all israel go to jerusalem which be jebus and the jebusites the people of the land be there . and the people of jebus say to david you will not come in here . but still david take the strong place of zion which be the town of david . and david say the first to overcome the jebusites will be chief and captain . and joab the son of zeruiah go up first and become chief . and david take the strong tower for his living place so it be name the town of david . and he take in hand the building of the town all round start from the millo and joab put the rest of the town in order . and david become great and great in power because the lord of army be with him . now these be the chief of david 's men of war who be his strong supporter in the kingdom and with all israel make him king a the lord have say about israel . this be the list of david 's men of war ishbaal the son of a hachmonite the chief of the three he put to death three hundred at one time with his spear . and after him be eleazar the son of dodo the ahohite who be one of the three great fighter . he be with david at pa dammim where the philistine have come together for the fight near a bit of land full of barley and the people go in flight before the philistine . and he take up his position in the middle of the bit of land and keep back their attack and overcome the philistine and the lord give a great salvation . and three of the thirty go down to david to the rock into the strong place of adullam and the army of the philistine have take up their position in the valley of rephaim . at that time david have take cover in the strong place and an armed force of the philistine be in beth lehem . and david move by a strong desire say if only someone would give me a drink of the water from the water hole of beth lehem by the doorway into the town ! so the three force a way through the philistine army get water from the water hole of beth lehem by the doorway into the town and take it back to david but david would not take it but make an offering of it drain it out to the lord say by my god far be it from me to do this ! how may i take a drink the life blood of these men who have put their life in danger ? so he do not take it . these thing do the three great men of war . and abishai the brother of joab be chief of the thirty for he put to death three hundred with his spear but he have not a name among the three . of the thirty he be the noble and be make their captain but he be not equal to the first three . benaiah the son of jehoiada a fight man of kabzeel have do great act he put to death two young lion go into their secret place and he go down into a hole and put a lion to death in time of snow . and he make an attack on an egyptian a very tall man about five cubit high arm with a spear like a cloth worker 's rod he go down to him with a stick and pull his spear out of the hand of the egyptian put him to death with that same spear . these be the act of benaiah the son of jehoiada who have a great name among the thirty men of war . he be honour over the thirty but he be not equal to the first three and david put him over his servant . and these be the great men of war asahel the brother of joab elhanan the son of dodo of beth lehem shammoth the harodite helez the pelonite ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite abiezer the anathothite sibbecai the hushathite ilai the ahohite maharai the netophathite heled the son of baanah the netophathite ithai the son of ribai of gibeah of the child of benjamin benaiah the pirathonite hurai of nahale gaash abiel the arbathite azmaveth of bahurim eliahba the shaalbonite the son of hashem the gizonite jonathan the son of shage the hararite ahiam the son of sacar the hararite eliphal the son of ur hepher the mecherathite ahijah the pelonite hezro the carmelite naarai the son of ezbai joel the brother of nathan mibhar the son of hagri zelek the ammonite and naharai the berothite the servant who have the care of the arm of joab the son of zeruiah ira the ithrite gareb the ithrite uriah the hittite zabad the son of ahlai adina the son of shiza the reubenite a chief of the reubenites and thirty with him hanan the son of maacah and joshaphat the mithnite uzzia the ashterathite shama and jeiel the son of hotham the aroerite jediael the son of shimri and joha his brother the tizite eliel the mahavite and jeribai and joshaviah the son of elnaam and ithmah the moabite eliel and obed and jaasiel the mezobaite .now these be the men who come to david at ziklag while he be still shut up because of saul the son of kish they be among the strong men his helper in war . they be arm with bow and be able to send stone and arrow from the bow with right hand or left they be saul 's brother of benjamin . ahiezer be their chief then joash the son of shemaah the gibeathite and jeziel and pelet the son of azmaveth and beracah and jehu the anathothite and ishmaiah the gibeonite a great man among the thirty and their chief and jeremiah and jehaziel and johanan and jozabad the gederathite eluzai and jerimoth and bealiah and shemariah and shephatiah the haruphite elkanah and isshiah and azarel and joezer and jashobeam the korahites and joelah and zebadiah the son of jeroham of gedor . and some of the gadites side with david go to his strong place in the waste land great and strong men train for war expert in the use of arm whose face be like the face of lion and they be quick foot like roe on the mountain ezer their chief obadiah the second eliab the third mishmannah the fourth jeremiah the fifth attai the sixth eliel the seventh johanan the eighth elzabad the ninth jeremiah the tenth machbannai the eleventh . these gadites be captain of the army the least of them be captain over a hundred men and the great over a thousand . it be they who go over jordan in the first month when the river be overflow and put to flight all the people of the valley to the east and to the west . and some of the child of benjamin and judah come to david in his strong place . and david go out to them and say to them if you have come in peace to give me help my heart will be unite with yours but if you have come to give me up to those who would take my life though my hand be clean from wrongdoing then may the god of our father see it and give you punishment . then the spirit come on amasai who be chief of the captain and he say we be yours david we be on your side o son of jesse may peace be with you and peace be with your helper for god be your helper . then david take them into his army and make them captain of the band . and some of the men of manasseh come over to david when he go with the philistine to the war against saul but he give them no help for the lord of the philistine after discussion send him away say he will go back to his master saul at the price of our life . then when he go back to ziklag there come over to him of the men of manasseh adnah and jozabad and jediael and michael and jozabad and elihu and zillethai captain of thousand from the army of manasseh . and they give david help against the armed band for they be all great men of war and captain in the army . and from day to day more supporter come to david till he have a great army like the army of god . these be the number of the chief of the arm men ready for war who come to david at hebron to give the kingdom of saul into his hand a the lord have say . there be six thousand eight hundred spearmen of the child of judah arm for war seven thousand one hundred of the child of simeon great men of war of the child of levi four thousand six hundred . and jehoiada chief of the family of aaron and with him three thousand seven hundred men and zadok a young man great and strong in war with twenty two captain from his father 's people . and of the child of benjamin the brother of saul three thousand for up to that time the great part of them have be true to saul . and of the child of ephraim twenty thousand eight hundred great men of war men of great name in their family . and from the half tribe of manasseh eighteen thousand list by name come to make david king . and of the child of issachar there be two hundred chief men who have expert knowledge of the time and what it be best for israel to do and all their brother be under their order . of zebulun there be fifty thousand men who go out with the army expert in order the fight to give help with all sort of arm true hearted men . and of naphtali a thousand captain with thirty seven thousand spearmen . and of the danites twenty eight thousand six hundred expert in order the fight . and of asher forty thousand who go out with the army expert in order the fight . from the other side of jordan there be a hundred and twenty thousand of the reubenites and the gadites and the men of the half tribe of manasseh arm with every sort of instrument of war . all these men of war expert in order the fight come to hebron with the full purpose of make david king over all israel and all the rest of israel be unite in their desire to make david king . for three day they be there with david feasting at his table for their brother have make ready food for them . and those who be near as far a issachar and zebulun and naphtali come with food on ass and camel and mule and ox with meal for food and cake of fig and mass of grape and wine and oil and ox and sheep in great number for there be joy in israel .then david have discussion with the captain of thousand and the captain of hundred and with every chief . and david say to all the men of israel who have come together there if it seem good to you and if it be the purpose of the lord our god let u send to all the rest of our brother everywhere in the land of israel and to the priest and the levite in their town and the country round them and get them to come together here to u and let u get back for ourselves the ark of our god for in the day of saul we do not go to it for direction . and all the people say they would do so for it seem right to them . so david sent for all israel to come together from shihor the river of egypt as far a the way into hamath to get the ark of god from kiriath jearim . and david go up with all israel to baalah that be to kiriath jearim in judah to get up from there the ark of god over which the holy name be name the name of the lord whose place be between the winged one . and they put the ark of god on a new cart and take it out of the house of abinadab and uzza and ahio be the driver of the cart . then david and all israel make melody before god with all their strength with song and cord instrument of music and with brass instrument and horn . and when they come to the grain floor of chidon uzza put out his hand to keep the ark in it place for the ox be slip . and the wrath of the lord burning against uzza sent destruction on him because he have put his hand on the ark and death come to him there before god . and david be angry because of the lord 's outburst of wrath against uzza and he give that place the name perez uzza to this day . and so great be david 's fear of god that day that he say how may i let the ark of god come to me ? so david do not let the ark come back to him to the town of david but have it turn away and put into the house of obed edom the gittite . and the ark of god be in the house of obed edom for three month and the lord send a blessing on the house of obed edom and on all he have .and hiram king of tyre send men to david with cedar tree and stoneworkers and woodworker for the building of his house . and david saw that the lord have make his position safe a king over israel lift up his kingdom on high because of his people israel . and while he be live in jerusalem david take more wife and become the father of more son and daughter . these be the name of the child he have in jerusalem shammua and shobab nathan and solomon and ibhar and elishua and elpelet and nogah and nepheg and japhia and elishama and beeliada and eliphelet . and when the philistine have news that david have be make king over all israel they go up in search of david and david hearing of it go out against them . now the philistine have come and have go out in every direction in the valley of rephaim . and david desire direction from god say be i to go up against the philistine ? and will you give them into my hand ? and the lord say go up for i will give them into your hand . so they go up to baal perazim and david overcome them there and david say god have let the force fight against me be break by my hand a a wall be break down by rush water so they give that place the name of baal perazim . and the philistine do not take their image with them in their flight and at david 's order they be burn with fire . then the philistine again go out in every direction in the valley . and david go for direction to god and god say to him you be not to go up after them but turn away from them come face to face with them opposite the spice tree . and at the sound of footstep in the top of the tree go out to the fight for god have go out before you to overcome the army of the philistine . and david do a the lord have say and they overcome the army of the philistine attack them from gibeon as far a gezer . and david 's name be honour in all land and the lord put the fear of him on all nation .and david make house for himself in the town of david and he get ready a place for the ark of god and put up a tent for it . then david say the ark of god may not be move by any but the levite for they have be mark out by god to take the ark of god and to do his work for ever . and david make all israel come together at jerusalem to take the ark of the lord to it place which he have get ready for it . and david get together the son of aaron and the levite of the son of kohath uriel the chief and his brother a hundred and twenty of the son of merari asaiah the chief and his brother two hundred and twenty of the son of gershom joel the chief and his brother a hundred and thirty of the son of elizaphan shemaiah the chief and his brother two hundred of the son of hebron eliel the chief and his brother eighty of the son of uzziel amminadab the chief and his brother a hundred and twelve . and david sent for zadok and abiathar the priest and for the levite uriel asaiah and joel shemaiah and eliel and amminadab and say to them you be the head of the family of the levite make yourselves holy you and your brother so that you may take the ark of the lord the god of israel to the place which i have make ready for it . for because you do not take it at the first the lord our god send punishment on u because we do not get direction from him in the right way . so the priest and the levite make themselves holy to take up the ark of the lord the god of israel . and the son of the levite take up the ark of god lift it by it rod a the lord have say to moses . and david give order to the chief of the levite to put their brother the music maker in position with instrument of music cord instrument and brass with glad voice make sound of joy . so heman the son of joel and of his brother asaph the son of berechiah and of the son of merari their brother ethan the son of kushaiah be put in position by the levite and with them their brother of the second order zechariah ban and jaaziel and shemiramoth and jehiel and unni eliab and benaiah and maaseiah and mattithiah and eliphelehu and mikneiah and obed edom and jeiel the door keeper . so those who make melody heman asaph and ethan be put in position with brass instrument sound loudly and zechariah and aziel and shemiramoth and jehiel unni and eliab and maaseiah and benaiah with corded instrument put to alamoth . and mattithiah and eliphelehu and mikneiah and obed edom and jeiel and azaziah with corded instrument on the octave to give the first note of the song . and chenaniah chief of the levite be master of the music he give direction about the song because he be expert . and berechiah and elkanah be door keeper for the ark . and shebaniah and joshaphat and nethanel and amasai and zechariah and benaiah and eliezer the priest make music on the horn before the ark of god and obed edom and jehiah be door keeper for the ark . so david and the responsible men of israel and the captain over thousand go with joy to get the ark of the agreement of the lord out of the house of obed edom . and when god give help to the levite who be lift up the ark of the agreement of the lord they make an offering of seven ox and seven sheep . and david be clothe with a robe of fair linen a be all the levite who take up the ark and those who make melody and chenaniah the master of those who make melody and david have on a linen ephod so all israel take up the ark of the agreement of the lord with loud cry and with horn and brass and cord instrument sound loudly . and when the ark of the agreement of the lord come into the town of david michal the daughter of saul look out of the window saw king david dancing and playing and to her mind he seem foolish .then they take in the ark of god and put it inside the tent which david have put up for it and they make offering burn offering and peace offering before god . and when david have come to an end of make the burn offering and peace offering he give the people a blessing in the name of the lord . and he give to everyone every man and woman of israel a cake of bread some meat and a cake of dry grape . and he put some of the levite before the ark of the lord a servant to keep the act of the lord in memory and to give worship and praise to the lord the god of israel asaph the chief and second to him zechariah uzziel and shemiramoth and jehiel and mattithiah and eliab and benaiah and obed edom and jeiel with corded instrument of music and asaph with brass instrument sound loudly and benaiah and jahaziel the priest blow horn all the time before the ark of the agreement of god . then on that day david first make the give of praise to the lord the work of asaph and his brother . o give praise to the lord give honour to his name talk of his doings among the people . let your voice be sound in song and melody let all your thought be of the wonder of his work . have glory in his holy name let the heart of those who be search after the lord be glad . let your search be for the lord and for his strength let your heart ever be turn to him . keep in mind the great work which he have do his wonder and the decision of his mouth o you seed of israel his servant you child of jacob his loved one . he be the lord our god he be judge of all the earth . he have keep his agreement in mind for ever the word which he give for a thousand generation the agreement which he make with abraham and his oath to isaac and he give it to jacob for a law and to israel for an eternal agreement say to you will i give the land of canaan the measured line of your heritage when you be still small in number and strange in the land when they go about from one nation to another and from one kingdom to another people he would not let anyone do them wrong he even keep back king because of them say put not your hand on those who have be mark with my holy oil and do my prophet no wrong . make song to the lord all the earth give the good news of his salvation day by day . make clear his glory to the nation and his wonder to all the people . for the lord be great and greatly to be praise and he be more to be fear than all other god . for all the god of the nation be false god but the lord make the heaven . honour and glory be before him strength and joy be in his holy place . give to the lord o you family of the people give to the lord glory and strength . give to the lord the glory of his name take with you an offering and come before him give worship to the lord in holy robe . be in fear before him all the earth the world be order so that it may not be move . let the heaven have joy and let the earth be glad let them say among the nation the lord be king . let the sea be thunder with all it water let the field be glad and everything which be in it then let all the tree of the wood be sound with joy before the lord for he be come to be the judge of the earth . o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . and say be our saviour o god of our salvation and let u come back and give u salvation from the nation so that we may give honour to your holy name and have glory in your praise . praise be to the lord the god of israel for ever and for ever . and all the people say so be it and give praise to the lord . so he make asaph and his brother keep their place there before the ark of the agreement of the lord to do whatever have to be do before the ark at all time day by day and obed edom the son of jeduthun and hosah with their brother sixty eight of them to be door keeper and zadok the priest with his brother the priest before the house of the lord in the high place at gibeon to give burned offering to the lord on the altar of burned offering morning and evening every day a it be order in the law of the lord which he give to israel and with them heman and jeduthun and the rest who be mark out by name to give praise to the lord for his mercy be unchanging for ever and heman and jeduthun have horn and brass instrument sound loudly and instrument of music for the song of god and the son of jeduthun be to be at the door . and all the people go away every man to his house and david go back to give a blessing to his family .now when david be live in his house he say to nathan the prophet see i be live in a house of cedar wood but the ark of the lord 's agreement be under the curtain of a tent . and nathan say to david do whatever be in your heart for god be with you . but that same night the word of god come to nathan say go and say to david my servant the lord say you be not to make me a house for my living place for from the day when i take israel up till this day i have have no house but have go from tent to tent and from live place to live place . in all the place where i have go with all israel do i ever say to any of the judge of israel whom i make the keeper of my people why have you not make for me a house of cedar ? so now say to my servant david the lord of army say i take you from the field from keep sheep so that you might be a ruler over my people israel and i have be with you wherever you go cut off before you all those who be against you and i will make your name like the name of the great one of the earth . and i will make a resting place for my people israel plant them there so that they may be in the place which be theirs and never again be move and never again will they be make waste by evil men a they be at first from the time when i put judge over my people israel and i will overcome all those who be against you and i will make you great and the head of a line of king . and when the time come for you to go to your father i will put in your place your seed after you one of your son and i will make his kingdom strong . he will be the builder of my house and i will make the seat of his authority certain for ever . i will be to him a father and he will be to me a son and i will not take my mercy away from him a i take it from him who be before you but i will make his place in my house and in my kingdom certain for ever and the seat of his authority will never be overturn . so nathan give david an account of all these word and this vision . then david the king go in and take his seat before the lord and say who be i o lord god and what be my family that you have be my guide till now ? and this be only a small thing to you o god but your word have even be about the far off future of your servant 's family look on me a on one of high position o lord god . what more may david say to you ? for you have knowledge of your servant . o lord because of your servant and from your heart you have do all these great thing and let them be see . o lord there be no one like you and no other god but you a be clear from everything which have come to our ear . and what other nation in the earth like your people israel do a god go out to take for himself to be his people make his name great and to be fear drive out the nation from before your people whom you make free and take out of egypt ? for your people israel you make yours for ever and you lord become their god . and now lord let your word about your servant and about his family be make certain for ever and do a you have say . so let your word be make certain and your name be make great when men say the lord of army be the god of israel and when the family of david your servant be make strong before you . for you o my god have let your servant see that you will make him head of a line of king and so it have come into your servant 's heart to make his prayer to you . and now o lord you be god and you have say you will give this good thing to your servant and now you have be please to give your blessing to the family of your servant so that it may go on for ever before you you o lord have give your blessing and a blessing will be on it for ever .and it come about after this that david make an attack on the philistine and overcome them and take gath with it daughter town out of the hand of the philistine . and he overcame moab and the moabites become his servant and give him offering . then david overcame hadadezer king of zobah near hamath when he be go to make his power see by the river euphrates . and david take from him a thousand war carriage and seven thousand horseman and twenty thousand footman and he have the leg muscle of all the horse cut keep only enough of them for a hundred war carriage . and when the aramaean of damascus come to the help of hadadezer king of zobah david put to the sword twenty two thousand aramaean . then david put arm force in damascus and the aramaean become his servant and give him offering . and the lord make david overcome wherever he go . and the gold body cover of the servant of hadadezer david take to jerusalem . and from tibhath and from cun town of hadadezer david take a great store of brass of which solomon make the great brass water vessel and the brass pillar and vessel . now when tou king of hamath have news that david have overcome all the army of hadadezer king of zobah he send his son hadoram to king david to give him word of peace and blessing because he have overcome hadadezer in the fight for hadadezer have be at war with tou and he give him all sort of vessel of gold and silver and brass . these king david make holy to the lord together with the silver and gold he have take from all nation from edom and moab and from the child of ammon and from the philistine and from amalek . and when he come back from put to the sword eighteen thousand of the edomites in the valley of salt david put armed force in all the town of edom and all the edomites become servant to david . the lord make david overcome wherever he go . so david be king over all israel judging and give right decision for all his people . and joab the son of zeruiah be chief of the army and jehoshaphat son of ahilud be keeper of the record . and zadok the son of ahitub and ahimelech the son of abiathar be priest and shavsha be the scribe and benaiah the son of jehoiada be over the cherethites and the pelethites and the son of david be chief of those whose place be at the king 's side .now it come about after this that death come to nahash the king of the child of ammon and his son become king in his place . and david say i will be a friend to hanun the son of nahash because his father be a friend to me . so david send men to him to give him word of comfort on account of his father . and the servant of david come to hanun to the land of the child of ammon offer him comfort . but the chief of the child of ammon say to hanun do it seem to you that david be honour your father by send comforter to you ? be it not clear that these men have only come to go through the land and to make secret observation of it so that they may overcome it ? so hanun take david 's servant and cut off their hair and the skirt of their robe up to the middle send them away . then certain men go and give david word of what have be do to them . and he send out with the purpose of meet them for the men be greatly sham . and the king say keep where you be at jericho till your hair be long again and then come back . and when the child of ammon saw that they have make themselves hat by david hanun and the child of ammon send a thousand talent of silver a payment for war carriage and horseman from mesopotamia and aram maacah and zobah . so with this money they get thirty two thousand war carriage and the help of the king of maacah and his people who come and take up their position in front of medeba . and the child of ammon come together from their town for the fight . and david hearing of it send joab with all the army of fight men . so the child of ammon come out and put their force in position on the way into the town and the king who have come be station by themselves in the field . now when joab saw that their force be in position against him in front and at his back he take all the best men of israel and put them in line against the aramaean and the rest of the people he put in position against the child of ammon with abishai his brother at their head . and he say if the aramaean be strong and get the good of me then come to my help and if the child of ammon get the good of you i will come to your help . take heart and let u be strong for our people and for the town of our god and may the lord do what seem good to him . so joab and the people who be with him go forward into the fight against the aramaean and they go in flight before him . and when the child of ammon saw the flight of the aramaean they themselves go in flight from abishai his brother and come into the town . then joab come back to jerusalem . and when the aramaean saw that israel have overcome them they send men to get the aramaean who be on the other side of the river with shophach the captain of hadadezer 's army at their head . and word of this be give to david and he get all israel together and go over jordan and come to helam and put his force in position against them . and when david 's force be in position against the aramaean the fight be start . and the aramaean go in flight before israel and david put to the sword the men of seven thousand aramaean war carriage and forty thousand footman and put to death shophach the captain of the army . and when the servant of hadadezer saw that they be overcome by israel they make peace with david and become his servant and the aramaean would give no more help to the child of ammon .now in the spring at the time when king go out to war joab go out at the head of the armed force and make waste all the land of the ammonite and put his men in position before rabbah shut it in . but david be still at jerusalem . and joab take rabbah and make it waste . and david take the crown of milcom from off his head it weight be a talent of gold and it have stone of great price in it and it be put on david 's head and he take a great store of good from the town . and he take the people out of the town and put them to work with wood cut instrument and iron grain crusher and ax . and this he do to all the town of the child of ammon . then david and all the people go back to jerusalem . now after this there be war with the philistine at gezer then sibbecai the hushathite put to death sippai one of the offspring of the rephaim and they be overcome . and again there be war with the philistine and elhanan the son of jair put to death lahmi the brother of goliath the gittite the stem of whose spear be like a cloth worker 's rod . and again there be war at gath where there be a very tall man who have twenty four finger and toe six finger on his hand and six toe on his foot he be one of the offspring of the rephaim . and when he put shame on israel jonathan the son of shimea david 's brother put him to death . these be of the offspring of the rephaim in gath they come to their death by the hand of david and his servant .now satan design evil against israel put into david 's mind the impulse to take the number of israel . and david say to joab and the captain of the people now let all israel from beer sheba to dan be number and give me word so that i may be certain of their number . and joab say may the lord make his people a hundred time more in number than they be but my lord king be they not all my lord 's servant ? why would my lord have this do ? why will he become a cause of sin to israel ? but the king 's word be strong than joab 's . so joab go out and go through all israel and come to jerusalem . and joab give david the number of all the people all the men of israel able to take up arm be one million one hundred thousand men and those of judah be four hundred and seventy thousand men able to take up arm . but levi and benjamin be not number among them for joab be disgust with the king 's order . and god be not pleased with this thing so he send punishment on israel . then david say to god great have be my sin in do this but now be please to take away the sin of your servant for i have do very foolishly . then the word of the lord come to gad david 's seer say go and say to david the lord say three thing be offer to you say which of them you will have so that i may do it to you . so gad come to david and say to him the lord say take whichever you will three year when there will not be enough food or three month of war when you will go in flight before your hater be in great danger of the sword or three day of the sword of the lord disease in the land and the angel of the lord take destruction through all the land of israel . now give thought to the answer i be to take back to him who send me . and david say to gad this be a hard decision for me to make let me come into the hand of the lord for great be his mercy let me not come into the hand of men . so the lord send disease on israel cause the death of seventy thousand men . and god send an angel to jerusalem for it destruction and when he be about to do so the lord saw and have regret for the evil and say to the angel of destruction it be enough do no more . now the angel of the lord be by the grain floor of ornan the jebusite . and david lift up his eye saw the angel of the lord there between earth and heaven with an uncovered sword in his hand stretch out over jerusalem . then david and the responsible men clothe in haircloth go down on their face . and david say to god be it not i who give the order for the people to be number ? it be i who have do the sin and the great wrong but these be only sheep what have they do ? let your hand o lord god be lift up against me and against my family but not against your people to send disease on them . then the angel of the lord give order to gad to say to david that he be to go and put up an altar to the lord on the grain floor of ornan the jebusite . and david go up a gad have say in the name of the lord . and ornan turn back saw the angel and his four son who be with him go to a secret place . now ornan be crush his grain . and when david come ornan look saw him and come out from the grain floor and go down on his face to the earth before him . then david say to ornan give me the place where this grain floor be so that i may put up an altar here to the lord let me have it for it full price so that this disease may be stop among the people . and ornan say to david take it and let my lord the king do what seem right to him . see i give you the ox for burn offering and the grain cleaning instrument for fire wood and the grain for the meal offering i give it all . and king david say to ornan no i will certainly give you the full price for it because i will not take for the lord what be yours or give a burned offering without payment . so david give ornan six hundred shekel of gold by weight for the place . and david put up an altar there to the lord offering burn offering and peace offering with prayer to the lord and he give him an answer from heaven send fire on the altar of burned offering . then the lord give order to the angel and he put back his sword into it cover . at that time when david saw that the lord have give him an answer on the grain floor of ornan the jebusite he make an offering there . for the house of the lord which moses have make in the waste land and the altar of burn offering be at that time in the high place at gibeon . but david be not able to go before it to get direction from the lord so great be his fear of the sword of the angel of the lord .then david say this be the house of the lord god and this be the altar for israel 's burn offering . and david give order to get together all the men from strange land who be in the land of israel and he put stone cutter to work cut stone for build the house of god . and he get together a great store of iron for the nail for the door and for the join and brass more in weight than might be measure and cedar tree without number for the zidonians and the men of tyre come with a great amount of cedar tree for david . and david say solomon my son be young and untested and the house which be to be put up for the lord be to be very great a thing of wonder and glory through all country so i will make ready what be need for it . so david get ready a great store of material before his death . then he send for his son solomon and give him order for the building of a house for the lord the god of israel . and david say to solomon my son it be my desire to put up a house for the name of the lord my god . but the word of the lord come to me say you have take life without number and make great war i will not let you be the builder of a house for my name because of the life you have take on the earth before my eye . but you will have a son who will be a man of rest and i will give him rest from war on every side . his name will be solomon and in his time i will give israel peace and quiet he will be the builder of a house for my name he will be to me a son and i will be to him a father and i will make the seat of his rule over israel certain for ever . now my son may the lord be with you and may you do well and put up the house of the lord your god a he have say of you . only may the lord give you wisdom and knowledge of his order for israel so that you may keep the law of the lord your god . and all will go well for you if you take care to keep the law and the rule which the lord give to moses for israel be strong and take heart have no fear and do not be trouble . now see poor though i be i have get ready for the house of the lord a hundred thousand talent of gold and a million talent of silver and a weight of brass and iron great than may be measure and wood and stone have i make ready and you may put more to it . and you have a great number of workman cutter and worker of stone and wood and expert in every sort of work in gold and silver and brass and iron more than may be number . up ! then and to work and may the lord be with you . then david give order to all the chief of israel to give their help to solomon his son say be not the lord your god with you ? and have he not give you rest on every side ? for the lord have give the people of the land into my hand and the land be overcome before the lord and before his people . now give your heart and soul to the worship of the lord your god and get to work on the building of the holy place of the lord god so that you may put the ark of the lord 's agreement and the holy vessel of god in the house which be to be make for the name of the lord .now david be old and full of day and he make his son solomon king over israel . and he get together all the chief of israel with the priest and the levite . and the levite all those of thirty year old and over be number and the number of them by head man by man be thirty eight thousand . of these twenty four thousand be to be overseer of the work of the house of the lord and six thousand be judge and men of authority four thousand be door keeper and four thousand give praise to the lord with the instrument which i make say david for give praise . and david put them into division under the name of the son of levi gershon kohath and merari . of the gershonites ladan and shimei . the son of ladan jehiel the chief and zetham and joel three . the son of shimei shelomoth and haziel and haran three these be the head of the family of ladan . and the son of shimei jahath zizah and jeush and beriah these four be the son of shimei . jahath be the chief and zizah the second but jeush and beriah have only a small number of son so they be group together a one family . the son of kohath amram izhar hebron and uzziel four . the son of amram aaron and moses and aaron be make separate and holy he and his son for ever for the care of the most holy thing and the burning of offering before the lord to do his work and give blessing in his name for ever . and the son of moses the man of god be put into the list of the tribe of levi . the son of moses gershom and eliezer . the son of gershom shebuel the first . and the son of eliezer rehabiah the first and eliezer have no other son but rehabiah have a great number . the son of izhar shelomith the first . the son of hebron jeriah the first amariah the second jahaziel the third and jekameam the fourth . the son of uzziel micah the first and isshiah the second . the son of merari mahli and mushi the son of mahli eleazar and kish . and at his death eleazar have no son but only daughter and their relation the son of kish take them a wife . the son of mushi mahli and eder and jeremoth three . these be the son of levi group by family the head of the family of those who be number by name by head all those of twenty year old and over who do the work of the house of the lord . for david say the lord the god of israel have give his people rest and he have make his rest place in jerusalem for ever and from now there will be no need for the house of the lord and the vessel use in it to be move about by the levite . so among the last act of david be the numbering of the son of levi from twenty year old and over . their place be by the side of the son of aaron in all the work of the house of the lord in the open space and in the room in the make clean of all the holy thing in do all the work of the house of the lord the holy bread be in their care and the crushed grain for the meal offering of unleavened cake or meal cook over the fire or in water they have control of all sort of weight and measure they have to take their place every morning to give praise and make melody to the lord and in the same way at even at every offering of burned offering to the lord on sabbath and at the new moon and on the regular feast in the number order by the law at all time before the lord and they have the care of the tent of meeting and the holy place under the direction of the son of aaron their brother for the work of the house of the lord .now the division into which the son of aaron be group be these the son of aaron nadab and abihu eleazar and ithamar . but nadab and abihu come to their end before their father and have no child so eleazar and ithamar do the work of priest . and david with zadok of the son of eleazar and ahimelech of the son of ithamar make distribution of them into their position for their work . and there be more chief among the son of eleazar than among the son of ithamar and this be how they be group of the son of eleazar there be sixteen all head of family and of the son of ithamar head of family there be eight . so they be put into group by the lord 's decision one with another for there be ruler of the holy place and ruler of the house of god among the son of eleazar and the son of ithamar . and shemaiah the son of nethanel the scribe who be a levite put down their name in write the king be present with the ruler and zadok the priest and ahimelech the son of abiathar and the head of family of the priest and the levite one family be take for eleazar and then one for ithamar and so on . now the first name to come out be that of jehoiarib the second jedaiah the third harim the fourth seorim the fifth malchijah the sixth mijamin the seventh hakkoz the eighth abijah the ninth jeshua the tenth shecaniah the eleventh eliashib the twelfth jakim the thirteenth huppah the fourteenth jeshebeab the fifteenth bilgah the sixteenth immer the seventeenth hezir the eighteenth happizzez the nineteenth pethahiah the twentieth jehezkel the twenty first jachin the twenty second gamul the twenty third delaiah the twenty fourth maaziah . so they be put into their different group to take their place in the house of the lord in agreement with the rule make by aaron their father a the lord the god of israel have give him order . and of the rest of the son of levi of the son of amram shubael of the son of shubael jehdeiah . of rehabiah of the son of rehabiah isshiah the chief . of the izharites shelomoth of the son of shelomoth jahath . and the son of hebron jeriah the chief amariah the second jahaziel the third jekameam the fourth . the son of uzziel micah of the son of micah shamir . the brother of micah isshiah of the son of isshiah zechariah . the son of merari mahli and mushi the son of jaaziah . the son of merari of jaaziah shoham and zaccur and ibri . of mahli eleazar who have no son . of kish the son of kish jerahmeel . and the son of mushi mahli and eder and jerimoth . these be the son of the levite by their family . selection be make of these in the same way a of their brother the son of aaron david the king be present with zadok and ahimelech and the head of family of the priest and of the levite the family of the chief in the same way a those of his young brother .far david and the chief of the servant of the holy place make selection of certain of the son of asaph and of heman and of jeduthun for the work of prophet to make melody with corded instrument and brass and the number of the men for the work they have to do be of the son of asaph zaccur and joseph and nethaniah and asharelah son of asaph under the direction of asaph act a a prophet under the order of the king of jeduthun the six son of jeduthun gedaliah and zeri and jeshaiah hashabiah and mattithiah under the direction of their father jeduthun who act a a prophet with corded instrument give praise and glory to the lord . of heman the son of heman bukkiah mattaniah uzziel shebuel and jerimoth hananiah hanani eliathah giddalti and romamti ezer joshbekashah mallothi hothir mahazioth all these be son of heman the king 's seer in the word of god . and to make great his power god give heman fourteen son and three daughter . all these under the direction of their father make music in the house of the lord with brass and cord instrument for the worship of the house of god asaph jeduthun and heman be under the order of the king . and the number of them with their brother who be train and expert in make melody to the lord be two hundred and eighty eight . and selection be make of them for their special work all have equal chance small as well a great the teacher a the learner . now of the group of asaph the first name to come out be joseph the second gedaliah he and his brother and son be twelve ? the third zaccur with his son and his brother twelve the fourth izri with his son and his brother twelve the fifth nethaniah with his son and his brother twelve the sixth bukkiah with his son and his brother twelve the seventh jesharelah with his son and his brother twelve the eighth jeshaiah with his son and his brother twelve the ninth mattaniah with his son and his brother twelve the tenth shimei with his son and his brother twelve the eleventh azarel with his son and his brother twelve the twelfth hashabiah with his son and his brother twelve the thirteenth shubael with his son and his brother twelve the fourteenth mattithiah with his son and his brother twelve the fifteenth jeremoth with his son and his brother twelve the sixteenth hananiah with his son and his brother twelve the seventeenth joshbekashah with his son and his brother twelve the eighteenth hanani with his son and his brother twelve the nineteenth mallothi with his son and his brother twelve the twentieth eliathah with his son and his brother twelve the twenty first hothir with his son and his brother twelve the twenty second giddalti with his son and his brother twelve the twenty third mahazioth with his son and his brother twelve the twenty fourth romamti ezer with his son and his brother twelve .for the division of the door keeper of the korahites meshelemiah the son of kore of the son of ebiasaph . and meshelemiah have son zechariah the old jediael the second zebadiah the third jathniel the fourth elam the fifth jehohanan the sixth eliehoenai the seventh . and obed edom have son shemaiah the old jehozabad the second joah the third and sacar the fourth and nethanel the fifth ammiel the sixth issachar the seventh peullethai the eighth for the blessing of god be on him . and shemaiah his son have son ruler over the family of their father for they be able men . the son of shemaiah othni and rephael and obed elzabad whose brother be great men of war elihu and semachiah . all these be son of obed edom they and their son and their brother able men and strong for the work sixty two son of obed edom . meshelemiah have son and brother eighteen able men . and hosah a son of the child of merari have son shimri the chief for though he be not the old his father make him chief hilkiah the second tebaliah the third zechariah the fourth hosah have thirteen son and brother . of these be the division of the door keeper men of authority have responsible position like their brother to be servant in the house of the lord . and the family be take by the decision of the lord for every door the small family have the same chance a the great . and the care of the door on the east come out for shelemiah . then the name of zechariah his son a man wise in discussion come out and the door on the north be give to him . to obed edom that on the south and to his son the store house . to hosah the door on the west by the door of shallecheth at the footway which go up watch by watch . on the east be six levite a day and on the north and the south four a day and for the store house two and two . for the pillared way on the west four at the footway and two at the pillared way itself . these be the division of door keeper of the son of the korahites and of the son of merari . and the levite their brother be responsible for the store of the house of god and the holy thing . the son of ladan son of the gershonites of the family of ladan head of family of ladan the gershonite jehieli . the son of jehieli zetham and joel his brother have the care of the store of the house of the lord . of the amramites of the izharites of the hebronites of the uzzielites and shebuel the son of gershom the son of moses be controller of the store . and his brother of eliezer rehabiah his son and jeshaiah his son and joram his son and zichri his son and shelomoth his son . shelomoth and his brother be responsible for all the store of holy thing which david the king and the head of family the captain of thousand and of hundred and the captain of the army have give to the lord . from the good take in war they give a a holy offering material for the building of the house of the lord . and everything samuel the prophet and saul the son of kish and abner the son of ner and joab the son of zeruiah have make holy whatever anyone have give it be under the care of shelomoth and his brother . of the izharites chenaniah and his son have to do all the public business of israel in relation to judge and men in authority . of the hebronites hashabiah and his brother seventeen hundred able men be overseer of israel on the other side of the jordan to the west be responsible for all the work of the lord 's house and for the work do by the king 's servant . of the hebronites jerijah be the chief of all the hebronites in their generation by family . in the fortieth year of the rule of david a search be make and able men be see among them at jazer of gilead . and his brother be two thousand seven hundred able men head of family whom king david make overseer over the reubenites and the gadites and the half tribe of manasseh in everything to do with god and for the king 's business .now the number of the child of israel that be the head of family and the captain of thousand and of hundred and the men in authority who be servant of the king in anything to do with the division which come in and go out month by month through all the month of the year in every division be twenty four thousand . over the first division for the first month be ishbaal the son of zabdiel and in his division be twenty four thousand . he be of the son of perez and the chief of all the captain of the army for the first month . and over the division for the second month be eleazar the son of dodai the ahohite the ruler and in his division be twenty four thousand . the third captain of the army for the third month be benaiah the son of jehoiada the priest and in his division be twenty four thousand . this be the same benaiah who be the great man of the thirty chief of the thirty and in his division be ammizabad his son . the fourth captain for the fourth month be asahel the brother of joab and zebadiah his son after him and in his division be twenty four thousand . the fifth captain for the fifth month be shamhuth the izrahite and in his division be twenty four thousand . the sixth captain for the sixth month be ira the son of ikkesh the tekoite and in his division be twenty four thousand . the seventh captain for the seventh month be helez the pelonite of the son of ephraim and in his division be twenty four thousand . the eighth captain for the eighth month be sibbecai the hushathite of the zerahites and in his division be twenty four thousand . the ninth captain for the ninth month be abiezer the anathothite of the benjamites and in his division be twenty four thousand . the tenth captain for the tenth month be maharai the netophathite of the zerahites and in his division be twenty four thousand . the eleventh captain for the eleventh month be benaiah the pirathonite of the son of ephraim and in his division be twenty four thousand . the twelfth captain for the twelfth month be heldai the netophathite of othniel and in his division be twenty four thousand . and over the tribe of israel the ruler of the reubenites be eliezer the son of zichri of the simeonites shephatiah the son of maacah of levi hashabiah the son of kemuel of aaron zadok of judah elihu one of the brother of david of issachar omri the son of michael of zebulun ishmaiah the son of obadiah of naphtali jerimoth the son of azriel of the child of ephraim hoshea the son of azaziah of the half tribe of manasseh joel the son of pedaiah of the half tribe of manasseh in gilead iddo the son of zechariah of benjamin jaasiel the son of abner of dan azarel the son of jeroham . these be the captain of the tribe of israel . but david do not take the number of those who be under twenty year old for the lord have say that he would make israel like the star of heaven in number . the numbering be start by joab the son of zeruiah but he do not go on to the end and because of it wrath come on israel and the number be not record in the history of king david . and azmaveth the son of adiel be controller of the king 's property jonathan the son of uzziah have control of all store house in country place and in the town and little town and strong place ezri the son of chelub have authority over the field worker and farmer shimei the ramathite be responsible for the vine garden zabdi the shiphmite be responsible for the produce of the vine garden and for all the store of wine baal hanan the gederite be responsible for the olive tree and the sycamore tree in the lowland and joash for the store of oil and shitrai the sharonite be responsible for the herd in the grass land of sharon and shaphat the son of adlai for those in the valley obil the ishmaelite have control of the camel and jehdeiah the meronothite of the she asses the flock be in the care of jaziz the hagarite . all these be the controller of king david 's property . now jonathan david 's father 's brother expert in discussion and a man of good sense be a scribe and jehiel the son of hachmoni have the care of the king 's son and ahithophel be the king 's expert in discussion and hushai the archite be the king 's friend . after ahithophel be jehoiada the son of benaiah and abiathar and the captain of the king 's army be joab .and david get together at jerusalem all the ruler of israel the chief of the tribe and the captain of the division wait on the king in turn and the captain of thousand and the captain of hundred and the controller of all the good and property of the king and his son with the unsexed servant and the great men of war . then david the king get up and say give ear to me my brother and my people it be my desire to put up a house a resting place for the ark of the lord 's agreement and for the foot rest of our god and i have get material ready for the building of it . but god say to me you be not to be the builder of a house for my name because you be a man of war and have take life though the lord the god of israel take me out of all my father 's family to be king over israel for ever mark out judah to be chief and of the people of judah my father 's family and among the son of my father he be pleased to make me king over all israel and of all my son for the lord have give me a great number of son he have make selection of solomon to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of the lord over israel . and he say to me solomon your son will be the builder of my house and the open space round it for i have take him to be my son and i will be his father . i will keep his kingdom in it place for ever if he be strong at all time to do my order and keep my rule a at this day . so now before the eye of all israel the people of the lord and in the hearing of our god keep and be true to the order of the lord your god so that you may have this good land for yourselves and give it for a heritage to your child after you for ever . and you solomon my son get knowledge of the god of your father and be his servant with a true heart and with a strong desire for the lord be the searcher of all heart and have knowledge of all the design of men 's thought if you make search for him he will be near you but if you be turn away from him he will give you up for ever . now then take note for the lord have make selection of you to be the builder of a house for the holy place . be strong and do it . then david give to his son solomon the design of the doorway of the house of god and of it house and it store house and the high room and the inner room and the place for the mercy seat and the design of all he have in his heart for the outer square of the house of the lord and for the room all round it and for the store house of the house of the lord and for the store house for the holy thing and for the division of the priest and levite and for all the work in connection with the worship of the house of the lord and all the vessel use in the house of the lord of gold by weight for the vessel of gold for all the vessel of different us and silver for all the vessel of silver by weight for vessel of different us and gold by weight for the light support and the vessel for the light the weight of gold need for every support and every vessel for light and for the silver light support the weight of silver need for every support and for the different vessel a every one be to be use and gold by weight for the table for the holy bread for every table and silver for the silver table clear gold for the meat hook and the basin and the cup for the gold basins gold enough by weight for every basin and silver by weight for every silver basin and the best gold for the altar of perfume and gold for the design of the carriage for the winged one whose wing be outstretched cover the ark of the lord 's agreement . all this say david the design for all these thing have be make dear to me in write by the hand of the lord . and david say to his son solomon be strong and of a good heart and do your work have no fear and do not be trouble for the lord god my god be with you he will not give you up and his face will not be turn away from you till all the work necessary for the house of the lord be complete . and see there be the division of the priest and levite for all the work of the house of god and every trained and expert workman will be ready to do for you whatever be need and the captain and the people will be under your order in everything .and david the king say to all the people solomon my son the only one who have be mark out by god be still young and untested and the work be great for this great house be not for man but for the lord god . now as far a i be able i have make ready what be need for the house of my god the gold for the thing of gold and the silver for the silver thing and the brass for the brass thing iron for the thing of iron and wood for the thing of wood beryl and jewel to be frame and stone of different colour for ornament all sort of stone of great price and polish build stone as much a be need and more . and because this house of god be dear to me i give my private store of gold and silver to the house of my god in addition to all i have get ready for the holy house even three thousand talent of gold of ophir and seven thousand talent of the best silver for plat the wall of the house gold for the gold thing and silver for the silver thing and for every sort of work to be do by the expert workman . who then will come forward offer himself this day for the lord 's work ? then the head of family and the chief of the tribe of israel and the captain of thousand and of hundred with the controller of the king 's business freely give themselves and they give for the use of the house of the lord five thousand talent and ten thousand darics of gold and ten thousand talent of silver and eighteen thousand talent of brass and a hundred thousand talent of iron . and those who have stone of great price give them to the store of the house of the lord under the care of jehiel the gershonite . then the people be glad because their offering be freely give for with a true heart they freely give what they have to the lord and david the king be full of joy . so david give praise to the lord before all the people and david say praise be to you o lord the god of israel our father for ever and ever . yours o lord be the strength and the power and the glory and the authority and the honour for everything in heaven and on earth be yours yours be the kingdom o lord and you be lift up a head over all . wealth and honour come from you and you be ruler over all and in your hand be power and strength it be in your power to make great and to give strength to all . so now our god we give you praise honour the glory of your name . but who be i and what be my people that we have power to give so freely in this way ? for all thing come from you and what we have give you be yours . for we a all our father be be like men from a strange country before you who have get a place for a time in the land our day on the earth be like a shade and there be no hope of go on . o lord our god all this store which we have make ready for the building of a house for your holy name come from your hand and be yours . and i be conscious my god that you be the searcher of heart take pleasure in righteousness . a for me with an upright heart i have freely give all these thing and i have see with joy your people who be here to make their offering freely to you . o lord the god of abraham of isaac and of israel our father keep this for ever in the deep thought of your people and let their heart be fix and true to you and give to solomon my son a true heart to keep your order your rule and your law and to do all these thing and to put up this great house for which i have make ready . and david say to all the people now give praise to the lord your god . and all the people give praise to the lord the god of their father with bent head worship the lord and the king . and they make offering to the lord and give burn offering to the lord on the day after a thousand oxen a thousand sheep and a thousand lamb with their drink offering and a great wealth of offering for all israel . and with great joy they make a feast before the lord that day . and they make solomon the son of david king a second time put the holy oil on him to make him holy to the lord a ruler and on zadok a priest . so solomon be put on the seat of the lord a king in place of his father david and everything go well for him and all israel be under his authority . and all the chief and the men of war and all the son of king david put themselves under the authority of solomon the king . and the lord make solomon great in the eye of all israel clothing him with glory and honour such a no other king in israel have have before him . now david the son of jesse be king over all israel . for forty year he be rule a king over israel seven year in hebron and thirty three year in jerusalem . and he come to his end after a long life full of day and great wealth and honour and solomon his son become king in his place . now all the act of david first and last be record in the word of samuel the seer and the word of nathan the prophet and the word of gad the seer together with all his rule and his power and the event which take place in his time in israel and in all the kingdom of other land .and solomon the son of david make himself strong in his kingdom and the lord his god be with him and make him very great . and solomon sent word to all israel to the captain of thousand and of hundred and to the judge and to every chief in all israel head of their family . then solomon and all the men of israel with him go to the high place at gibeon because the tent of meeting of god which moses the servant of the lord have make in the waste land be there . but the ark of god have be move by david from kiriath jearim to the place which he have make ready for it for he have put up a tent for it at jerusalem . and the altar of brass which bezalel the son of uri the son of hur have make be there before the tent of the lord and solomon and all the people go to give worship there . and solomon go up there to the brass altar before the lord at the tent of meet offer on it a thousand burn offering . in that night god come to solomon in a vision and say to him say what i be to give you . and solomon say to god great be your mercy to david my father and you have make me king in his place . now o lord god let your word to david my father come true for you have make me king over a people like the dust of the earth in number . give me now wisdom and knowledge so that i may go out and come in before this people for who be able to be the judge of this great people of yours ? and god say to solomon because this be in your heart and you do not make request for money property or honour or for the destruction of your hater or for long life but you have make request for wisdom and knowledge for yourself so that you may be the judge of my people over whom i have make you king wisdom and knowledge be give to you and i will give you wealth and honour such a no king have have before you or ever will have after you . so solomon go back from the high place at gibeon from before the tent of meeting to jerusalem and he be king over israel . and solomon get together war carriage and horseman he have one thousand four hundred carriage and twelve thousand horseman which he keep some in the carriage town and some with the king at jerusalem . and the king make silver and gold as common a stone in jerusalem and cedar like the sycamore tree of the lowland in number . and solomon 's horse come out of egypt the king 's trader get them from kue at a price . a war carriage might be get from egypt for six hundred shekel of silver and a horse for a hundred and fifty they get them at the same rate for all the king of the hittite and the king of aram .now it be solomon 's purpose to put up a house for the name of the lord and a house for himself a king . and solomon have seventy thousand men number for transport and eighty thousand for cut stone in the mountain and three thousand six hundred a overseer . and solomon sent to huram king of tyre say a you do for my father david send him cedar tree for the building of his house see ! i be build a house for the name of the lord my god to be make holy to him where perfume of sweet spice will be burn before him and the holy bread will be place at all time and burn offering will be offer morning and evening on the sabbath and at the new moon and on the regular feast of the lord our god . this be a law for ever to israel . and the house which i be building be to be great for our god be great than all god . but who may have strength enough to make a house for him see that the heaven and the heaven of heaven be not wide enough to be his rest place ? who be i then to make a house for him ? but i be build it only for the burning of perfume before him . so now send me an expert worker in gold and silver and brass and iron ? in purple and red and blue and in the cutting of all sort of ornament to be with the expert workman who be here in judah and in jerusalem whom my father david get together . and send me cedar tree cypress tree and sandal wood from lebanon for to my knowledge your servant be expert wood cutter in lebanon and my servant will be with yours to get tree for me in great number for the house which i be building be to be great and a wonder . and i will give a food to your servant the wood cutter twenty thousand measure of grain and twenty thousand measure of barley and twenty thousand measure of wine and twenty thousand measure of oil . then huram king of tyre sent solomon an answer in write say because of his love for his people the lord have make you king over them . and huram say praise be to the lord the god of israel maker of heaven and earth who have give to david the king a wise son full of wisdom and good sense to be the builder of a house for the lord and a house for himself a king . and now i be send you a wise and expert man huram who be a my father the son of a woman of the daughter of dan whose father be a man of tyre an expert worker in gold and silver and brass and iron in stone and wood in purple and blue and fair linen and red train in the cutting of every sort of ornament and the invention of every sort of design let him be give a place among your expert workman and those of my lord your father david . so now let my lord send to his servant the grain and the oil and the wine a my lord have say and we will have wood cut from lebanon as much a you have need of and will send it to you on flat boat by sea to joppa and from there you may take it up to jerusalem . then solomon take the number of all the men from strange land who be live in israel a his father david have do there be a hundred and fifty three thousand six hundred . seventy thousand he put to the work of transport eighty thousand to cut stone in the mountain and three thousand six hundred a overseer to put the people to work .then solomon make a start at build the house of the lord on mount moriah in jerusalem where the lord have be see by his father david in the place which david have make ready in the grain floor of ornan the jebusite . the building be start in the second month in the fourth year of his rule . and solomon put the base of the house of god in position by the old measure it be sixty cubit long and twenty cubit wide . and the covered way in front of the house be twenty cubit long as wide a the house and a hundred and twenty cubit high all plat inside with the best gold . and the great house be roof with cypress wood plat with the best gold and ornament with design of palm tree and chain . and the house be make beautiful with stone of great value and the gold be gold of parvaim . all the house be plat with gold the support the step the wall and the door and the wall be ornament with design of winged one . and he make the most holy place it be twenty cubit long and twenty cubit wide like the great house and be plat all over with the best gold six hundred talent be use for it . and fifty shekel weight of gold be use for the nail . he have all the high room plat with gold . and in the most holy place he make image of two winged being cover them with gold . their outstretched wing be twenty cubit across one wing five cubit long touch the wall of the house and the other of the same size meet the wing of the other wing one . and in the same way the wing of the other five cubit long be stretch out one touch the wall and the other meet the wing of the first wing one . their outstretched wing be twenty cubit across they be place upright on their foot face the inner part of the house . and he make the veil of blue and purple and red of the best linen work with winged one . and in front of the house he make two pillar thirty five cubit high with crown on the top of them five cubit high . and he make chain like neck ornament and put them on the top of the pillar and a hundred apple on the chain . he put up the pillar in front of the temple one on the right side and one on the left name the one on the right jachin and that on the left boaz .then he make a brass altar twenty cubit long twenty cubit wide and ten cubit high . and he make the great water vessel of metal round in form measuring ten cubit across from edge to edge it be five cubit high and thirty cubit round . and under it be a design of flower all round it ten to a cubit circle the water vessel in two line they be make from liquid metal at the same time a the water vessel . it be support on twelve ox three facing to the north three to the west three to the south and three to the east the water vessel rest on top of them their back part be all turn to the middle of it . it be as thick a a man 's open hand and the edge of it be curve like the edge of a cup like a lily flower it would take three thousand bath . and he make ten washing vessel put five on the right side and five on the left such thing a be use in make the burned offering be wash in them but the great water vessel be to be use by the priest for wash themselves . and he make the ten gold support for the light a direction have be give for them and he put them in the temple five on the right side and five on the left . he make ten table and put them in the temple five on the right side and five on the left . and he make a hundred gold basin . then he make the open space for the priest and the great open space and it door plat the door with brass . he put the great water vessel on the right side of the house to the east facing south . and huram make all the pot and the spade and the basin . so he come to the end of all the work he do for king solomon in the house of god the two pillar and the two crown on the top of the pillar and the network cover the two cup of the crown on the top of the pillar and the four hundred apple for the network two line of apple for the network cover the two cup of the crown on the pillar . and he make the ten base and the ten washing vessel which be on the base the great water vessel with the twelve ox under it . all the pot and the spade and the meat hook and their vessel which huram who be a his father make for king solomon for the house of the lord be of polished brass . the king make them of liquid metal in the lowland of jordan in the soft earth between succoth and zeredah . so solomon make all these vessel a very great store of them and the weight of the brass use be not measure . and solomon make all the vessel use in the house of god the gold altar and the table on which the holy bread be place and the support for the light with their light to be burn in the regular way in front of the inmost room of the best gold the flower and the vessel for the light and the instrument use for them be all of gold it be the best gold . the scissors and the basin and the spoon and the fire tray of the best gold and the inner door of the house open into the most holy place and the door of the temple be all of gold .so all the work which solomon do for the house of the lord be complete . and solomon take the holy thing which david his father have give the silver and the gold and all the vessel and put them in the store house of the house of god . then solomon sent for all the responsible men of israel all the chief of the tribe and the head of family of the child of israel to come to jerusalem and take the ark of the lord 's agreement up out of the town of david which be zion . and all the men of israel come together to the king at the feast in the seventh month . all the responsible men of israel come and the levite take up the ark . they take up the ark and the tent of meeting and all the holy vessel which be in the tent all these the priest the levite take up . and king solomon and all the men of israel who have come together there with him be before the ark make offering of sheep and oxen more than might be number . and the priest take the ark of the lord 's agreement and put it in it place in the inner room of the house in the most holy place under the wing of the winged one . for their wing be outstretched over the place where the ark be cover the ark and it rod . the rod be so long that their end be see from the holy place before the inmost room but they be not see from outside and there they be to this day . nothing be in the ark but the two flat stone which moses put there at horeb where the lord make an agreement with the child of israel when they come out of egypt . now when the priest have come out of the holy place for all the priest who be present have make themselves holy not keep to their division and the levite who make the music all of them asaph heman jeduthun and their son and brother rob in fair linen be in their place with their brass and cord instrument at the east side of the altar and with them a hundred and twenty priest blow horn and when the player on horn and those who make melody in song with one voice be sound the praise and glory of the lord with loud voice and with wind instrument and brass and cord instrument of music praise the lord and say he be good his mercy be unchanging for ever then the house be full of the cloud of the glory of the lord so that the priest be not able to keep their place to do their work because of the cloud for the house of god be full of the glory of the lord .then solomon say o lord to the sun you have give the heaven for a living place but your living place be not see by men so i have make for you a live place a house in which you may be for ever present . then turn his face about the king give a blessing to all the men of israel and they be all on their foot together . and he say praise be to the lord the god of israel who himself give his word to my father david and with his strong hand have make his word come true say from the day when i take my people out of the land of egypt no town in all the tribe of israel have be mark out by me for the building of a house for the rest place of my name and i take no man to be a ruler over my people israel but now i have make selection of jerusalem that my name might be there and of david to be over my people israel . now it be in the heart of my father david to put up a house for the name of the lord the god of israel . but the lord say to david my father you do well to have in your heart the desire to make a house for my name but you yourself will not be the builder of the house but your son the offspring of your body he it be who will put up a house for my name . and the lord have keep his word for i have take my father david 's place on the seat of the kingdom of israel a the lord give his word and i have make the house for the name of the lord the god of israel . and there i have put the ark in which be the agreement of the lord which he make with the people of israel . then he take his place in front of the altar of the lord all the men of israel be present for solomon have make a brass stage five cubit long five cubit wide and three cubit high and have put it in the middle of the open space on this he take his place and go down on his knee before all the meeting of israel stretch out his hand to heaven . and he say o lord the god of israel there be no god like you in heaven or on earth keep faith and mercy unchanging for your servant while they go in your way with all their heart for you have keep the word which you give to your servant david my father with your mouth you say it and with your hand you have make it come true this day . so now o lord the god of israel let your word to your servant david my father come true when you say you will never be without a man to take his place before me on the seat of the kingdom of israel if only your child give attention to their way walk in my law a you have do before me . so now o lord the god of israel make your word come true which you say to your servant david . but be it truly possible that god may be house with men on earth ? see heaven and the heaven of heaven be not wide enough to be your rest place how much less this house which i have make still let your heart be turn to the prayer of your servant and to his prayer for grace o lord my god and give ear to the cry and the prayer which your servant make before you that your eye may be open to this house day and night to this place of which you have say that you would put your name there to give ear to the prayer which your servant may make turn to this place . and give ear to the prayer of your servant and of your people israel when they make their prayer turn to this place give ear from heaven your living place and hearing have mercy . if a man do wrong to his neighbour and have to take an oath and come before your altar to take his oath in this house then let your ear be open in heaven and be the judge of your servant give punishment to the wrongdoer so that his sin may come on his head and by your decision keep from evil him who have do no wrong . and if your people israel be overcome in war because of their sin against you if they be turn to you again honour your name make prayer and request your grace in this house then give ear from heaven and let the sin of your people israel have forgiveness and take them back again to the land which you give to them and to their father . when heaven be shut up and there be no rain because of their sin against you if they make prayer with their face turn to this place honour your name and turn away from their sin when you send trouble on them then give ear from heaven so that the sin of your servant and the sin of your people israel may have forgiveness when you make clear to them the good way in which they be to go and send rain on your land which you have give to your people for their heritage . if there be no food in the land if there be disease if the fruit of the earth be damage by heat or water locust or worm if their town be shut in by their attacker whatever trouble or whatever disease there may be whatever prayer or request for your grace be make by any man or by all your people israel whatever his trouble may be whose hand be stretch out to this house then give ear from heaven your live place answer with forgiveness and give to every man whose secret heart be open to you the reward of all his way for you and you only have knowledge of the heart of the child of men so that they may give you worship walk in your way as long a they be live in the land which you give to our father . and a for the man from a strange land who be not of your people israel but come from a far country because of the glory of your name and your strong hand and your outstretched arm when he come to make his prayer turn to this house then give ear from heaven your living place and give him his desire whatever it may be so that all the people of the earth may have knowledge of your name worship you a do your people israel and may see that this house which i have make be truly name by your name . if your people go out to war against their attacker by whatever way you may send them if they make their prayer to you turn their face to this town of yours and to this house which i have put up for your name then give ear from heaven to their prayer and their cry for grace and see right do to them . if they do wrong against you for no man be without sin and you be angry with them and give them up into the power of those who be fight against them so that they take them away prisoner to a land far off or near and if they take think in the land where they be prisoner turn again to you cry out in prayer to you in that land and say we be sinner we have do wrong we have do evil if with all their heart and soul they be turn again to you in the land where they be prisoner the land where they have be take and make their prayer turn their eye to their land which you give to their father and to the town which you take for yourself and the house which i have make for your name then give ear from heaven your live place to their prayer and their cry and see right do to them answer with forgiveness your people who have do wrong against you . now o my god may your eye be open and your ear awake to the prayer make in this place . up ! now o lord god come back to your rest place you and the ark of your strength let your priest o lord god be clothe with salvation and let your saint be glad in what be good . o lord god let him whom you have take for yourself never be give up by you keep in mind your mercy to david your servant .now when solomon 's prayer be end fire come down from heaven burn up all the offering and the house be full of the glory of the lord . and the priest be not able to go into the house of the lord for the lord 's house be full of the glory of the lord . and all the child of israel be look on when the fire come down and the glory of the lord be on the house and they go down on their knee with their face to the earth worship and praise the lord and say he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . then the king and all the people make offering before the lord . king solomon make an offering of twenty two thousand ox and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep . so the king and all the people keep the feast of the opening of the house of god . and the priest be in their place and the levite with their instrument of music for the lord 's song which david the king have make for the praise of the lord whose mercy be unchanging for ever when david give praise by their hand and the priest be sound horn before them and all israel be on their foot . then solomon make holy the middle of the open square in front of the house of the lord offer the burned offering there and the fat of the peace offering for there be not room on the brass altar which solomon have make for all the burn offering and the meal offering and the fat . so solomon keep the feast at that time for seven day and all israel with him a very great meeting for the people have come together from the way into hamath and from as far a the river of egypt . and on the eighth day they have a holy meeting the offering for make the altar holy go on for seven day and the feast for seven day . and on the twenty third day of the seventh month he send the people away to their tent full of joy and glad in their heart because of all the good which the lord have do to david and to solomon and to israel his people . so solomon come to the end of build the house of the lord and the king 's house and everything which it be in his mind to make in the house of the lord and for himself have be well do . now the lord come to solomon in a vision by night and say to him i have give ear to your prayer and have take this place for myself a a house where offering be to be make . if at my word heaven be shut up so that there be no rain or if i send locust on the land for it destruction or if i send disease on my people if my people on whom my name be name make themselves low and come to me in prayer searching for me and turn from their evil way then i will give ear from heaven overlook their sin and will give life again to their land . now my eye will be open and my ear awake to the prayer make in this place . for i have take this house for myself and make it holy so that my name may be there for ever and my eye and my heart will be there at all time . and a for you if you will go on your way before me a david your father do do whatever i have give you order to do and keep my law and my decision then i will make strong the seat of your kingdom a i give my word to david your father say you will never be without a man to be ruler in israel . but if you be turn away from me and do not keep my order and my law which i have put before you but go and make yourselves servant to other god give them worship then i will have this people uproot out of my land which i have give them and this house which i have make holy for my name i will put away from before my eye and make it an example and a word of shame among all people . and this house will become a mass of broken wall and everyone who go by will be overcome with wonder and will say why have the lord do so to this land and to this house ? and their answer will be because they be turn away from the lord the god of their father who take them out of the land of egypt and take for themselves other god and give them worship and become their servant that be why he have send all this evil on them .now at the end of twenty year in which time solomon have put up the house of the lord and a house for himself he take in hand the building up of the town which huram have give him cause the child of israel to make living place for themselves there . and solomon go to hamath zobah and overcame it . and he put up the building of tadmor in the waste land and of all the store town in hamath and of beth horon the high and the low wall town with wall and doorway and lock and of baalath and all the store town which solomon have and the town where he keep his war carriage and his horse men and everything which it be his pleasure to put up in jerusalem and in lebanon and in all the land under his rule . a for all the rest of the hittite and the amorites and the perizzites and the hivites and the jebusites who be not of israel their men who be still live in the land and whom the child of israel have not put an end to these solomon put to force work as be do to this day but solomon do not make use of the child of israel a servant for his work they be men of war his chief and his captain and captain of his war carriage and his horseman . now these be the chief men in authority whom king solomon have two hundred and fifty of them in authority over the people . then solomon make pharaoh 's daughter come up from the town of david to the house which he have make for her for he say i will not have my wife living in the house of david king of israel because those place where the ark of the lord have come be holy . then solomon make burn offering to the lord on the altar of the lord which he have put up in front of the covered way offer every day what have be order by moses on the sabbath and at the new moon and at the regular feast three time a year that be at the feast of unleavened bread the feast of week and the feast of tent . and he give the division of the priest their place for their work a order by his father david and to the levite he give their work of praise and wait on the priest to do what be need day by day and he give the door keeper their place in turn at every door for so david the man of god have give order . all the order give by the king to the priest and levite in connection with any business or store be do with care . and all the work of solomon be complete from the day when he put the base of the lord 's house in position till solomon have come to the end of build the lord 's house . then solomon go to ezion geber and to eloth by the sea in the land of edom . and huram send him by his servant ship and experienced seaman who go with the servant of solomon to ophir and come back with four hundred and fifty talent of gold which they take to king solomon .now the queen of sheba hear great thing of solomon come to jerusalem to put his wisdom to the test with hard question and with her come a very great train and camel weight down with spice and great store of gold and jewel and when she come to solomon she have talk with him of everything in her mind . and solomon give her answer to all her question there be no secret which he do not make clear to her . and when the queen of sheba have see the wisdom of solomon and the house which he have make and the food at his table and all his servant seat there and those who be wait on him in their place and their robe and his wine servant and their robe and the burn offering which he make in the house of the lord there be no more spirit in her . and she say to the king the account which be give to me in my country of your act and your wisdom be true . but i have no faith in what be say about you till i come and saw for myself and truly word be not give me of half your great wisdom you be much great than they say . happy be your wife and happy these your servant whose place be ever before you hear your word of wisdom . praise be to the lord your god whose pleasure it be to put you on the seat of his kingdom to be king for the lord your god because in his love for israel it be the purpose of your god to make them strong for ever he make you king over them to be their judge in righteousness . and she give the king a hundred and twenty talent of gold and a great store of spice and jewel never have such spice be see a the queen of sheba give to solomon . and the servant of huram and the servant of solomon in addition to gold from ophir come back with sandal wood and jewel . and with the sandal wood the king make step for the house of the lord and for the king 's house and instrument of music for the maker of melody never before have such be see in the land of judah . and king solomon give the queen of sheba all her desire whatever she make request for in addition to what she have take to the king . so she go back to her country with her servant . now the weight of gold which come to solomon in one year be six hundred and sixty six talent and in addition to what he get from trader of different sort all the king of arabia and the ruler of the country give gold and silver to solomon . and king solomon make two hundred body cover of hammered gold every one have six hundred shekel of gold in it . and he make three hundred small body cover of hammered gold use three hundred shekel of gold for every cover and the king put them in the house of the wood of lebanon . then the king make a great ivory seat plat with the best gold . there be six step up to it and a foot rest of gold fix to it and arm on the two side of the seat with two lion at the side of the arm . and twelve lion be place on one side and on the other side on the six step there be nothing like it in any kingdom . all king solomon 's drinking vessel be of gold and all the vessel of the house of the wood of lebanon be of the best gold no one give a thought to silver in the day of solomon . for the king have tarshish ship sail with the servant of huram once every three year the tarshish ship come back with gold and silver ivory and monkey and peacock . and king solomon be great than all the king of the earth in wealth and in wisdom . and all the king of the earth come to see solomon and to give ear to his wisdom which god have put into his heart . and everyone take with him an offering vessel of silver and vessel of gold and robe and coat of metal and spice and horse and beast for transport regularly year by year . solomon have four thousand building for his horse and his war carriage and twelve thousand horseman whom he keep some in the carriage town and some with the king in jerusalem . and he be ruler over all the king from the river to the land of the philistine as far a the limit of egypt . the king make silver as common a stone in jerusalem and cedar like the sycamore tree of the lowland in number . they get horse for solomon from egypt and from every land . now the rest of the act of solomon first and last be they not record in the history of nathan the prophet and in the word of ahijah the prophet of shiloh and in the vision of iddo the seer about jeroboam the son of nebat ? solomon be king over israel in jerusalem for forty year . and solomon go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the town of david his father and rehoboam his son become king in his place .and rehoboam go to shechem where all israel have come together to make him king . and when jeroboam the son of nebat have news of it for he be in egypt where he have go in flight from king solomon he come back from egypt . and they send for him and jeroboam and all israel come to rehoboam and say your father put a hard yoke on u if you will make the condition under which your father keep u down less cruel and the weight of the yoke he put on u less hard then we will be your servant . and he say to them come to me again after three day . so the people go away . then king rehoboam take the opinion of the old men who have be with solomon his father when he be live and say in your opinion what answer be i to give to this people ? and they say to him if you be kind to this people please them and say good word to them then they will be your servant for ever . but he give no attention to the opinion of the old men but go to the young men of his generation who be wait before him . and he say to them what be your opinion ? what answer be we to give to this people who have say to me make less the weight of the yoke which your father put on u ? and the young men of his generation say to him this be the answer to give to the people who come to you say your father put a hard yoke on u but will you make it less say to them my little finger be thick than my father 's body if my father put a hard yoke on you i will make it hard my father give you punishment with whip but i will give you blow with snake . so jeroboam and all the people come to rehoboam on the third day a the king have give order say come to me again on the third day . and the king give them a rough answer . so king rehoboam give no attention to the suggestion of the old men but give them the answer put forward by the young men say my father make your yoke hard but i will make it hard my father give you punishment with whip but i will give it with snake . so the king do not give ear to the people for this come about by the purpose of god so that the lord might give effect to his word which he have say by ahijah the shilonite to jeroboam the son of nebat . and when all israel saw that the king would give no attention to them the people in answer say to the king what part have we in david ? what be our heritage in the son of jesse ? every man to your tent o israel now see to your house david . so all israel go to their tent . but rehoboam be still king over those of the child of israel who be live in the town of judah . then rehoboam sent adoniram the overseer of the forced work and he be stone to death by all israel . and king rehoboam go quickly and get into his carriage to go in flight to jerusalem . so israel be turn away from the family of david to this day .and rehoboam come to jerusalem and get together the men of judah and benjamin a hundred and eighty thousand of his best fight men to make war against israel and get the kingdom back for rehoboam . but the word of the lord come to shemaiah the man of god say say to rehoboam the son of solomon king of judah and to all israel in judah and benjamin the lord have say you be not to go to war against your brother let every man go back to his house for this thing be my purpose . so they give ear to the word of the lord and be turn back from fight against jeroboam . now rehoboam kept in jerusalem building wall town in judah . he be the builder of beth lehem and etam and tekoa and beth zur and soco and adullam and gath and mareshah and ziph and adoraim and lachish and azekah and zorah and aijalon and hebron wall town in judah and benjamin . and he make the walled town strong and he put captain in them and store of food oil and wine . and in every town he put store of body cover and spear and make them very strong . and judah and benjamin be his . and the priest and levite who be in all israel come together to him from every part of their country . for the levite give up their living place and their property and come to judah and jerusalem for jeroboam and his son have send them away not let them be priest to the lord and he himself make priest for the high place and for the image of he goats and ox which he have make . and after them from all the tribe of israel all those whose heart be fix and true to the lord the god of israel come to jerusalem to make offering to the lord the god of their father . so they go on increase the power of the kingdom of judah and make rehoboam the son of solomon strong for three year and for three year they go in the way of david and solomon . and rehoboam take a his wife mahalath the daughter of jerimoth the son of david and of abihail the daughter of eliab the son of jesse and she have son by him jeush shemariah and zaham . and after her he take maacah the daughter of absalom and she have abijah and attai and ziza and shelomith by him . maacah the daughter of absalom be dearer to rehoboam than all his wife and his servant wife for he have eighteen wife and sixty servant wife and be the father of twenty eight son and sixty daughter . rehoboam make abijah the son of maacah chief and ruler among his brother for it be his purpose to make him king . and in his wisdom he have his son station in every walled town through all the land of judah and benjamin and he give them a great store of food and take wife for them .now when rehoboam 's position a king have be make certain and he be strong he give up the law of the lord and all israel with him . now in the fifth year of king rehoboam shishak king of egypt come up against jerusalem because of their sin against the lord with twelve hundred war carriage and sixty thousand horseman and the people who come with him out of egypt be more than might be number lubim and sukkiim and ethiopian . and he take the walled town of judah and come as far a jerusalem . now shemaiah the prophet come to rehoboam and the chief of judah who have come together in jerusalem because of shishak and say to them the lord have say because you have give me up i have give you up into the hand of shishak . then the chief of israel and the king make themselves low and say the lord be upright . and the lord see that they have make themselves low say to shemaiah they have make themselves low i will not send destruction on them but in a short time i will give them salvation and will not let loose my wrath on jerusalem by the hand of shishak . but still they will become his servant so that they may see how different my yoke be from the yoke of the kingdom of the land . so shishak king of egypt come up against jerusalem and take away all the stored wealth of the house of the lord and the king 's house he take everything away and with the rest the gold body cover which solomon have make . and in their place king rehoboam have other body cover make of brass and give them into the care of the captain of the arm men who be station at the door of the king 's house . and whenever the king go into the house of the lord the arm men go with him take the body cover and then take them back to their room . and when he make himself low the wrath of the lord be turn back from him and complete destruction do not come on him for there be still some good in judah . so king rehoboam make himself strong in jerusalem and be rule there . rehoboam be forty one year old when he become king and he be rule for seventeen year in jerusalem the town which the lord have make his out of all the tribe of israel to put his name there and his mother 's name be naamah an ammonite woman . and he do evil because his heart be not true to the lord . now the act of rehoboam first and last be they not record in the word of shemaiah the prophet and iddo the seer ? and there be war between rehoboam and jeroboam all their day . and rehoboam go to rest with his father and be put into the earth in the town of david and abijah his son become king in his place .in the eighteenth year of king jeroboam abijah become king over judah . he be king in jerusalem for three year his mother 's name be maacah the daughter of uriel of gibeah . and there be war between abijah and jeroboam . and abijah go out to the fight with an army of men of war four hundred thousand of his best men and jeroboam put his force in line against him eight hundred thousand of his best men of war . and abijah take up his position on mount zemaraim in the hill country of ephraim and say give ear to me o jeroboam and all israel be it not clear to you that the lord the god of israel give the rule over israel to david and to his son for ever by an agreement make with salt ? but jeroboam the son of nebat the servant of solomon the son of david take up arm against his lord . and certain foolish and good for nothing men be join with him and make themselves strong against rehoboam the son of solomon when he be young and untested and not able to keep them back . and now it be your purpose to put yourselves against the authority which the lord have put into the hand of the son of david and you be a very great number and you have with you the gold ox which jeroboam make to be your god . and after drive out the priest of the lord the son of aaron and the levite have you not make priest for yourselves a the people of other land do ? so that anyone who come to make himself priest by offer an ox or seven sheep may be a priest of those who be no god . but a for u the lord be our god and we have not be turn away from him we have priest who do the work of the lord even the son of aaron and the levite in their place by whom burn offering and perfume be send up in smoke before the lord every morning and every evening and they put out the holy bread on it table and the gold support for the light with it light burn every evening for we keep the order give to u by the lord our god but you have go away from him . and now god be with u at our head and his priest with their loud horn sound against you . o child of israel do not make war on the lord the god of your father for it will not go well for you . but jeroboam have put some of his men to make a surprise attack on them from the back so some be facing judah and others be station secretly at their back . and judah turn their face saw that they be be attack in front and at the back and they give a cry for help to the lord while the priest be sound their horn . and the men of judah give a loud cry and at their cry god put fear into jeroboam and all israel before abijah and judah . and the child of israel go in flight before judah and god give them up into their hand . and abijah and his people put them to death with great destruction five hundred thousand of the best of israel be put to the sword . so at that time the child of israel be overcome and the child of judah get the good of them because they put their faith in the lord the god of their father . and abijah go after jeroboam and take some of his town beth el with it small town and jeshanah with it small town and ephron with it small town . and jeroboam do not get back his power again in the life time of abijah and the lord send death on him . but abijah become great and have fourteen wife and become the father of twenty two son and sixteen daughter . and the rest of the act of abijah and his way and his saying be record in the account of the prophet iddo .so abijah go to rest with his father and they put him into the earth in the town of david and asa his son become king in his place in his time the land be quiet for ten year . and asa do what be good and right in the eye of the lord his god for he take away the altar of strange god and the high place and have the upright stone break and the wood pillars cut down and he make judah go after the lord the god of their father and keep his law and his order . and he take away the high place and the sun image from all the town of judah and the kingdom be quiet under his rule . he make walled town in judah for the land be quiet and there be no war in those year because the lord have give him rest . he say to judah let u make these town building wall round them with tower and door and lock . the land be still ours because we have be true to the lord our god we have be true to him and he have give u rest on every side . so they go on building and all go well for them . and asa have an army of three hundred thousand men of judah arm with body cover and spear and two hundred and eighty thousand of benjamin arm with body cover and bow all these be men of war . and zerah the ethiopian with an army of a million and three hundred war carriage come out against them to mareshah . and asa go out against him and they put their force in position in the valley north of mareshah . and asa make prayer to the lord his god and say lord you only be able to give help against the strong to him who have no strength come to our help o lord our god for our hope be in you and in your name we have come out against this great army . o lord you be our god let not man 's power be great than yours . so the lord send fear on the ethiopian before asa and judah and the ethiopian go in flight . and asa and the people who be with him go after them as far a gerar and so great be the destruction among the ethiopian that they be not able to get their army together again for they be break before the lord and before his army and they take away a great amount of their good . and they overcome all the town round gerar because the lord send fear on them and they take away their good from the town for there be store of wealth in them . and they make an attack on the tent of the owner of the cattle and take away great number of sheep and camel and go back to jerusalem .and the spirit of god come on azariah the son of oded and he come face to face with asa and say to him give ear to me asa and all judah and benjamin the lord be with you while you be with him if your heart 's desire be for him he will be near you but if you give him up he will give you up . now for a long time israel have be without the true god and without a teaching priest and without the law but when in their trouble they be turn to the lord the god of israel search after him he let their search be reward . in those time there be no peace for him who go out or for him who come in but great trouble be on all the people of the land . and they be break by division nation against nation and town against town because god send all sort of trouble on them . but be you strong and let not your hand be feeble for your work will be reward . and asa hearing these word of azariah the son of oded the prophet take heart and put away all the disgust thing out of all the land of judah and benjamin and out of the town which he have take from the hill country of ephraim and he make new again the altar of the lord in front of the covered way of the lord 's house . and he get together all judah and benjamin and those of ephraim and manasseh and simeon who be live with them for number of them come to him out of israel when they saw that the lord his god be with him . so they come together at jerusalem in the third month in the fifteenth year of the rule of asa . and that day they make offering to the lord of the thing they have take in war seven hundred ox and seven thousand sheep . and they make an agreement to be true to the lord the god of their father with all their heart and all their soul and that anyone small or great man or woman who be not true to the lord the god of israel would be put to death . and they make an oath to the lord with a loud voice sound wind instrument and horn . and all judah be glad because of the oath for they have take it with all their heart turn to the lord with all their desire and he be with them and give them rest on every side . and asa would not let maacah his mother be queen because she have make a disgusting image for asherah and asa have her image cut down and break up and burn by the stream kidron . but the high place be not take away out of israel but still the heart of asa be true to the lord all his life . he take into the house of god all the thing which his father have make holy and those which he himself have make holy silver and gold and vessel . and there be no more war till the thirty fifth year of the rule of asa .in the thirty sixth year of the rule of asa baasha king of israel go up against judah building ramah so that no one be able to go out or in to asa king of judah . then asa take silver and gold out of the store of the lord 's house and of the king 's store house and send to ben hadad king of aram at damascus say let there be an agreement between me and you a there be between my father and your father see i have send you silver and gold go and put an end to your agreement with baasha king of israel so that he may give up attack me . and ben hadad do a king asa say and send the captain of his army against the town of israel attack ijon and dan and abel maim and all the store town of naphtali . then baasha hearing of it put a stop to the building of ramah and let his work come to an end . then king asa with all judah take away the stone and wood with which baasha be build ramah and he make use of them for build geba and mizpah . at that time hanani the seer come to asa king of judah and say to him because you have put your faith in the king of aram and not in the lord your god the army of the king of aram have get away out of your hand . be not the ethiopian and the lubim a very great army with war carriage and horseman more than might be number ? but because your faith be in the lord he give them up into your hand . for the eye of the lord go this way and that through all the earth let it be see that he be the strong support of those whose heart be true to him . in this you have do foolishly for from now you will have war . then asa be angry with the seer and put him in prison burn with wrath against him because of this thing . and at the same time asa be cruel to some of the people . now the act of asa first and last be record in the book of the king of judah and israel . in the thirty ninth year of his rule asa have a very bad disease of the foot but he do not go to the lord for help in his disease but to medical men . so asa go to rest with his father and death come to him in the forty first year of his rule . and they put him into the rest place which he have make for himself in the town of david in a bed full of sweet perfume of all sort of spice make by the perfumer 's art and they make a great burning for him .and jehoshaphat his son become king in his place and make himself strong against israel . he put force in all the walled town of judah and responsible chief in the land of judah and in the town of ephraim which asa his father have take . and the lord be with jehoshaphat because he go in the early way of his father not turn to the baal but turn to the god of his father and keep his law and not do a israel do . so the lord make his kingdom strong and all judah give offering to jehoshaphat and he have great wealth and honour . his heart be lift up in the way of the lord and he go so far a to take away the high place and the wood pillars out of judah . in the third year of his rule he send benhail and obadiah and zechariah and nethanel and micaiah his captain a teacher into the town of judah and with them shemaiah and nethaniah and zebadiah and asahel and shemiramoth and jehonathan and adonijah and tobijah and tob adonijah the levite and elishama and jehoram the priest . and they give teach in judah and have the book of the law of the lord with them they go through all the town of judah teach the people . and the fear of the lord be on all the kingdom of the land round judah so that they make no war against jehoshaphat . and some of the philistine take offering to jehoshaphat and make him payment of silver and the arabian give him flock seven thousand seven hundred sheep and seven thousand seven hundred he goats . jehoshaphat become great and great and make strong tower and store town in judah . he have much property in the town of judah he have force of arm men great and strong in jerusalem . this be the number of them list by their family the captain of thousand of judah adnah the captain and with him three hundred thousand men of war second to him jehohanan the captain and with him two hundred and eighty thousand after him amasiah the son of zichri who freely give himself to the lord and with him two hundred thousand men of war and the captain of benjamin eliada a great man of war and with him two hundred thousand arm with bow and body cover and after him jehozabad and with him a hundred and eighty thousand train for war . these be the men who be wait on the king in addition to those place by the king in the walled town through all judah .now jehoshaphat have great wealth and honour and his son be marry to ahab 's daughter . and after some year he go down to samaria to see ahab . and ahab make a feast for him and the people who be with him put to death great number of sheep and ox and he get jehoshaphat to go with him to ramoth gilead . for ahab king of israel say to jehoshaphat king of judah will you go with me to ramoth gilead ? and he say i be a you be and my people a your people we will be with you in the war . then jehoshaphat say to the king of israel let u now get direction from the lord . so the king of israel get together all the prophet four hundred men and say to them be i to go to ramoth gilead to make war or not ? and they say go up for god will give it into the hand of the king . but jehoshaphat say be there no other prophet of the lord here from whom we may get direction ? and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat there be still one man by whom we may get direction from the lord but i have no love for him because he have never be a prophet of good to me but only of evil he be micaiah the son of imla . and jehoshaphat say let not the king say so . then the king of israel sent for one of his unsexed servant and say go quickly and come back with micaiah the son of imla . now the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah be seat on their seat of authority dress in their robe by the doorway into samaria and all the prophet be act a prophet before them . and zedekiah the son of chenaanah make himself iron horn and say the lord say push back the aramaean with these you will put an end to them completely . and all the prophet say the same thing say go up to ramoth gilead and it will go well for you for the lord will give it into the hand of the king . now the servant who have go to get micaiah say to him see now all the prophet with one voice be say good thing to the king so let your word be like theirs and say good thing . and micaiah say by the living lord whatever the lord say to me i will say . when he come to the king the king say to him micaiah be we to go to ramoth gilead to make war or not ? and he say go up and it will go well for you and they will be give up into your hand . and the king say to him have i not again and again put you on your oath to say nothing to me but what be true in the name of the lord ? then he say i saw all israel wandering on the mountain like sheep without a keeper and the lord say these have no master let them go back every man to his house in peace . and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat do i not say that he would not be a prophet of good to me but of evil ? then he say give ear now to the word of the lord i saw the lord seat on his seat of power and all the army of heaven in their place at his right hand and at his left . and the lord say how may ahab king of israel be trick into go up to ramoth gilead to his death ? and one say one thing and one another . then a spirit come forward and take his place before the lord and say i will get him to do it by a trick . and the lord say to him how ? and he say i will go out and be a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all his prophet . and the lord say your trick will have it effect on him go out and do so . and now see the lord have put a spirit of deceit in the mouth of these prophet of yours and the lord have say evil against you . then zedekiah the son of chenaanah come near and give micaiah a blow on the side of his face say where be the spirit of the lord whose word be in you ? and micaiah say truly you will see on that day when you go into an inner room to keep yourself safe . and the king of israel say take micaiah and send him back to amon the ruler of the town and to joash the king 's son and say by the king 's order this man be to be put in prison and give prison food till i come back in peace . and micaiah say if you come back at all in peace the lord have not send his word by me . so the king of israel and jehoshaphat the king of judah go up to ramoth gilead . and the king of israel say to jehoshaphat i will make a change in my clothing so that i do not seem to be the king and will go into the fight but do you put on your robe . so the king of israel make a change in his dress and they go to the fight . now the king of aram have give order to the captain of his war carriage say make no attack on small or great but only on the king of israel . so when the captain of the war carriages saw jehoshaphat they say it be the king of israel . and turn about they come round him but jehoshaphat give a cry and the lord come to his help and god send them away from him . now when the captain of the war carriages saw that he be not the king of israel they go back from go after him . and a certain man send an arrow from his bow without thought of it direction and give the king of israel a wound where his breastplate be join to his clothing so he say to the driver of his war carriage go to one side and take me away out of the army for i be badly wound . but the fight become more violent while the day go on and the king of israel be support in his war carriage face the aramaean till the evening and by sundown he be dead .and jehoshaphat king of judah go back to his house in jerusalem in peace . and jehu the son of hanani the seer go to king jehoshaphat and say to him be it right for you to go to the help of evil doer love the hater of the lord ? because of this the wrath of the lord have come on you . but still there be some good in you for you have put away the wood pillars out of the land and have give your heart to the worship of god . and jehoshaphat be live in jerusalem and he go out again among the people from beer sheba to the hill country of ephraim guide them back to the lord the god of their father . and he put judge through all the land in every walled town of judah and say to the judge take care what you do for you be judge not for man but for the lord and he be with you in the decision you give . so now let the fear of the lord be in you do your work with care for in the lord our god there be no evil or respect for high position or taking of payment to do wrong . then in jerusalem he give authority to certain of the levite and the priest and the head of family of israel to give decision for the lord and in the cause of those live in jerusalem . and he give them their order say you be to do your work in the fear of the lord in good faith and with a true heart . and if any cause come before you from your brother live in their town where the death punishment be in question or where there be question of law or order or rule or decision make them take care that they be not in the wrong before the lord so that wrath may not come on you and on your brother do this and you yourselves will not be in the wrong . and now amariah the chief priest be over you in all question to do with the lord and zebadiah the son of ishmael the head of the family of judah in everything to do with the king 's business and the levite will be overseer for you . be strong to do the work and may the lord be with the upright .now after this the child of moab and the child of ammon and with them some of the meunim make war against jehoshaphat . and they come to jehoshaphat with the news say a great army be move against you from edom across the sea and now they be in hazazon tamar which be en gedi . then jehoshaphat in his fear go to the lord for direction and give order all through judah for the people to go without food . and judah come together to make prayer for help from the lord from every town of judah they come to give worship to the lord . and jehoshaphat take his place in the meeting of judah and jerusalem in the house of the lord in front of the new open space and say o lord the god of our father be you not god in heaven ? be you not ruler over all the kingdom of the nation ? and in your hand be power and strength so that no one be able to keep his place against you . do you not o lord our god after drive out the people of this land before your people israel give it to the seed of abraham your friend for ever ? and they make it their living place building there a holy house for your name and say if evil come on u the sword or punishment or disease or need of food we will come to this house and to you for your name be in this house cry to you in our trouble and you will give u salvation in answer to our cry . and now see the child of ammon and moab and the people of mount seir whom you keep israel from attack when they come out of egypt so that turn to one side they do not send destruction on them see now how a our reward they have come to send u out of your land which you have give u a our heritage . o our god will you not be their judge ? for our strength be not equal to this great army which be come against u and we be at a loss what to do but our eye be on you . and all judah be wait before the lord with their little one their wife and their child . then before all the meeting the spirit of the lord come on jahaziel the son of zechariah son of benaiah son of jeiel son of mattaniah a levite and one of the family of asaph and he say give ear o judah and you people of jerusalem and you king jehoshaphat the lord say to you have no fear and do not be trouble on account of this great army for the fight be not yours but god 's . go down against them tomorrow see they be come up by the slope of ziz at the end of the valley before the waste land of jeruel you will come face to face with them . there will be no need for you to take up arm in this fight put yourselves in position and keep where you be and you will see the salvation of the lord with you o judah and jerusalem have no fear and do not be trouble go out against them tomorrow for the lord be with you . then jehoshaphat go down with his face to the earth and all judah and the people of jerusalem give worship to the lord fall down before him . and the levite the child of the kohathites and the korahites get to their foot and give praise to the lord the god of israel with a loud voice . and early in the morning they get up and go out to the waste land of tekoa and when they be go out jehoshaphat take his station and say to them give ear to me o judah and you people of jerusalem have faith in the lord your god and you will be safe have faith in his prophet and all will go well for you . and after discussion with the people he put in their place those who be to make melody to the lord praise him in holy robe while they go at the head of the army and say may the lord be praise for his mercy be unchanging for ever . and at the first note of song and praise the lord send a surprise attack against the child of ammon and moab and the people of mount seir who have come against judah and they be overcome . and the child of ammon and moab make an attack on the people of mount seir with a view to their complete destruction and when they have put an end to the people of seir everyman 's hand be turn against his neighbour for his destruction . and judah come to the watchtower of the waste land and look in the direction of the army they saw only dead body stretch on the earth no living man be to be see . and when jehoshaphat and his people come to take their good from them they saw beast in great number and wealth and clothing and thing of value more than they be able to take away all this they take for themselves and they be three day get it away there be so much . on the fourth day they all come together in the valley of blessing and there they give bless to the lord for which cause that place have be name the valley of bless to this day . then all the men of judah and jerusalem go back with jehoshaphat at their head come back to jerusalem with joy for the lord have make them glad over their hater . so they come to jerusalem with corded instrument and wind instrument into the house of the lord . and the fear of god come on all the kingdom of the land when they have news of how the lord make war on those who come against israel . so the kingdom of jehoshaphat be quiet for the lord give him rest on every side . and jehoshaphat be king over judah he be thirty five year old when he become king and he be rule for twenty five year in jerusalem his mother 's name be azubah the daughter of shilhi . he go in the way of his father asa not turn away but do right in the eye of the lord . the high place however be not take away and the heart of the people be still not true to the god of their father . now a for the rest of the act of jehoshaphat first and last they be record in the word of jehu the son of hanani which be put in the book of the king of israel . after this jehoshaphat king of judah become friend with ahaziah king of israel who do much evil together they make ship to go to tarshish build them in ezion geber . then the word of eliezer the prophet the son of dodavahu of mareshah come against jehoshaphat say because you have let yourself be join with ahaziah the lord have send destruction on your work . and the ship be break and be not able to go to tarshish .and jehoshaphat go to rest with his father and his body be put into the earth in the town of david . and jehoram his son become king in his place . and he have brother son of jehoshaphat azariah jehiel zechariah azariah michael and shephatiah all these be son of jehoshaphat king of israel . and their father give them much silver and gold and thing of great value as well a walled town in judah but the kingdom he give to jehoram because he be the old . now when jehoram have take his place over his father 's kingdom and have make his position safe he put all his brother to death with the sword as well a some of the prince of israel . jehoram be thirty two year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for eight year . he go in the way of the king of israel and do a the family of ahab do for the daughter of ahab be his wife and he do evil in the eye of the lord . but it be not the lord 's purpose to send destruction on the family of david because of the agreement he have make with david when he say he would give to him and to his son a light for ever . in his time edom make themselves free from the rule of judah and take a king for themselves . then jehoram go over with his captain and all his war carriage ... make an attack by night on the edomites whose force be all round him ... on the captain of the war carriage . so edom make themselves free from the rule of judah to this day and at the same time libnah make itself free from his rule because he be turn away from the lord the god of his father . and more than this he make high place in the mountain of judah teach the people of jerusalem to go after false god and guide judah away from the true way . and a letter come to him from elijah the prophet say the lord the god of your father david say because you have not keep to the way of your father jehoshaphat or the way of asa king of judah but have go in the way of the king of israel and have make judah and the people of jerusalem go after false god a the family of ahab do and because you have put to death your father 's son your brother who be good than yourself now truly the lord will send a great destruction on your people and your child and your wife and everything which be yours and you yourself will undergo the cruel pain of a disease in your stomach so that day by day your inside will be fall out because of the disease . then the philistine and the arabian who be by ethiopia be move by the lord to make war on jehoram and they come up against judah force a way into it and take away all the good in the king 's house as well a his son and his wife so that he have no son but only jehoahaz the young . and after all this the lord send on him a disease of the stomach from which it be impossible for him to be make well . and time go on and after two year his inside fall out because of the disease he come to his death in cruel pain . and his people make no burning for him like the burning make for his father . he be thirty two year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for eight year and at his death he be not regret they put his body into the earth in the town of david but not in the rest place of the king .and the people of jerusalem make ahaziah his young son king in his place for the band of men who come with the arabian to the army have put all the old son to death . so ahaziah the son of jehoram become king . ahaziah be twenty two year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for one year . his mother 's name be athaliah the daughter of omri . he go in the way of the family of ahab for his mother be his teacher in evil do . and he do evil in the eye of the lord a the family of ahab do for after the death of his father they be his guide to his destruction . act on their suggestion he go with jehoram son of ahab king of israel to make war on hazael king of aram at ramoth gilead and joram be wound by the bowman . and he go back to jezreel to get well from the wound which they have give him at ramah when he be fight against hazael king of aram . and ahaziah the son of jehoram king of judah go down to jezreel to see jehoram the son of ahab because he be ill. now by the purpose of god ahaziah 's journey to see jehoram be the cause of his downfall for when he come there he go out with jehoram against jehu the son of nimshi who have be mark out by the lord for the destruction of the family of ahab . now when jehu be effect the punishment of the family of ahab he come to the prince of judah and the son of ahaziah 's brother the servant of ahaziah and put them to death . and he go in search of ahaziah and when they come where he be for he be in a secret place in samaria they take him to jehu and put him to death then they put his body to rest in the earth for they say he be the son of jehoshaphat whose heart be true to the lord . so the family of ahaziah have no power to keep the kingdom . now when athaliah the mother of ahaziah saw that her son be dead she have all the rest of the seed of the kingdom of judah put to death . but jehoshabeath the daughter of the king secretly take joash the son of ahaziah away from among the king 's son who be put to death and put him and the woman who take care of him in a bedroom . so jehoshabeath the daughter of king jehoram the wife of jehoiada the priest and sister of ahaziah keep him safe from athaliah so that she do not put him to death . and she keep him safe with her in the house of god for six year while athaliah be rule the land .in the seventh year jehoiada make himself strong and make an agreement with the captain of hundred azariah the son of jeroham ishmael the son of jehohanan azariah the son of obed maaseiah the son of adaiah and elishaphat the son of zichri . and they go through judah get together the levite and the head of family in israel from all the town of judah and they come to jerusalem . and all the people make an agreement with the king in the house of god . and he say to them truly the king 's son will be king a the lord have say about the son of david . this be what you be to do let a third of you of the priest and levite who come in on the sabbath keep the door and a third be to be station at the king 's house and a third at the doorway of the horse while all the people be wait in the open space round the house of the lord . but let no one come into the house of the lord but only the priest and those of the levite who have work to do there they may go in for they be holy but the rest of the people be to keep the order of the lord . and the levite be to make a circle round the king every man be arm and any man who come into the house be to be put to death you be to keep with the king when he come in and when he go out . so the levite and all judah do a jehoiada the priest have give them order every one take with him his men those who be to come in and those who be to go out on the sabbath for jehoiada have not send away the division . then jehoiada the priest give to the captain of hundred the spear and body cover which have be king david 's and which be keep in the house of god . and he put all the people in position every man with his instrument of war in his hand from the right side of the house to the leave by the altar and the house and all round the king . then they make the king 's son come out and they put the crown on his head and give him the arm band and make him king and jehoiada and his son put the holy oil on him and say long life to the king . now athaliah hear the noise of the people run and praise the king come to the people in the house of the lord and look she saw the king in his place by the pillar at the doorway and the captain and the horn by his side and all the people of the land be give sign of joy and sound the horn and the maker of melody be play on instrument of music take the chief part in the song of praise . then athaliah violently part her robe say broken faith break faith ! then jehoiada the priest give order to the captain of hundred who have authority over the army say take her outside the line and let anyone who go after her be put to death with the sword . for the priest say let her not be put to death in the house of the lord . so they put their hand on her and she go to the king 's house by the doorway of the king 's horse and there she be put to death . and jehoiada make an agreement between the lord and all the people and the king that they would be the lord 's people . then all the people go to the house of baal and have it pull down and it altar and image break up and mattan the priest of baal they put to death before the altar . and jehoiada put the work and the care of the house of the lord into the hand of the priest and the levite who have be group in division by david to make burned offering to the lord a it be record in the law of moses with joy and song a david have say . and he put door keeper at the door of the lord 's house to see that no one who be unclean in any way might come in . then he take the captain of hundred and the chief and the ruler of the people and all the people of the land and they come down with the king from the house of the lord through the high doorway into the king 's house and put the king on the seat of the kingdom . so all the people of the land be glad and the town be quiet for they have put athaliah to death with the sword .joash be seven year old when he become king and he be rule for forty year in jerusalem his mother 's name be zibiah of beer sheba . and joash do what be right in the eye of the lord as long a jehoiada the priest be live . and jehoiada take two wife for him and he become the father of son and daughter . now after this joash have a desire to put the house of the lord into good order again and get together the priest and levites he say to them go out into the town of judah year by year and get from all israel money to keep the house of your god in good condition and see that this be do without loss of time . the levite however be slow in do so . then the king sent for jehoiada the chief priest and say to him why have you not give the levite order that the tax fix by moses the servant of the lord and by the meeting of israel for the tent of witness be to be get in from judah and jerusalem and hand over ? for the house of the lord have be break up by athaliah that evil woman and her son and all it holy thing they have give to the baal . so at the king 's order they make a chest and put it outside the doorway of the house of the lord . and an order be send out through all judah and jerusalem that payment be to be make to the lord of the tax which moses the servant of god have put on israel in the waste land . and all the chief and all the people come gladly and put their money into the chest till they have all give . so when the chest be take to the king 's servant by the levite and they saw that there be much money in it the king 's scribe and the chief priest 's servant take the money out and put the chest back in it place . they do this day by day and get together a great amount of money . then the king and jehoiada give it to those who be responsible for get the work do on the lord 's house and with it they get wall builder and woodworker and metal worker to put the house of the lord in good order again . so the workman do their work make good what be damage and build up the house of god till it be strong and beautiful again . and when the work be do they take the rest of the money to the king and jehoiada and it be use for make the vessel for the house of the lord all the vessel need for the offering the spoon and the vessel of gold and silver . and as long a jehoiada be live the regular burn offering be offer in the house of the lord . but jehoiada become old and full of day and he come to his end he be a hundred and thirty year old at the time of his death . and they put him into his last resting place in the town of david among the king because he have do good in israel for god and for his house . now after the death of jehoiada the chief of judah come and go down on their face before the king . then the king give ear to them . and they give up the house of the lord god of their father and become worshipper of pillar of wood and of the image and because of this sin of theirs wrath come on judah and jerusalem . and the lord send them prophet to make them come back to him and they give witness against them but they would not give ear . then the spirit of god come on zechariah the son of jehoiada the priest and get up before the people he say to them god have say why do you go against the order of the lord so that everything go badly for you ? because you have give up the lord he have give you up . but when they have make a secret design against him he be stone with stone by the king 's order in the outer square of the lord 's house . so king joash do not keep in mind how good jehoiada his father have be to him but put his son to death . and in the hour of his death he say may the lord see it and take payment ! now in the spring the army of the aramaean come up against him they come against judah and jerusalem put to death all the great men of the people and send all the good they take from them to the king of damascus . for though the army of aram be only a small one the lord give a very great army into their hand because they have give up the lord the god of their father . so they put into effect the punishment of joash . and when they have go away from him for he be break with disease his servant make a secret design against him because of the blood of the son of jehoiada the priest and they put him to death on his bed and they put his body into the earth in the town of david but not in the rest place of the king . those who make design against him be zabad the son of shimeath an ammonite woman and jehozabad the son of shimrith a moabite woman . now the story of his son and all the word say by the prophet against him and the building up again of the lord 's house be record in the account in the book of the king . and amaziah his son become king in his place .amaziah be twenty five year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for twenty nine year his mother 's name be jehoaddan of jerusalem . he do what be right in the eye of the lord but his heart be not completely true to the lord . now when he become strong in the kingdom he put to death those men who have take the life of the king his father . but he do not put their child to death for he keep the order of the lord record in the book of the law of moses say the father be not to be put to death for their child or the child for their father but a man be to be put to death for the sin which he himself have do . then amaziah get all judah together and put them in order by their family even all judah and benjamin under captain of thousand and captain of hundred and he have those of twenty year old and over numbered and they come to three hundred thousand of the best fight men train for war and in the use of the spear and the body cover . and for a hundred talent of silver he get a hundred thousand fight men from israel . but a man of god come to him say o king let not the army of israel go with you for the lord be not with israel that be the child of ephraim . but go yourself and be strong in war god will not let you go down before those who be fight against you for god have power to give help or to send you down before your attacker . then amaziah say to the man of god but what be to be do about the hundred talent which i have give for the armed band of israel ? and the man of god in answer say god be able to give you much more than this . so amaziah separate the arm band which have come to him from ephraim send them back again which make them very angry with judah and they go back burn with wrath . then amaziah take heart and go out at the head of his people and come to the valley of salt where he put to death ten thousand of the child of seir and ten thousand more the child of israel take living and make them go up to the top of the rock push them down from the top of the rock so that their body be break by the fall . but the men of the band which amaziah send back and do not take with him to the fight make attack on the town of judah from samaria to beth horon put to death three thousand of their people and take away a great store of their good . now when amaziah come back from the destruction of the edomites he take the god of the child of seir and make them his god worship them and burn offering before them . and so the wrath of the lord be move against amaziah and he send a prophet to him who say why have you go after the god of the people who have not give their people salvation from your hand ? but while he be talk to him the king say to him have we make you one of the king 's government ? say no more or it will be the cause of your death . then the prophet give up protesting and say it be clear to me that god 's purpose be your destruction because you have do this and have not give ear to my word . then amaziah king of judah act on the suggestion of his servant send to joash the son of jehoahaz the son of jehu king of israel say come let u have a meeting face to face . and joash king of israel sent to amaziah king of judah say the thorn tree in lebanon sent to the cedar in lebanon say give your daughter to my son for a wife and a beast from the woodland in lebanon go by crush the thorn under his foot . you say see i have overcome edom and your heart be lift up with pride now keep in your country why do you make cause of trouble put yourself and judah with you in danger of downfall ? but amaziah give no attention and this be the purpose of god so that he might give them up into the hand of joash because they have go after the god of edom . and so joash king of israel go up and he and amaziah king of judah come face to face at beth shemesh in judah . and judah be overcome before israel and they go in flight every man to his tent . and joash king of israel make amaziah king of judah the son of joash the son of jehoahaz prisoner at beth shemesh and take him to jerusalem and he have the wall of jerusalem pull down from the doorway of ephraim to the doorway in the angle four hundred cubit . and he take all the gold and silver and all the vessel which be in the house of the lord under the care of obed edom and all the wealth from the king 's house as well a those whose life would be the price of broken faith and go back to samaria . amaziah son of joash king of judah go on living for fifteen year after the death of joash the son of jehoahaz king of israel . now the rest of the act of amaziah first and last be they not record in the book of the king of judah and israel ? now from the time when amaziah give up worship the lord they make secret design against him in jerusalem and he go in flight to lachish but they send to lachish after him and put him to death there . and they take his body on horseback and put it into the earth with his father in the town of david .then all the people of judah take uzziah who be sixteen year old and make him king in place of his father amaziah . he be the builder of eloth which he get back for judah after the death of the king . uzziah be sixteen year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for fifty two year his mother 's name be jechiliah of jerusalem . he do what be right in the eye of the lord a his father amaziah have do . he give himself to search after god in the day of zechariah who make men wise in the fear of god and as long a he be true to the lord god make thing go well for him . he go out and make war against the philistine pull down the wall of gath and jabneh and ashdod and building town in the country round ashdod and among the philistine . and god give him help against the philistine and against the arabian live in gur baal and against the meunim . the ammonite give offering to uzziah and news of him go out as far a the limit of egypt for he become very great in power . uzziah make tower in jerusalem at the doorway in the angle and at the doorway in the valley and at the turn of the wall arm them . and he put up tower in the waste land and make place for store water for he have much cattle in the low hill and in the table land and he have farmer and vine keeper in the mountain and in the fertile land for he be a lover of farm . in addition uzziah have an army of fight men who go out to war in band a they have be list by jeiel the scribe and maaseiah the ruler under the authority of hananiah one of the king 's captain . the head of family the strong men of war be two thousand six hundred . and under their order be a trained army of three hundred and seven thousand five hundred of great strength in war help the king against any who come against him . and uzziah have all these force arm with body cover and spear and head cover and coat of metal and bow and stone for send from leather band . and in jerusalem he make machine the invention of expert men to be place on the tower and angle of the wall for send arrow and great stone . and his name be honour far and wide for he be greatly help till he be strong . but when he have become strong his heart be lift up in pride cause his destruction and he do evil against the lord his god for he go into the temple of the lord for the purpose of burn perfume on the altar of perfume . and azariah the priest go in after him with eighty of the lord 's priest who be strong men and they make protest to uzziah the king and say to him the burning of perfume uzziah be not your business but that of the priest the son of aaron who have be make holy for this work go out of the holy place for you have do wrong and it will not be to your honour before god . then uzziah be angry and he have in his hand a vessel for burn perfume and while his wrath be bitter against the priest the mark of the leper 's disease come out on his brow before the eye of the priest in the house of the lord by the altar of perfume . and azariah the chief priest and all the priest look at him saw the mark of the leper on his brow and they send him out quickly and he himself go out straight away for the lord 's punishment have come on him . so king uzziah be a leper till the day of his death living separately in his private house for he be cut off from the house of god and jotham his son be rule over his house judge the people of the land . now the rest of the act of uzziah first and last be record by isaiah the prophet the son of amoz . so uzziah go to rest with his father and they put his body into the earth in the field use for the rest place of the king for they say he be a leper and jotham his son become king in his place .jotham be twenty five year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for sixteen year and his mother 's name be jerushah the daughter of zadok . he do what be right in the eye of the lord a his father uzziah have do but he do not go into the temple of the lord . and the people still go on in their evil way . he put up the high doorway of the house of the lord and do much building on the wall of the ophel . in addition he make town in the hill country of judah and strong building and tower in the woodland . he go to war with the king of the child of ammon and overcome them . that year the child of ammon give him a hundred talent of silver and ten thousand measure of grain and ten thousand measure of barley . and the child of ammon give him the same amount the second year and the third . so jotham become strong because in all his way he make the lord his guide . now the rest of the act of jotham and all his war and his way be record in the book of the king of israel and judah . he be twenty five year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for sixteen year . and jotham go to rest with his father and they put his body into the earth in the town of david and ahaz his son become king in his place .ahaz be twenty year old when he become king and he be rule in jerusalem for sixteen year he do not do what be right in the eye of the lord like david his father but he go in the way of the king of israel and make image of metal for the baal . more than this he have offering burn in the valley of the son of hinnom and make his child go through fire copy the disgust way of the nation whom the lord have send out of the land before the child of israel . and he make offering and have perfume burn in the high place and on the hill and under every green tree . so the lord his god give him up into the hand of the king of aram and they overcome him and take away a great number of his people a prisoner to damascus . then he be give into the hand of the king of israel who send great destruction on him . for pekah the son of remaliah in one day put to death a hundred and twenty thousand men of judah all of them good fight men because they have give up the lord the god of their father . and zichri a great fight man of ephraim put to death maaseiah the king 's son and azrikam the controller of his house and elkanah who be second in authority to the king . and the child of israel take away a prisoner from their brother two hundred thousand woman and son and daughter and a great store of their good and take them to samaria . but a prophet of the lord be there name oded and he go out in front of the army which be come into samaria and say to them truly because the lord the god of your father be angry with judah he give them up into your hand and you have put them to death in an outburst of wrath stretch up to heaven . and now your purpose be to keep the child of judah and jerusalem a men servant and woman servant under your yoke but be there no sin against the lord your god to be see among yourselves ? and now give ear to me and send back the prisoner whom you have take from your brother for the wrath of the lord be burn against you . then certain of the head of the child of ephraim azariah the son of johanan berechiah the son of meshillemoth jehizkiah the son of shallum and amasa the son of hadlai put themselves against those who have come from the war and say to them you be not to let these prisoner come here for what you be design to do will be a cause of sin against the lord to u make even great our sin and our wrongdoing which now be great enough and his wrath be burn against israel . so the arm men give up the prisoner and the good they have take to the head and the meeting of the people . and those men who have be name go up and take the prisoner clothe those among them who be uncover with thing from the good which have be take in the war and put robe on them and shoe on their foot and they give them food and drink and oil for their body and seat all the feeble among them on ass they take them to jericho the town of palm tree to their people and then go back to samaria . at that time king ahaz sent for help to the king of assyria . for the edomites have come again attack judah and take away prisoner . and the philistine force their way into the town of the lowland and the south of judah have take beth shemesh and aijalon and gederoth and soco with their daughter town as well a timnah and gimzo and their daughter town and be live there . for the lord make judah low because of ahaz king of israel for he have give up all self control in judah sin greatly against the lord . then tiglath pileser king of assyria come to him but be a cause of trouble and not of strength to him . for ahaz take a part of the wealth from the house of the lord and from the house of the king and of the great men and give it to the king of assyria but it be no help to him . and in the time of his trouble this same king ahaz do even more evil against the lord . for he make offering to the god of damascus who be attack him and say because the god of the king of aram be give them help i will make offering to them so that they may give me help . but they be the cause of his downfall and of that of all israel . and ahaz get together the vessel of the house of god cut up all the vessel of the house of god and shut the door of the lord 's house and he make altar in every part of jerusalem . and in every town of judah he make high place where perfume be burn to other god awake the wrath of the lord the god of his father . now the rest of his act and all his way first and last be record in the book of the king of judah and israel . and ahaz go to rest with his father and they put his body into the earth in jerusalem but they do not put him in the rest place of the king of israel and hezekiah his son become king in his place .hezekiah become king when he be twenty five year old and he be king in jerusalem for twenty nine year and his mother 's name be abijah the daughter of zechariah . he do what be right in the eye of the lord a his father david have do . in the first year of his rule in the first month open the door of the lord 's house he make them strong . and he send for the priest and the levite and get them together in the wide place on the east side and say to them give ear to me o levite now make yourselves holy and make holy the house of the lord the god of your father and take away everything unclean from the holy place . for our father have do evil sinning in the eye of the lord our god and have give him up turn away their face from the house of the lord and turn their back on him . the door of his house have be shut and the light put out no perfume have be burn or offering make to the god of israel in his holy place . and so the wrath of the lord have come on judah and jerusalem and he have give them up to be a cause of fear and wonder and shame a your eye have see . for see our father have be put to death with the sword and our son and daughter and wife have be take away prisoner because of this . now it be my purpose to make an agreement with the lord the god of israel so that the heat of his wrath may be turn away from u . my son take care now for you have be mark out by the lord to come before him and to be his servant burn offering to him . then the levite take their place mahath the son of amasai and joel the son of azariah among the kohathites and of the son of merari kish the son of abdi and azariah the son of jehallelel and of the gershonites joah the son of zimmah and eden the son of joah and of the son of elizaphan shimri and jeuel and of the son of asaph zechariah and mattaniah and of the son of heman jehuel and shimei and of the son of jeduthun shemaiah and uzziel . and they get their brother together and make themselves holy and go in a the king have say by the word of the lord to make the house of the lord clean . and the priest go into the inner part of the house of the lord to make it clean and everything unclean which be to be see in the temple of the lord they take out into the outer square of the lord 's house and the levite get it together and take it away to the stream kidron . on the first day of the first month the work of make the house holy be start and on the eighth day they come to the covered way of the lord in eight day they make the lord 's house holy and on the sixteenth day of the first month the work be do . then they go in to king hezekiah and say we have make all the house of the lord clean as well a the altar of burn offering with all it vessel and the table for the holy bread with all it vessel . and all the vessel which be turn out by king ahaz in his sin while he be king we have put in order and make holy and now they be in their place before the altar of the lord . then hezekiah the king get up early and get together the great men of the town and go up to the house of the lord . and they take with them seven ox and seven male sheep and seven lamb and seven he goats a a sin offering for the kingdom and for the holy house and for judah . and he give order to the son of aaron the priest that these be to be offer on the altar of the lord . so they put the ox to death and their blood be give to the priest to be drain out against the altar then they put the male sheep to death drain out their blood against the altar and they put the lamb to death drain out their blood against the altar . then they take the he goats for the sin offering place them before the king and the meeting of the people and they put their hand on them and the priest put them to death and make a sin offering with their blood on the altar to take away the sin of all israel for the king give order that the burned offering and the sin offering be for all israel . then he put the levite in their place in the house of the lord with brass and cord instrument of music a order by david and gad the king 's seer and nathan the prophet for the order be the lord 's give by his prophet . so the levite take their place with david 's instrument and the priest with their horn . and hezekiah give the word for the burned offering to be offer on the altar . and when the burn offering be start then the song of the lord be start with the blowing of horn and with all the instrument of david king of israel . and all the people give worship to the sound of song and the blowing of horn and this go on till the burned offering be end . and at the end of the offer the king and all who be present with him give worship with bent head . then king hezekiah and the captain give order to the levite to give praise to god in the word of david and asaph the seer . and they make song of praise with joy and with bent head give worship . then hezekiah make answer and say now that you have give yourselves to the lord come near and take offering and praise offering into the house of the lord . so all the people take in offering and praise offering and those whose heart be move take in burned offering . the number of burn offering which the people take in be seventy ox a hundred male sheep and two hundred lamb all these be for burn offering to the lord . and the holy thing be six hundred ox and three thousand sheep . there be not enough priest for the work of cut up all the burn offering so their brother the levite give them help till the work be do and the priest have make themselves holy for the levite be more upright in heart to make themselves holy than the priest . and there be a great amount of burn offering with the fat of the peace offering and the drink offering for every burned offering . so the work of the lord 's house be put in order . and hezekiah and all the people be full of joy because god have make the people ready for the thing be do suddenly .then hezekiah sent word to all israel and judah and send letter to ephraim and manasseh request them to come to the house of the lord at jerusalem to keep the passover to the lord the god of israel . for the king after discussion with his chief and all the body of the people in jerusalem have make a decision to keep the passover in the second month . it be not possible to keep it at that time because not enough priest have make themselves holy and the people have not come together in jerusalem . and the thing be right in the eye of the king and all the people . so it be order that word be to be send out through all israel from beer sheba to dan that they be to come to keep the passover to the lord the god of israel at jerusalem because they have not keep it in great number in agreement with the law . so runner go with letter from the king and his chief through all israel and judah by the order of the king say o child of israel come back again to the lord the god of abraham isaac and israel so that he may come again to that small band of you which have be keep safe out of the hand of the king of assyria . do not be like your father and your brother who be sinner against the lord the god of their father so that he make them a cause of fear a you see . now do not be hard hearted a your father be but give yourselves to the lord and come into his holy place which he have make his for ever and be the servant of the lord your god so that the heat of his wrath may be turn away from you . for if you come back to the lord those who take away your brother and your child will have pity on them and let them come back to this land for the lord your god be full of grace and mercy and his face will not be turn away from you if you come back to him . so the runner go from town to town through all the country of ephraim and manasseh as far a zebulun but they be laugh at and make sport of . however some of asher and manasseh and zebulun put away their pride and come to jerusalem . and in judah the power of god give them one heart to do the order of the king and the captain which be take a the word of the lord . so a very great number of people come together at jerusalem to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month . and they get to work and take away all the altar in jerusalem and they put all the vessel for burn perfume into the stream kidron . then on the fourteenth day of the second month they put the passover lamb to death and the priest and the levite be sham and make themselves holy and take burn offering into the house of the lord . and they take their place in their right order a it be order in the law of moses the man of god the priest drain out on the altar the blood give them by the levite . for there be still a number of the people there who have not make themselves holy so the levite have to put passover lambs to death for those who be not clean to make them holy to the lord . for a great number of the people from ephraim and manasseh issachar and zebulun have not make themselves clean but they take the passover meal though not in the right way . for hezekiah have make prayer for them say may the good lord have mercy on everyone who with all his heart be turn to god the lord the god of his father even if he have not be make clean after the rule of the holy place . and the lord give ear to hezekiah and make the people well . so the child of israel who be present in jerusalem keep the feast of unleavened bread for seven day with great joy and the levite and the priest give praise to the lord day by day make melody to the lord with loud instrument . and hezekiah say kind word to the levite who be expert in the ordering of the worship of the lord so they keep the feast for seven day offer peace offering and praise the lord the god of their father . and by the desire of all the people the feast go on for another seven day and they keep the seven day with joy . for hezekiah king of judah give to the people for offering a thousand ox and seven thousand sheep and the ruler give a thousand ox and ten thousand sheep and a great number of priest make themselves holy . and all the people of judah with the priest and the levite and those who have come from israel and men from other land who have come from israel or who be live in judah be glad with great joy . so there be great joy in jerusalem for nothing like this have be see in jerusalem from the time of solomon the son of david king of israel . then the priest and the levite give the people a blessing and the voice of their prayer go up to the holy place of god in heaven .now when all this be over all the men of israel who be present go out into the town of judah cause the stone pillars to be break up and the wood pillar to be cut down pull down the high place and the altar in all judah and benjamin as well a in ephraim and manasseh till all be go . then all the child of israel go back to their town every man to his property . then hezekiah put in order the division of the priest and levites every man in his division in relation to his work for the burned offering and peace offering and for the ordering of worship and for give praise at the door of the lord 's house . and he give the king 's part of his private property for the burned offering that be for the morning and evening offering and the offering for the sabbath and the new moon and the regular feast a it be record in the law of the lord . in addition he give order to the people of jerusalem to give to the priest and levite that part which be theirs by right so that they might be strong in keep the law of the lord . and when the order be make public straight away the child of israel give in great amount the first fruit of their grain and wine and oil and honey and of the produce of their field and they take in a tenth part of everything a great store . and the child of israel and judah who be live in the town of judah come with the tenth part of their ox and sheep and a tenth of all the holy thing which be to be give to the lord their god and put them in great mass . the first store of thing be put down in the third month and in the seventh month the mass be complete . and when hezekiah and the ruler come and saw all the store of good they give praise to the lord and to his people israel . then hezekiah put question to the priest and levites about the store of good . and azariah the chief priest of the family of zadok say in answer from the time when the people first come with their offering into the house of the lord we have have food enough and more than enough for the blessing of the lord be on his people and there be this great store which have not be use . then hezekiah say that store room be to be make ready in the house of the lord and this be do . and in them they put all the offering and the tenth and the holy thing keep nothing back and over them be conaniah the levite with shimei his brother second to him . and jehiel and azaziah and nahath and asahel and jerimoth and jozabad and eliel and ismachiah and mahath and benaiah be overseer under the direction of conaniah and shimei his brother by the order of hezekiah the king and azariah the ruler of the house of god . and kore the son of imnah the levite the keeper of the east door have control of the offering freely give to god and the distribution of the offering of the lord and the most holy thing . and under him be eden and miniamin and jeshua and shemaiah and amariah and shecaniah in the town of the priest who be make responsible for give it to all their brother by division to small and great as well a to all the male of three year old and over list by their family who go into the house of the lord to do what be need day by day for their special work with their division . and the family of the priest be list by their father ' name but the levite of twenty year old and over be list in relation to their work in their division and in the list be all their little one and their wife and their son and daughter through all the people they make themselves holy in the position which they be give . and a for the son of aaron the priest live in the country on the outskirt of their town every different town there be men mark out by name to give their part of the good to all the male among the priest and to all who be list among the levite . this hezekiah do through all judah he do what be good and right and true before the lord his god . and for everything he undertake in connection with the work of the house of god and his law and order he get direction from god and do it with serious purpose and thing go well for him .now after these thing and this true hearted work sennacherib king of assyria come into judah and put his army in position before the walled town of judah design to make his way into them by force . and when hezekiah saw that sennacherib have come for the purpose of fight against jerusalem he take up with his ruler and men of war the question of stop up the water spring outside the town and they give him their support . so they get together a great number of people and have all the water spring and the stream flow through the land stop up say why let the king of assyria come and have much water ? then he take heart building up the wall where it be break down and make it tower higher and build another wall outside and he make strong the millo in the town of david and get together a great store of all sort of instrument of war . and he put war chief over the people and sent for them all to come together to him in the wide place at the doorway into the town and to give them heart he say to them be strong and take heart have no fear and do not be trouble on account of the king of assyria and all the great army with him for there be a great with u . with him be an arm of flesh but we have the lord our god help u and fight for u . and the people put their faith in what hezekiah king of judah say . after this sennacherib king of assyria send his servant to jerusalem at that time he be station with all his army in front of lachish to say to hezekiah and all the men of judah in jerusalem sennacherib king of assyria say in what be you place your hope wait here in the walled town of jerusalem ? be it not hezekiah who have get you to do it cause your death from need of food and water by say the lord our god will give u salvation out of the hand of the king of assyria ? have not this same hezekiah take away his high place and his altar say to judah and jerusalem give worship before one altar only burn offering on it ? have you no knowledge of what i and my father have do to all the people of every land ? be the god of the nation of those land able to keep their land from fall into my hand ? who be there among all the god of those nation which my father put to destruction who be able to keep his people safe from my hand ? and be it possible that your god will keep you safe from my hand ? so do not be trick by hezekiah or let him get you to do this and do not put any faith in what he say for no god of any nation or kingdom have be able to keep his people safe from my hand or the hand of my father how much less will your god keep you safe from my hand ! and his servant say even more against the lord god and against his servant hezekiah . and he send letter in addition to put shame on the lord the god of israel and to say evil against him say a the god of the nation of other land have not be able to keep their people safe from my hand no more will the god of hezekiah keep his people safe from my hand . these thing they say cry out with a loud voice in the jew ' language to the people of jerusalem who be on the wall with the purpose of trouble them and put fear into them so that they might take the town talk of the god of jerusalem a if he be like the god of the people of the earth the work of men 's hand . and hezekiah the king and isaiah the prophet the son of amoz make prayer because of this cry out to heaven . and the lord send an angel who put to death all the men of war and the chief and the captain in the army of the king of assyria . so he go back to his country in shame . and when he come into the house of his god his son the offspring of his body put him to death there with the sword . so the lord give hezekiah and the people of jerusalem salvation from the power of sennacherib the king of assyria and from all others give them rest on every side . and great number come to jerusalem with offering for the lord and thing of great price for hezekiah king of judah so that he be honour among all nation from that time . in those day hezekiah be ill and near death and he make prayer to the lord and the lord in answer give him a sign . but hezekiah do not do a have be do to him for his heart be lift up in pride and so wrath come on him and on judah and jerusalem . but then hezekiah in sorrow for what he have do put away his pride and he and all jerusalem make themselves low so that the wrath of the lord do not come on them in hezekiah 's life time . and hezekiah have very great wealth and honour and he make himself store house for his gold and silver and jewel and spice and for body cover and all sort of beautiful vessel . and store house for the produce of grain and wine and oil and building for all sort of beast and flock . and he make town for himself and get together much property in flock and herd for god have give him great wealth . it be hezekiah who have the high spring of the water of gihon stop and the water take down on the west side of the town of david . in everything he undertake hezekiah do well . however in the business of the representative send by the ruler of babylon to get news of the wonder which have take place in the land god give up guide him test him to see what be in his heart . now the rest of the act of hezekiah and the good he do be record in the vision of isaiah the prophet the son of amoz and in the book of the king of judah and israel . so hezekiah go to rest with his father and they put his body into the high part of the rest place of the son of david and all judah and the people of jerusalem give him honour at his death . and manasseh his son become king in his place .manasseh be twelve year old when he become king and he be rule for fifty five year in jerusalem . he do evil in the eye of the lord copy the disgust way of the nation whom the lord have send out of the land before the child of israel . for he put up again the high place which have be pull down by his father hezekiah and he make altar for the baal and pillar of wood and be a worshipper and servant of all the star of heaven and he make altar in the house of the lord of which the lord have say in jerusalem will my name be for ever . and he make altar for all the star of heaven in the two outer square of the house of the lord . more than this he make his child go through the fire in the valley of the son of hinnom and he make use of secret art and sign for read the future and unnatural power and give position to those who have control of spirit and to wonder worker he do much evil in the eye of the lord move him to wrath . and he put the image he have make in the house of god the house of which god have say to david and to solomon his son in this house and in jerusalem the town which i have make mine out of all the tribe of israel will i put my name for ever and never again will i let the foot of israel be move out of the land which i have give to their father if only they will take care to do all my order even all the law and the order and the rule give to them by moses . and manasseh make judah and the people of jerusalem go out of the true way so that they do more evil than those nation whom the lord give up to destruction before the child of israel . and the word of the lord come to manasseh and his people but they give no attention . so the lord send against them the captain of the army of assyria who make manasseh a prisoner and take him away in chain to babylon . and cry out to the lord his god in his trouble he make himself low before the god of his father and make prayer to him and in answer to his prayer god let him come back to jerusalem and to his kingdom . then manasseh be certain that the lord be god . after this he make an outer wall for the town of david on the west side of gihon in the valley as far a the way into the town by the fish doorway and he put a very high wall round the ophel and he put captain of the army in all the walled town of judah . he take away the strange god and the image out of the house of the lord and all the altar he have put up on the hill of the lord 's house and in jerusalem and put them out of the town . and he put the altar of the lord in order offering peace offering and praise offering on it and say that all judah be to be servant of the lord the god of israel . however the people still make offering in the high place but only to the lord their god . now the rest of the act of manasseh and his prayer to his god and the word which the seer say to him in the name of the lord the god of israel be record among the act of the king of israel . and the prayer which he make to god and how god give him an answer and all his sin and his wrongdoing and the place where he make high place and put up pillar of wood and image before he put away his pride be record in the history of the seer . so manasseh go to rest with his father and they put his body to rest in his house and amon his son become king in his place . amon be twenty two year old when he become king and he be rule for two year in jerusalem . he do evil in the eye of the lord a manasseh his father have do and amon make offering to all the image which his father manasseh have make and be their servant . he do not make himself low before the lord a his father manasseh have do but go on sin more and more . and his servant make a secret design against him and put him to death in his house . but the people of the land put to death all those who have take part in the design against king amon and make his son josiah king in his place .josiah be eight year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for thirty one year . and he do what be right in the eye of the lord walking in the way of his father david without turn to the right hand or to the left . in the eighth year of his rule while he be still young his heart be first turn to the god of his father david and in the twelfth year he undertake the clear away of all the high place and the pillar and the image of wood and metal from judah and jerusalem . he have the altar of the baal break down while he himself be present and the sun image which be place on high over them he have cut down and the pillar of wood and the metal image he have break up and crush to dust drop the dust over the resting place of the dead who have make offering to them . and he have the bone of the priest burn on their altar and so he make judah and jerusalem clean . and in all the town of manasseh and ephraim and simeon as far a naphtali he make waste their house round about . he have the altar and the pillar of wood pull down and the image crush to dust and all the sun image cut down through all the land of israel and then he go back to jerusalem . now in the eighteenth year of his rule when the land and the house have be make clean he send shaphan the son of azaliah and maaseiah the ruler of the town and joah the son of joahaz the recorder to make good what be damage in the house of the lord his god . and they come to hilkiah the chief priest and give him all the money which have be take into the house of god which the levites the keeper of the door have get from manasseh and ephraim and those of israel who have not be take away a prisoner and from all judah and benjamin and the people of jerusalem . and they give it to the overseer of the work of the lord 's house and the overseer give it to the workman work in the house for build it up and make good what be damage even to the woodworker and builder to get cut stone and wood for join the structure together and for make board for the house which the king of judah have give up to destruction . and the men do the work well and those who have authority over them be jahath and obadiah levite of the son of merari and zechariah and meshullam of the son of the kohathites who be to be responsible for see that the work be do and others of the levite who be expert with instrument of music have authority over the transport worker give direction to all who be do any sort of work and among the levite there be scribe and overseer and door keeper . now when they be take out the money which have come into the lord 's house hilkiah the priest come across the book of the law of the lord which he have give by the mouth of moses . then hilkiah say to shaphan the scribe i have make discovery of the book of the law in the house of the lord . and hilkiah give the book to shaphan . and shaphan take the book to the king and he give him an account of what have be do say your servant be do all they have be give to do they have take out all the money which be in the lord 's house and have give it to the overseer and to the workman . then shaphan the scribe say to the king hilkiah the priest have give me a book and he make a start at read some of it to the king . and the king hear the word of the law take his robe in his hand violently part it a a sign of his grief . and he give order to hilkiah and to ahikam the son of shaphan and abdon the son of micah and shaphan the scribe and asaiah the king 's servant say go and get direction from the lord for me and for those who be still in israel and for judah about the word of this book which have come to light for great be the wrath of the lord which have be let loose on u because our father have not keep the word of the lord or do what be record in this book . so hilkiah and those whom the king send go to huldah the woman prophet the wife of shallum the son of tokhath the son of hasrah the keeper of the robe now she be live in jerusalem in the second part of the town and they have talk with her about this thing . and she say to them the lord the god of israel have say say to the man who send you to me these be the word of the lord see i will send evil on this place and on it people even all the curse in the book which they have be read before the king of judah because they have give me up burn offering to other god and move me to wrath by all the work of their hand so my wrath be let loose on this place and will not be put out . but to the king of judah who send you to get direction from the lord say this be what the lord the god of israel have say because you have give ear to my word and your heart be soft and you make yourself low before god on hear his word about this place and it people and with weep and sign of grief have make yourself low before me i have give ear to you say the lord god . see i will let you go to your father and be put in your last resting place in peace and your eye will not see all the evil which i will send on this place and on it people . so they take this news back to the king . then the king sent and get together all the responsible men of judah and of jerusalem . and the king go up to the house of the lord with all the men of judah and the people of jerusalem and the priest and the levite and all the people small and great and they be present at his reading of the book of the law which have come to light in the house of the lord . then the king take his place by the pillar make an agreement before the lord to go in the way of the lord and to keep his order and his decision and his rule with all his heart and with all his soul and to keep the word of the agreement record in this book . and he make all the people in jerusalem and benjamin give their word to keep it . and the people of jerusalem keep the agreement of god the god of their father . josiah take away all the disgust thing out of all the land of the child of israel and make all who be in israel servant of the lord their god . and as long a he be live they be true to the lord the god of their father .and josiah keep a passover to the lord in jerusalem on the fourteenth day of the first month they put the passover lamb to death . and he give the priest their place make them strong for the work of the house of god . and he say to the levite the teacher of all israel who be holy to the lord see the holy ark be in the house which solomon the son of david king of israel make it will no longer have to be transport on your back now be the servant of the lord your god and his people israel and make yourselves ready in your division by your family a it be order in the writing of david king of israel and of solomon his son and take your position in the holy place group in the family of your brother the child of the people and for every division let there be a part of a family of the levite . and put the passover lamb to death and make yourselves holy and make it ready for your brother so that the order give by the lord through moses may be do . and josiah give lamb and goat from the flock a passover offering for all the people who be present to the number of thirty thousand and three thousand ox these be from the king 's private property . and his captain freely give an offering to the people the priest and the levite . hilkiah and zechariah and jehiel the ruler of the house of god give to the priest for the passover offering two thousand six hundred small cattle and three hundred ox . and conaniah and shemaiah and nethanel his brother and hashabiah and jeiel and jozabad the chief of the levite give to the levite for the passover offering five thousand small cattle and five hundred ox . so everything be make ready and the priest take their place with the levite in their division a the king have say . and they put the passover lamb to death the blood be drain out by the priest when it be give to them and the levite do the skinning . and they take away the burned offering so that they might give them to be offer to the lord for the division of the family of the people a it be record in the book of moses . and they do the same with the ox . and the passover lamb be cook over the fire a it say in the law and the holy offering be cook in pot and basin and vessel and take quickly to all the people . and after that they make ready for themselves and for the priest for the priest the son of aaron be offer the burn offering and the fat till night so the levite make ready what be need for themselves and for the priest the son of aaron . and the son of asaph the maker of melody be in their place a order by david and asaph and heman and jeduthun the king 's seer and the door keeper be station at every door there be no need for them to go away from their place for their brother the levite make ready for them . so everything need for the worship of the lord be make ready that same day for the keep of the passover and the offering of burned offering on the altar of the lord a king josiah have give order . and all the child of israel who be present keep the passover and the feast of unleavened bread at that time for seven day . no passover like it have be keep in israel from the day of samuel the prophet and not one of the king of israel have ever keep a passover like the one kept by josiah and the priest and the levite and all those of judah and israel who be present and the people of jerusalem . in the eighteenth year of the rule of josiah this passover be keep . after all this and after josiah have put the house in order neco king of egypt go up to make war at carchemish by the river euphrates and josiah go out against him . but he send representative to him say what have i to do with you o king of judah ? i have not come against you this day but against those with whom i be at war and god have give me order to go forward quickly keep out of god 's way for he be with me or he will send destruction on you . however josiah would not go back but keep to his purpose of fight against him and give no attention to the word of neco which come from god he go forward to the fight in the valley of megiddo . and the bowman send their arrow at king josiah and the king say to his servant take me away for i be badly wound . so his servant take him out of the line of war carriage and put him in his second carriage and take him to jerusalem where he come to his end and they put his body in the rest place of his father . and in all judah and jerusalem there be great weep for josiah . and jeremiah make a song of grief for josiah and to this day josiah be name by all the maker of melody men and woman in their song of grief they make it a rule in israel and the song be record among the song of grief . now the rest of the act of josiah and the good he do in keep with what be record in the law of the lord and all his act first and last be record in the book of the king of israel and judah .then the people of the land take jehoahaz the son of josiah and make him king in jerusalem in place of his father . jehoahaz be twenty three year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for three month . then the king of egypt take the kingdom from him in jerusalem and put on the land a tax of a hundred talent of silver and a talent of gold . and the king of egypt make eliakim his brother king over judah and jerusalem change his name to jehoiakim . and neco take his brother jehoahaz away to egypt . jehoiakim be twenty five year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for eleven year and he do evil in the eye of the lord his god . nebuchadnezzar king of babylon come up against him and take him away in chain to babylon . and nebuchadnezzar take away some of the vessel of the lord 's house and put them in the house of his god in babylon . now the rest of the act of jehoiakim and the disgusting thing he do and all there be to be say against him be record in the book of the king of israel and judah and jehoiachin his son become king in his place . jehoiachin be eighteen year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for three month and ten day and he do evil in the eye of the lord . in the spring of the year king nebuchadnezzar sent and take him away to babylon with the beautiful vessel of the house of the lord and make zedekiah his father 's brother king over judah and jerusalem . zedekiah be twenty one year old when he become king he be rule in jerusalem for eleven year . he do evil in the eye of the lord and do not make himself low before jeremiah the prophet who give him the word of the lord . and he take up arm against king nebuchadnezzar though he have make him take an oath by god but he make his neck stiff and his heart hard turn away from the lord the god of israel . and more than this all the great men of judah and the priest and the people make their sin great turn to all the disgust way of the nation and they make unclean the house of the lord which he have make holy in jerusalem . and the lord the god of their father send word to them by his servant send early and frequently because he have pity on his people and on his living place but they put shame on the servant of god make sport of his word and laugh at his prophet till the wrath of god be move against his people till there be no help . so he send against them the king of the chaldaean who put their young men to death with the sword in the house of their holy place and have no pity for any young man or virgin old man or white haired god give them all into his hand . and all the vessel of the house of god great and small and the stored wealth of the lord 's house and the wealth of the king and his chief he take away to babylon . and the house of god be burn and the wall of jerusalem break down all it great house be burn with fire and all it beautiful vessel give up to destruction . and all who have not come to death by the sword he take away prisoner to babylon and they become servant to him and to his son till the kingdom of persia come to power so that the word of the lord which he say by the mouth of jeremiah might come true till the land have have pleasure in her sabbath for as long a she be waste the land keep the sabbath till seventy year be complete . now in the first year of cyrus king of persia in order that the word which the lord have say by the mouth of jeremiah might come true the spirit of cyrus king of persia be move by the lord and he make a public statement and have it give out through all his kingdom and put in write say cyrus king of persia have say all the kingdom of the earth have be give to me by the lord the god of heaven and he have make me responsible for build a house for him in jerusalem which be in judah . whoever there be among you of all his people may the lord his god be with him and let him go up .now in the first year of cyrus king of persia in order that the word of the lord give by the mouth of jeremiah might come true the spirit of cyrus king of persia be move by the lord so that he make a public statement through all his kingdom and put it in write say these be the word of cyrus king of persia the lord god of heaven have give me all the kingdom of the earth and he have make me responsible for build a house for him in jerusalem which be in judah . whoever there be among you of his people may his god be with him and let him go up to jerusalem which be in judah and take in hand the building of the house of the lord the god of israel he be the god who be in jerusalem . and whoever there may be of the rest of israel living in any place let the men of that place give him help with offering of silver and gold and good and beast in addition to the offering freely give for the house of god in jerusalem . then the head of family of judah and benjamin with the priest and the levite get ready even all those whose spirit be move by god to go up and take in hand the building of the lord 's house in jerusalem . and all their neighbour give them help with offering of vessel of silver and gold and good and beast and thing of great value in addition to what be freely offer . and cyrus the king get out the vessel of the house of the lord which nebuchadnezzar have take from jerusalem and put in the house of his god even these cyrus make mithredath the keeper of his wealth get out and he give them after number them to sheshbazzar the ruler of judah . and this be the number of them there be thirty gold plat a thousand silver plat twenty nine knife thirty gold basins four hundred and ten silver basin and a thousand other vessel . there be five thousand four hundred gold and silver vessel . all these be take back by sheshbazzar when those who have be take prisoner go up from babylon to jerusalem .now these be the people of the division of the kingdom among those who have be make prisoner by nebuchadnezzar king of babylon and take away to babylon who go back to jerusalem and judah everyone to his town who go with zerubbabel jeshua nehemiah seraiah reelaiah mordecai bilshan mispar bigvai rehum baanah the number of the men of the people of israel the child of parosh two thousand one hundred and seventy two . the child of shephatiah three hundred and seventy two . the child of arah seven hundred and seventy five . the child of pahath moab of the child of jeshua and joab two thousand eight hundred and twelve . the child of elam a thousand two hundred and fifty four . the child of zattu nine hundred and forty five . the child of zaccai seven hundred and sixty . the child of ban six hundred and forty two . the child of bebai six hundred and twenty three . the child of azgad a thousand two hundred and twenty two . the child of adonikam six hundred and sixty six . the child of bigvai two thousand and fifty six . the child of adin four hundred and fifty four . the child of ater of hezekiah ninety eight . the child of bezai three hundred and twenty three . the child of jorah a hundred and twelve . the child of hashum two hundred and twenty three . the child of gibbar ninety five . the child of beth lehem a hundred and twenty three . the men of netophah fifty six . the men of anathoth a hundred and twenty eight . the child of azmaveth forty two . the child of kiriath arim chephirah and beeroth seven hundred and forty three . the child of ramah and geba six hundred and twenty one . the men of michmas a hundred and twenty two . the men of beth el and ai two hundred and twenty three . the child of nebo fifty two . the child of magbish a hundred and fifty six . the child of the other elam a thousand two hundred and fifty four . the child of harim three hundred and twenty . the child of lod hadid and ono seven hundred and twenty five . the child of jericho three hundred and forty five . the child of senaah three thousand six hundred and thirty . the priest the child of jedaiah of the house of jeshua nine hundred and seventy three . the child of immer a thousand and fifty two . the child of pashhur a thousand two hundred and forty seven . the child of harim a thousand and seventeen . the levites the child of jeshua and kadmiel of the child of hodaviah seventy four . the music maker the child of asaph a hundred and twenty eight the child of the door keepers the child of shallum the child of ater the child of talmon the child of akkub the child of hatita the child of shobai a hundred and thirty nine . the nethinim the child of ziha the child of hasupha the child of tabbaoth the child of keros the child of siaha the child of padon the child of lebanah the child of hagabah the child of akkub the child of hagab the child of shamlai the child of hanan the child of giddel the child of gahar the child of reaiah the child of rezin the child of nekoda the child of gazzam the child of uzza the child of paseah the child of besai the child of asnah the child of meunim the child of nephisim the child of bakbuk the child of hakupha the child of harhur the child of bazluth the child of mehida the child of harsha the child of barkos the child of sisera the child of temah the child of neziah the child of hatipha . the child of solomon 's servant the child of sotai the child of hassophereth the child of peruda the child of jaalah the child of darkon the child of giddel the child of shephatiah the child of hattil the child of pochereth hazzebaim the child of ami . all the nethinim and the child of solomon 's servant be three hundred and ninety two . and these be the people who go up from tel melah tel harsha cherub addan and immer . but have no knowledge of their father ' family or offspring it be not certain that they be israelites the child of delaiah the child of tobiah the child of nekoda six hundred and fifty two . and of the child of the priest the child of habaiah the child of hakkoz the child of barzillai who be marry to one of the daughter of barzillai the gileadite and take their name . they make search for their record among the list of family but their name be nowhere to be see so they be look on a unclean and no long priest . and the tirshatha say that they be not to have the most holy thing for their food till a priest come to give decision by urim and thummim . the number of all the people together be forty two thousand three hundred and sixty as well a their men servant and their woman servant of whom there be seven thousand three hundred and thirty seven and they have two hundred men and woman to make music . they have seven hundred and thirty six horse two hundred and forty five transport beast four hundred and thirty five camel six thousand seven hundred and twenty ass . and some of the head of family when they come to the house of the lord which be in jerusalem give freely of their wealth for the building up of the house of god in it place every one a he be able give for the work sixty one thousand darics of gold five thousand pound of silver and a hundred priest ' robe . so the priest and the levite and the people and the music maker and the door keeper and the nethinim take up their place in their town even all israel in their town .and when the seventh month come and the child of israel be in the town the people come together like one man to jerusalem . then jeshua the son of jozadak and his brother the priest and zerubbabel the son of shealtiel with his brother get up and make the altar of the god of israel for burned offering a be record in the law of moses the man of god . they put the altar on it base for fear be on them because of the people of the country and they make burn offering on it to the lord even burn offering morning and evening . and they keep the feast of tent a it be record make the regular burn offering every day by number a it be order for every day what be need . and after that the regular burned offering and the offering for the new moon and all the fixed feast of the lord which have be make holy and the offering of everyone who freely give his offering to the lord . from the first day of the seventh month they make a start with the burned offering but the base of the temple of the lord have still not be put in it place . and they give money to the stoneworkers and woodworker and meat and drink and oil to the people of zidon and of tyre for the transport of cedar tree from lebanon to the sea to joppa a cyrus king of persia have give them authority to do . now in the second year of their come into the house of god in jerusalem in the second month the work be take in hand by zerubbabel the son of shealtiel and jeshua the son of jozadak and the rest of their brother the priest and the levite and all those who have come from the land where they be prisoner to jerusalem and they make the levite of twenty year old and over responsible for oversee the work of the house of the lord . then jeshua with his son and his brother kadmiel with his son the son of hodaviah together take up the work of oversee the workman in the house of god the son of henadad with their son and their brother the levite . and when the builder put in position the base of the temple of the lord the priest dress in their robe take their place with horn and the levite the son of asaph with brass instrument to give praise to the lord in the way order by david king of israel . and they give praise to the lord answer one another in their song and say for he be good for his mercy to israel be eternal . and all the people give a great cry of joy when they give praise to the lord because the base of the lord 's house be put in place . but a number of the priest and levite and the head of family old men who have see the first house when the base of this house be put down before their eye be overcome with weep and a number be cry out with joy so that in the ear of the people the cry of joy be mixed with the sound of weep for the cry of the people be loud and come to the ear of those who be a long way off .now news come to the hater of judah and benjamin that the people who have come back be build a temple to the lord the god of israel then they come to zerubbabel and to the head of family and say to them let u take part in the building with you for we be servant of your god even a you be and we have be make offering to him from the day of esar haddon king of assyria who put u here . but zerubbabel and jeshua and the rest of the head of family in israel say to them you have no part with u in the building of a house for our god we ourselves will do the work together for the lord the god of israel a cyrus king of persia have give u order . then the people of the land make the hand of the people of judah feeble trouble them with fear in their building and they give payment to men who make design against them and keep them from effect their purpose all through the time of cyrus king of persia till darius become king . and in the time of ahasuerus when he first become king they put on record a statement against the people of judah and jerusalem . and in the time of artaxerxes bishlam mithredath tabeel and the rest of his friend send a letter to artaxerxes king of persia write it in the aramaean writing and language . rehum the chief ruler and shimshai the scribe send a letter against jerusalem to artaxerxes the king the letter be send by rehum the chief ruler and shimshai the scribe and their friend the dinaites and the apharsathchites the tarpelites the apharsites the archevites the babylonian the shushanchites the dehaites the elamite and the rest of the nation which the great and noble osnappar take over and put in samaria and the rest of the country over the river this be a copy of the letter which they send to artaxerxes the king your servant live across the river send these word we give news to the king that the jew who come from you have come to u at jerusalem they be build up again that uncontrolled and evil town the wall be complete and they be join up the base . the king may be certain that when the building of this town and it wall be complete they will give no tax or payment in good or force payment and in the end it will be a cause of loss to the king . now because we be responsible to the king and it be not right for u to see the king 's honour damage we have send to give the king word of these thing so that search may be make in the book of the record of your father and you will see in the book of the record that this town have be uncontrolled and a cause of trouble to king and country and that there be outburst against authority there in the past for which reason the town be make waste . we give you word that if the building of this town and it wall be make complete there will be an end of your power in the country across the river . then the king send an answer to rehum the chief ruler and shimshai the scribe and their friend live in samaria and to the rest of those across the river say peace to you and now the sense of the letter which you send to u have be make clear to me and i give order for a search to be make and it be certain that in the past this town have make trouble for king and that outbursts against authority have take place there . far there have be great king in jerusalem ruling over all the country across the river to whom they give tax and payment in good and forced payment . give an order now that these men be to do nothing more and that the building of the town be to be stop till i give an order . be certain to do this with all care do not let trouble be increase to the king 's damage . then after read the king 's letter rehum and shimshai the scribe and their friend go quickly to jerusalem to the jew and have them stop by force . so the work of the house of god at jerusalem come to an end so it be stop till the second year of the rule of darius king of persia .now the prophet haggai and zechariah the son of iddo be preach to the jew in judah and jerusalem in the name of the god of israel . then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel and jeshua the son of jozadak get up and make a start at build the house of god at jerusalem and the prophet of god be with them help them . at the same time tattenai ruler of the land across the river and shethar bozenai and their men come to them and say who give you order to go on building this house and this wall ? then they say these word to them what be the name of the men who be at work on this building ? but the eye of their god be on the chief of the jew and they do not make them give up work till the question have be put before darius and an answer have come by letter about it . this be a copy of the letter which tattenai the ruler of the land across the river and shethar bozenai and his friend the apharsachites live across the river send to darius the king they send him a letter say to darius the king all peace this be to give the king word that we go into the land of judah to the house of the great god which be make of great stone and have it wall support with wood and the work be go on with industry and they be do it well . then we say to the men responsible who give you authority for the building of this house and these wall ? and we make request for their name so that we might send you word and give you the name of the men at the head of them . and they make answer to u say we be the servant of the god of heaven and earth and we be build the house which be put up in time long past and be design and make complete by a great king of israel . but when the god of heaven be move to wrath by our father he give them up into the hand of nebuchadnezzar king of babylon the chaldaean who send destruction on this house and take the people away into babylon . but in the first year of cyrus king of babylon cyrus the king give an order for the building of this house of god and the gold and silver vessel of the house of god which nebuchadnezzar take from the temple which be in jerusalem and put into the house of his god in babylon these cyrus the king take from the house of his god in babylon and give to one name sheshbazzar whom he have make ruler and he say to him go take these vessel and put them in the temple in jerusalem and let the house of god be put up again in it place . then this same sheshbazzar come and put the house of god in jerusalem on it base and from that time till now the building have be go on but it be still not complete . so now if it seem good to the king let search be make in the king 's store house at babylon to see if it be true that an order be give by cyrus the king for the building of this house of god at jerusalem and let the king send u word of his pleasure in connection with this business .then darius the king give an order and a search be make in the house of the record where the thing of value be store up in babylon . and at achmetha in the great house of the king in the land of medium they come across a roll in which this statement be put on record in the first year of cyrus the king cyrus the king make an order in connection with the house of god at jerusalem let the house be put up the place where they make offering and let the earth for the base be put in place let it be sixty cubit high and sixty cubit wide with three line of great stone and one line of new wood support and let the necessary money be give out of the king 's store house and let the gold and silver vessel from the house of god which nebuchadnezzar take from the temple at jerusalem to babylon be give back and take again to the temple at jerusalem every one in it place and put them in the house of god . so now tattenai ruler of the land across the river and shethar bozenai and your people the apharsachites across the river keep far from that place let the work of this house of god go on let the ruler of the jew and their responsible men put up this house of god in it place . far i give order a to what you be to do for the responsible men of the jew in connection with the building of this house of god that from the king 's wealth that be from the tax get together in the land over the river the money need be to be give to these men readily so that their work may not be stop . and whatever they have need of young ox and sheep and lamb for burn offering to the god of heaven grain salt wine and oil whatever the priest in jerusalem say be necessary be to be give to them day by day regularly so that they may make offering of a sweet smell to the god of heaven with prayer for the life of the king and of his son . and i have give order that if anyone make any change in this word one of the support be to be pull out of his house and he be to be lift up and fix to it and his house be to be make waste for this and may the god who have make it a rest place for his name send destruction on all king and people whose hand be outstretched to make any change in this or to do damage to this house of god at jerusalem . i darius have give this order let it be do with all care . then tattenai the ruler across the river and shethar bozenai and their people because of the order give by king darius do a he have say with all care . and the responsible men of the jew go on with their building and do well help by the teaching of haggai the prophet and zechariah the son of iddo . they go on building till it be complete in keep with the word of the god of israel and the order give by cyrus and darius and artaxerxes king of persia . and the building of this house be complete on the third day of the month adar in the sixth year of the rule of darius the king . and the child of israel the priest and the levite and the rest of those who have come back kept the feast of the opening of this house of god with joy . and they give a offering at the opening of this house of god a hundred ox two hundred sheep four hundred lamb and for a sin offering for all israel twelve he goats be the number of the tribe of israel . and they put the priest in their division and the levite in their order for the worship of god at jerusalem a it be record in the book of moses . and the child of israel who have come back kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month . for the priest and the levite have make themselves clean together they be all clean and they put the passover lamb to death for all those who have come back and for their brother the priest and for themselves . and the child of israel who have come back and all those who be join to them after separate themselves from the evil way of the people of the land to become the servant of the lord the god of israel take food together and keep the feast of unleavened bread for seven day with joy for the lord have make them full of joy by turn the heart of the king of assyria to them to give them help in the work of the house of god the god of israel .now after these thing when artaxerxes be king of persia ezra the son of seraiah the son of azariah the son of hilkiah the son of shallum the son of zadok the son of ahitub the son of amariah the son of azariah the son of meraioth the son of zerahiah the son of uzzi the son of bukki the son of abishua the son of phinehas the son of eleazar the son of aaron the chief priest this ezra go up from babylon and he be a scribe expert in the law of moses which the lord the god of israel have give and the king move by the lord his god give him whatever he make request for . and some of the child of israel go up with some of the priest and the levite and the music maker and the door keeper and the nethinim to jerusalem in the seventh year of artaxerxes the king . and he come to jerusalem in the fifth month in the seventh year of the king 's rule . for start his journey from babylon on the first day of the first month he come to jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month by the good help of his god . for ezra have give his mind to learn the law of the lord and do it and to teach his rule and decision in israel . now this be a copy of the letter which king artaxerxes give to ezra the priest and the scribe who put into write the word of the order of the lord and of his rule for israel artaxerxes king of king to ezra the priest scribe of the law of the god of heaven all peace and now it be my order that all those of the people of israel and their priest and levite in my kingdom who be ready and have a desire to go to jerusalem be to go with you . because you be send by the king and his seven wise men to get knowledge about judah and jerusalem a you be order by the law of your god which be in your hand and to take with you the silver and gold freely offer by the king and his wise men to the god of israel whose temple be in jerusalem as well a all the silver and gold which you get from the land of babylon together with the offering of the people and of the priest freely give for the house of their god which be in jerusalem so with this money get with care oxen sheep and lamb with their meal offering and their drink offering to be offer on the altar of the house of your god which be in jerusalem . and whatever seem right to you and to your brother to do with the rest of the silver and gold that do a may be please to your god . and the vessel which have be give to you for the us of the house of your god you be to give to the god of jerusalem . and whatever more be need for the house of your god and which you may have to give take it from the king 's store house . and i even i artaxerxes the king now give order to all keeper of the king 's money across the river that whatever ezra the priest the scribe of the law of the god of heaven may have need of from you be to be do with all care up to a hundred talent of silver a hundred measure of grain a hundred measure of wine and a hundred measure of oil and salt without measure . whatever be order by the god of heaven let it be do completely for the house of the god of heaven so that there may not be wrath against the kingdom of the king and his son . in addition we make it clear to you that it will be against the law to put any tax or payment in good or force payment on any of the priest or levites the music maker door keeper nethinim or any servant of this house of god . and you ezra by the wisdom of your god which be in you be to put ruler and judge to have authority over all the people across the river who have knowledge of the law of your god and you be to give teaching to him who have no knowledge of them . and if anyone do not keep the law of your god and the law of the king take care that punishment be give to him by death or by drive him from his country or by take away his good or by put him in prison . praise be to the lord the god of our father who have put such a thing into the heart of the king to make fair the house of the lord which be in jerusalem and have give mercy to me before the king and his government and before all the king 's great captain . and i be make strong by the hand of the lord my god which be on me and i get together out of israel chief men to go up with me .now these be the head of family who be list of those who go up with me from babylon when artaxerxes be king . of the son of phinehas gershom of the son of ithamar daniel of the son of david hattush of the son of shecaniah of the son of parosh zechariah and with him be list a hundred and fifty male . of the son of pahath moab eliehoenai the son of zerahiah and with him two hundred male . of the son of shecaniah the son of jahaziel and with him three hundred male . and of the son of adin ebed the son of jonathan and with him fifty male . and of the son of elam jeshaiah the son of athaliah and with him seventy male . and of the son of shephatiah zebadiah the son of michael and with him eighty male . of the son of joab obadiah the son of jehiel and with him two hundred and eighteen male . and of the son of shelomith the son of josiphiah and with him a hundred and sixty male . and of the son of bebai zechariah the son of bebai and with him twenty eight male . and of the son of azgad johanan the son of hakkatan and with him a hundred and ten male . and of the son of adonikam the last whose name be eliphelet jeuel and shemaiah and with them sixty male . and of the son of bigvai uthai and zabbud and with them seventy male . and i make them come together by the river flow to ahava and we be there in tent for three day and after view the people and the priest i saw that no son of levi be there . then i send for eliezer and ariel and shemaiah and elnathan jarib and elnathan and nathan and zechariah and meshullam all responsible men and for joiarib and elnathan who be wise men . and i send them to iddo the chief at the place casiphia and give them order what to say to iddo and his brother the nethinim at the place casiphia so that they might come back to u with men to do the work of the house of our god . and by the help of our god they get for u ish sechel one of the son of mahli the son of levi the son of israel and sherebiah with his son and brother eighteen and hashabiah and with him jeshaiah of the son of merari his brother and their son twenty and of the nethinim to whom david and the captain have give the work of help the levite two hundred and twenty nethinim all of them specially name . then i give order for a time of go without food there by the river ahava so that we might make ourselves low before our god in prayer request from him a straight way for u and for our little one and for all our substance . for i would not for shame make request to the king for a band of arm men and horseman to give u help against those who might make attack on u on the way for we have say to the king the hand of our god be on his servant for good but his power and his wrath be against all those who be turn away from him . so we go without food request our god for this and his ear be open to our prayer . so i put on one side twelve of the chief of the priest sherebiah hashabiah and ten of their brother with them and give to them by weight the silver and the gold and the vessel all the offering for the house of our god which the king and his wise men and his captain and all israel there present have give measure into their hand six hundred and fifty talent of silver and silver vessel a hundred talent ' weight and a hundred talent of gold and twenty gold basin of a thousand darics and two vessel of the best bright brass equal in value to gold . and i say to them you be holy to the lord and the vessel be holy and the silver and the gold be an offering freely give to the lord the god of your father . take care of them and keep them till you put them on the scale before the chief of the priest and the levite and the chief of the family of israel in jerusalem in the room of the house of the lord . so the priest and the levite take the weight of silver and gold and the vessel to take them to jerusalem into the house of our god . then we go away from the river of ahava on the twelfth day of the first month to go to jerusalem and the hand of our god be on u and he give u salvation from our hater and those who be wait to make an attack on u by the way . and we come to jerusalem and be there for three day . and on the fourth day the silver and the gold and the vessel be measure out by weight in the house of our god into the hand of meremoth the son of uriah the priest and with him be eleazar the son of phinehas and with them be jozabad the son of jeshua and noadiah the son of binnui the levite all be hand over by number and by weight and the weight be put on record at that time . and those who have be prisoner who have come back from a strange land make burn offering to the god of israel twelve ox for all israel ninety six male sheep seventy seven lamb twelve he goats for a sin offer all this be a burned offering to the lord . and they give the king 's order to the king 's captain and the ruler across the river and they give the people and the house of god the help which be need .now after these thing be do the captain come to me and say the people of israel and the priest and levite have not keep themselves separate from the people of the land but have take part in the disgusting way of the canaanite the hittite the perizzites the jebusites the ammonite the moabites the egyptian and the amorites . for they have take their daughter for themselves and for their son so that the holy seed have be mix with the people of the land and in fact the captain and ruler have be the first to do this evil . and hear this with sign of grief and pull out the hair of my head and my chin i take my seat on the earth deeply troubled . then everyone who go in fear of the word of the god of israel because of the sin of those who have come back come together to me and i keep where i be overcome with grief till the evening offering . and at the even offering have make myself low before god i get up and with sign of grief fall down on my knee with my hand stretch out to the lord my god i say o my god shame keep me from lift up my face to you my god for our sin be increase high than our head and our evil do have come up to heaven . from the day of our father till this day we have be great sinner and for our sin we and our king and our priest have be give up into the hand of the king of the land to the sword and to prison and to loss of good and to shame of face a it be this day . and now for a little time grace have come to u from the lord our god to let a small band of u get free and to give u a nail in his holy place so that our god may give light to our eye and a measure of new life in our prison chain . for we be servant but our god have not be turn away from u in our prison but have have mercy on u before the eye of the king of persia to give u new strength to put up again the house of our god and to make fair it waste place and to give u a wall in judah and jerusalem . and now o our god what be we to say after this ? for we have not keep your law which you give to your servant the prophet say the land into which you be go to take it for a heritage be an unclean land because of the evil life of the people of the land and their disgusting way which have make the land unclean from end to end . so now do not give your daughter to their son or take their daughter for your son or do anything for their peace or well be for ever so that you may be strong living on the good of the land and hand it on to your child for a heritage for ever . and after everything which have come on u because of our evil do and our great sin and see that the punishment which you o god have give u be less than the measure of our sin and that you have keep from death those of u who be here be we again to go against your order take wife from among the people who do these disgust thing ? would you not be angry with u till our destruction be complete till there be not one who get away safe ? o lord god of israel righteousness be yours we be only a small band which have be keep from death a at this day see we be before you in our sin for no one may keep his place before you because of this .now while ezra be make his prayer and his statement of wrongdoing weep and fall down before the house of god a very great number of men and woman and child out of israel come together round him for the people be weep bitterly . and shecaniah the son of jehiel one of the son of elam answer say to ezra we have do evil against our god and have take a our wife strange woman of the people of the land but still there be hope for israel in this question . let u now make an agreement with our god to put away all the wife and all their child if it seem right to my lord and to those who go in fear of the word of our god and let it be do in keep with the law . up now ! for this be your business and we be with you take heart and do it . then ezra get up and make the chief of the priest and the levite and all israel take an oath that they would do this . so they take an oath . then ezra get up from before the house of god and go into the room of jehohanan the son of eliashib but when he come there he take no food or drink for he be sorrow for the sin of those who have come back . and they make a public statement through all judah and jerusalem to all those who have come back that they be to come together to jerusalem and that if anyone do not come before three day be past a order by the ruler and the responsible men all his good would be put under the curse and he himself would be cut off from the meeting of the people who have come back . then all the men of judah and benjamin come together to jerusalem before three day be past it be the ninth month on the twentieth day of the month and all the people be seat in the wide square in front of the house of god shake with fear because of this business and because of the great rain . and ezra the priest get to his foot and say to them you have do wrong and take strange woman for your wife so increase the sin of israel . so now give praise to the lord the god of your father and do his pleasure and make yourselves separate from the people of the land and from the strange woman . then all the people answer say with a loud voice a you have say so it be right for u to do . but the number of people be great and it be a time of much rain it be not possible for u to go on wait outside and this be not a thing which may be do in one day or even two for our sin in this business be great . so now let our ruler be representative for all the people and let all those in our town who be marry to strange woman come at fixed time and with them the responsible men and the judge of every town till the burn wrath of our god be turn away from u and this have be do . only jonathan the son of asahel and jahzeiah the son of tikvah be against this meshullam and shabbethai the levite support them . so those who have come back do so . and ezra the priest with certain head of family by their father ' family all of them by their name be mark out and on the first day of the tenth month they take their place to go into the question with care . and they get to the end of all the men who be marry to strange woman by the first day of the first month . and among the son of the priest who be marry to strange woman be these of the son of jeshua the son of jozadak and his brother maaseiah and eliezer and jarib and gedaliah . and they give their word that they would put away their wife and for their sin they give an offering of a male sheep of the flock . and of the son of immer hanani and zebadiah . and of the son of harim maaseiah and elijah and shemaiah and jehiel and uzziah . and of the son of pashhur elioenai maaseiah ishmael nethanel jozabad and elasah . and of the levite jozabad and shimei and kelaiah that be kelita pethahiah judah and eliezer . and of the music maker eliashib and of the door keeper shallum and telem and uri . and of israel the son of parosh ramiah and izziah and malchijah and mijamin and eleazar and malchijah and benaiah . and of the son of elam mattaniah zechariah and jehiel and abdi and jeremoth and elijah . and of the son of zattu elioenai eliashib mattaniah and jeremoth and zabad and aziza . and of the son of bebai jehohanan hananiah zabbai athlai . and of the son of ban meshullam malluch and adaiah jashub and sheal jeremoth . and of the son of pahath moab adna and chelal benaiah maaseiah mattaniah bezalel and binnui and manasseh . and of the son of harim eliezer isshijah malchijah shemaiah shimeon benjamin malluch shemariah . of the son of hashum mattenai mattattah zabad eliphelet jeremai manasseh shimei . of the son of ban maadai amram and uel benaiah bedeiah cheluhi vaniah meremoth eliashib mattaniah mattenai and jaasu and ban and binnui shimei and shelemiah and nathan and adaiah machnadebai shashai sharai azarel and shelemiah shemariah shallum amariah joseph . of the son of nebo jeiel mattithiah zabad zebina iddo and joel benaiah . all these have take strange wife and some of them have wife by whom they have offspring .the history of nehemiah the son of hacaliah . now it come about in the month chislev in the twentieth year when i be in shushan the king 's town that hanani one of my brother come with certain men from judah and in answer to my request for news of the jew who have be prisoner and have get away and of jerusalem they say to me the small band of jew now live there in the land be in great trouble and shame the wall of jerusalem have be break down and it doorway burn with fire . then after hear these word for some day i give myself up to weep and sorrow seat on the earth and take no food i make prayer to the god of heaven and say o lord the god of heaven the great god greatly to be fear keep faith and mercy with those who have love for him and be true to his law let your ear now take note and let your eye be open so that you may give ear to the prayer of your servant which i make before you at this time day and night for the child of israel your servant while i put before you the sin of the child of israel which we have do against you truly i and my father 's people be sinner . we have do great wrong against you and have not keep the order the rule and the decision which you give to your servant moses . keep in mind o lord the order you give your servant moses say if you do wrong i will send you wander among the people but if you come back to me and keep my order and do them even if those of you who have be force out be live in the farthest part of heaven i will get them from there and take them back to the place mark out by me for the rest place of my name . now these be your servant and your people whom you have make yours by your great power and by your strong hand . o lord let your ear take note of the prayer of your servant and of the prayer of your servant who take delight in worship your name give help o lord to your servant this day and let him have mercy in the eye of this man . now i be the king 's wine servant .and it come about in the month nisan in the twentieth year of artaxerxes the king when wine be before him that i take up the wine and give it to the king . now i have never before be sad when the king be present . and the king say to me why be your face sad see that you be not ill ? this be nothing but sorrow of heart . then i be full of fear and say to the king may the king be live for ever be it not natural for my face to be sad when the town the place where the body of my father be at rest have be make waste and it doorway burn with fire ? then the king say to me what be your desire ? so i make prayer to the god of heaven . and i say to the king if it be the king 's pleasure and if your servant have your approval send me to judah to the town where the body of my father be at rest so that i may take in hand the building of it . and the king say to me the queen be seat by his side how long will your journey take and when will you come back ? so the king be pleased to send me and i give him a fixed time . far i say to the king if it be the king 's pleasure let letter be give to me for the ruler across the river so that they may let me go through till i come to judah and a letter to asaph the keeper of the king 's park so that he may give me wood to make board for the door of the tower of the house and for the wall of the town and for the house which be to be mine . and the king give me this for the hand of my god be on me . then i come to the ruler of the land across the river and give them the king 's letter . now the king have send with me captain of the army and horseman . and sanballat the horonite and tobiah the servant the ammonite hearing of it be greatly troubled because a man have come to the help of the child of israel . so i come to jerusalem and be there three day . and in the night i get up take with me a small band of men i say nothing to any man of what god have put into my heart to do for jerusalem and i have no beast with me but the one on which i be seat . and i go out by night through the doorway of the valley and past the dragon 's water spring as far a the place where waste material be put view the wall of jerusalem which be break down and the doorway which have be burn with fire . then i go on to the door of the fountain and to the king 's pool but there be no room for my beast to get through . then in the night i go up by the stream view the wall then turn back i go in by the door in the valley and so come back . and the chief have no knowledge of where i have be or what i be do and i have not then say anything to the jew or to the priest or the great one or the chief or the rest of those who be do the work . then i say to them you see what a bad condition we be in how jerusalem be a waste and it doorway burn with fire come let u get to work build up the wall of jerusalem so that we may no longer be put to shame . then i give them an account of how the hand of my god be on me help me and of the king 's word which he have say to me . and they say let u get to work on the building . so they make their hand strong for the good work . but sanballat the horonite and tobiah the servant the ammonite and geshem the arabian hearing of it make sport of u laugh at u and say what be you do ? will you go against the king ? then answer them i say the god of heaven he will be our help so we his servant will go on with our building but you have no part or right or any name in jerusalem .then eliashib the chief priest get up with his brother the priest and take in hand the building of the sheep doorway they make it holy and put it door in position as far a the tower of hammeah they make it holy even to the tower of hananel . and by his side the men of jericho be build . and after them zaccur the son of imri . the son of hassenaah be the builder of the fish doorway they put it board in place and put up it door with their lock and rod . by their side meremoth the son of uriah the son of hakkoz be make good the wall . then meshullam the son of berechiah the son of meshezabel and by him zadok the son of baana . near them the tekoites be at work but their chief do not put their neck to the work of their lord . joiada the son of paseah and meshullam the son of besodeiah make good the old doorway they put it board in place and put up it door with their lock and rod . by their side be work melatiah the gibeonite and jadon the meronothite the men of gibeon and of mizpah from the seat of the ruler across the river . near them be work uzziel the son of harhaiah the gold worker . and by him be hananiah one of the perfume maker build up jerusalem as far a the wide wall . near them be work rephaiah the son of hur the ruler of half jerusalem . by his side be jedaiah the son of harumaph opposite his house . and by him be hattush the son of hashabneiah . malchijah the son of harim and hasshub the son of pahath moab be work on another part and the tower of the oven . near them be shallum the son of hallohesh the ruler of half jerusalem with his daughter . hanun and the people of zanoah be work on the doorway of the valley they put it up and put up it door with their lock and rod and a thousand cubit of wall as far a the doorway where the waste material be place . and malchijah the son of rechab the ruler of the division of beth haccherem make good the doorway of the waste building it up and put up it door with their lock and rod . and shallun the son of col hozeh the ruler of the division of mizpah make good the doorway of the fountain building it up and cover it and put up it door with their lock and rod with the wall of the pool of shelah by the king 's garden as far a the step which go down from the town of david . by his side be work nehemiah the son of azbuk ruler of half the division of beth zur as far a the place opposite the last resting place of david 's family and the pool which be make and the house of the men of war . then come the levite rehum the son of ban . by his side be work hashabiah ruler of half the division of keilah for his division . after him be work their brother bavvai the son of henadad ruler of half the division of keilah . and by his side be work ezer the son of jeshua the ruler of mizpah make good another part opposite the way up to the store of arm at the turning of the wall . after him baruch the son of zabbai be hard at work on another part from the turning of the wall to the door of the house of eliashib the chief priest . after him meremoth the son of uriah the son of hakkoz be work on another part from the door of the house of eliashib as far a the end of his house . after him be work the priest the men of the lowland . after them come benjamin and hasshub opposite their house . after them azariah the son of maaseiah the son of ananiah make good the wall by the house where he himself be live . after him binnui the son of henadad be work on another part from the house of azariah as far a the turning of the wall and the angle . palal the son of uzai make good the wall opposite the angle and the tower which come out from the high part of the king 's house by the open space of the watch . after him be pedaiah the son of parosh . now the nethinim be live in the ophel as far a the place face the water doorway to the east and the tower which come out . after him the tekoites be make good another part opposite the great tower which come out and up to the wall of the ophel . far on past the horse doorway the priest be at work every one opposite his house . after them zadok the son of immer be work opposite his house . and after him shemaiah the son of shecaniah the keeper of the east door . after him hananiah the son of shelemiah and hanun the sixth son of zalaph be make good another part . after him meshullam the son of berechiah make good the wall opposite his room . after him malchijah one of the gold worker to the nethinim and the trader make good the wall opposite the doorway of hammiphkad and as far a the way up to the angle . and between the way up to the angle and the sheep door the gold worker and the trader make good the wall .now sanballat hearing that we be build the wall be very angry and in his wrath make sport of the jew . and in the hearing of his countryman and the army of samaria he say what be these feeble jew do ? will they make themselves strong ? will they make offering ? will they get the work do in a day ? will they make the stone which have be burn come again out of the dust ? now tobiah the ammonite be by him and he say such be their building that if a fox go up it their stone wall will be break down . give ear o our god for we be look down on let their word of shame be turn back on themselves and let them be give up to waste in a land where they be prisoner let not their wrongdoing be cover or their sin wash away from before you for they have make you angry before the builder . so we go on build the wall and all the wall be join together half way up for the people be work hard . but when it come to the ear of sanballat and tobiah and the arabian and the ammonite and the ashdodites that the building of the wall of jerusalem be go forward and the broken place be be make good they be full of wrath and they make design all of them together to come and make an attack on jerusalem cause trouble there . but we make our prayer to god and have men on watch against them day and night because of them . and judah say the strength of the workman be give way and there be much waste material it be impossible for u to put up the wall . and those who be against u say without their knowledge and without their see u we will come among them and put them to death cause the work to come to a stop . and it come about that when the jew who be live near them come they say to u ten time from all direction they be come against u . so in the low part of the space at the back of the wall in the open place i put the people by family with their sword their spear and their bow . and after look i get up and say to the great one and to the chief and to the rest of the people have no fear of them keep in mind the lord who be great and greatly to be fear and take up arm for your brother your son and your daughter your wife and your house . and when it come to the ear of those who be against u that we have knowledge of their design and that god have make their purpose come to nothing we all go back to the wall everyone to his work and from that time half of my servant be do their part of the work and half keep the spear and body cover and the bow and the metal war dress and the chief be at the back of the men of judah . those who be build the wall and those who be move material do their part everyone work with one hand with his spear in the other every builder be work with his sword at his side . and by my side be a man for sound the horn . and i say to the great one and the chief and the rest of the people the work be great and widely space and we be far away from one another on the wall wherever you may be when the horn be sound come here to u our god will be fight for u . so we go on with the work and half of them have spear in their hand from the dawn of the morning till the star be see . and at the same time i say to the people let everyone with his servant come inside jerusalem for the night so that at night they may keep watch for u and go on work by day . so not one of u i or my brother or my servant or the watchman who be with me take off his clothing everyone go arm to the water .then there be a great outcry from the people and their wife against their countryman the jew . for there be some who say we our son and our daughter be a great number let u get grain so that we may have food for our need . and there be some who say we be give our field and our vine garden and our house for debt let u get grain because we be in need . and there be others who say we have give up our field and our vine garden to get money for the king 's tax . but our flesh be the same a the flesh of our countryman and our child a their child and now we be give our son and daughter into the hand of others to be their servant and some of our daughter be servant even now and we have no power to put a stop to it for other men have our field and our vine garden . and on hear their outcry and what they say i be very angry . and after turn it over in my mind i make a protest to the chief and the ruler and say to them every one of you be take interest from his countryman . and i get together a great meeting of protest . and i say to them we have give whatever we be able to give to make our brother the jew free who be servant and prisoner of the nation and would you now give up your brother for a price and be they to become our property ? then they say nothing answer not a word . and i say what you be do be not good be it not the more necessary for you to go in the fear of our god because of the shame which the nation may put on u ? even i and my servant have be take interest for the money and the grain we have let them have . so now let u give up this thing . give back to them this very day their field their vine garden their olive garden and their house as well a a hundredth part of the money and the grain and the wine and the oil which you have take from them . then they say we will give them back and take nothing for them we will do a you say . then i send for the priest and make them take an oath that they would keep this agreement . and shake out the fold of my robe i say so may god send out from his house and his work every man who do not keep this agreement even so let him be send out and make a nothing . and all the meeting of the people say so be it and give praise to the lord . and the people do a they have say . now from the time when i be make ruler of the people in the land of judah from the twentieth year till the thirty second year of artaxerxes the king for twelve year i and my servant have never take the food which be the right of the ruler . but early ruler who be before me make the people responsible for their upkeep and take from them bread and wine at the rate of forty shekel of silver and even their servant be lord over the people but i do not do so because of the fear of god . and i keep on with the work of this wall and we get no land for ourselves and all my servant be help with the work . and more than this a hundred and fifty of the jew and the ruler be guest at my table in addition to those who come to u from the nation round about u . now the food make ready for one day be one ox and six fat sheep as well a fowl and once in ten day a store of all sort of wine but all the same i do not take the food to which the ruler have a right because the people be crush under a hard yoke . keep in mind o my god for my good all i have do for this people .now when word be give to sanballat and tobiah and to geshem the arabian and to the rest of our hater that i have do the building of the wall and that there be no more broken place in it though even then i have not put up the door in the doorway sanballat and geshem sent to me say come let u have a meeting in one of the little town in the lowland of ono . but their purpose be to do me evil . and i send men to them say i be do a great work so that it be not possible for me to come down be the work to be stop while i go away from it and come down to you ? and four time they send to me in this way and i send them the same answer . then sanballat send his servant to me a fifth time with an open letter in his hand and in it these word be record it be say among the nation and geshem say so that you and the jew be hop to make yourselves free from the king 's authority and that this be why you be build the wall and they say that it be your purpose to be their king and that you have prophet preach about you in jerusalem and say there be a king in judah now an account of these thing will be send to the king . so come now and let u have a discussion . then i send to him say no such thing a you say be be do they be only a fiction you have make up yourself . for they be hop to put fear in u say their hand will become feeble and give up the work so that it may not get do . but now o god make my hand strong . and i go to the house of shemaiah the son of delaiah the son of mehetabel who be shut up and he say let u have a meeting in the house of god inside the temple and let the door be shut for they will come to put you to death truly in the night they will come to put you to death . and i say be i the sort of man to go in flight ? what man in my position would go into the temple to keep himself safe ? i will not go in . then it become clear to me that god have not send him he have give this word of a prophet against me himself and tobiah and sanballat have give him money to do so . for this reason they have give him money in order that i might be overcome by fear and do what he say and do wrong and so they would have reason to say evil about me and put shame on me . keep in mind o my god tobiah and sanballat and what they do and noadiah the woman prophet and the rest of the prophet whose purpose be to put fear into me . so the wall be complete on the twenty fifth day of the month elul in fifty two day . and when our hater have news of this all the nation round about u be full of fear and be greatly sham for they saw that this work have be do by our god . and far in those day the chief of judah send a number of letter to tobiah and his letter come to them . for in judah there be a number of people who have make an agreement by oath with him because he be the son in law of shecaniah the son of arah and his son jehohanan have take a his wife the daughter of meshullam the son of berechiah . and they say much before me of the good he have do and give him account of my word . and tobiah send letter with the purpose of cause me fear .now when the building of the wall be complete and i have put up the door and the door keeper and the music maker and the levite have be give their place i make my brother hanani and hananiah the ruler of the tower responsible for the government of jerusalem for he be a man of good faith fear god more than most . and i say to them do not let the door of jerusalem be open till the sun be high and while the watchman be in their place let the door be shut and lock and let the people of jerusalem be put on watch every one in his watch opposite his house . now the town be wide and great but the people in it be only a small number and the house have not be put up . and my god put it into my heart to get together the ruler and the chief and the people so that they might be list by family . and i come across a record of the name of those who come up at the first and in it i saw these word these be the people of the division of the kingdom among those who have be make prisoner by nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon and take away by him who go back to jerusalem and judah every one to his town who come with zerubbabel jeshua nehemiah azariah raamiah nahamani mordecai bilshan mispereth bigvai nehum baanah . the number of the men of the people of israel the child of parosh two thousand one hundred and seventy two . the child of shephatiah three hundred and seventy two . the child of arah six hundred and fifty two . the child of pahath moab of the child of jeshua and joab two thousand eight hundred and eighteen . the child of elam a thousand two hundred and fifty four . the child of zattu eight hundred and forty five . the child of zaccai seven hundred and sixty . the child of binnui six hundred and forty eight . the child of bebai six hundred and twenty eight . the child of azgad two thousand three hundred and twenty two . the child of adonikam six hundred and sixty seven . the child of bigvai two thousand and sixty seven . the child of adin six hundred and fifty five . the child of ater of hezekiah ninety eight . the child of hashum three hundred and twenty eight . the child of bezai three hundred and twenty four . the child of hariph a hundred and twelve . the child of gibeon ninety five . the men of beth lehem and netophah a hundred and eighty eight . the men of anathoth a hundred and twenty eight . the men of beth azmaveth forty two . the men of kiriath jearim chephirah and beeroth seven hundred and forty three . the men of ramah and geba six hundred and twenty one . the men of michmas a hundred and twenty two . the men of beth el and ai a hundred and twenty three . the men of the other nebo fifty two . the child of the other elam a thousand two hundred and fifty four . the child of harim three hundred and twenty . the child of jericho three hundred and forty five . the child of lod hadid and ono seven hundred and twenty one . the child of senaah three thousand nine hundred and thirty . the priest the child of jedaiah of the family of jeshua nine hundred and seventy three . the child of immer a thousand and fifty two . the child of pashhur a thousand two hundred and forty seven . the child of harim a thousand and seventeen . the levites the child of jeshua of kadmiel of the child of hodevah seventy four . the music maker the child of asaph a hundred and forty eight . the door keepers the child of shallum the child of ater the child of talmon the child of akkub the child of hatita the child of shobai a hundred and thirty eight . the nethinim the child of ziha the child of hasupha the child of tabbaoth the child of keros the child of sia the child of padon the child of lebana the child of hagaba the child of salmai the child of hanan the child of giddel the child of gahar the child of reaiah the child of rezin the child of nekoda the child of gazzam the child of uzza the child of paseah the child of besai the child of meunim the child of nephushesim the child of bakbuk the child of hakupha the child of harhur the child of bazlith the child of mehida the child of harsha the child of barkos the child of sisera the child of temah the child of neziah the child of hatipha . the child of solomon 's servant the child of sotai the child of sophereth the child of perida the child of jaala the child of darkon the child of giddel the child of shephatiah the child of hattil the child of pochereth hazzebaim the child of amon . all the nethinim and the child of solomon 's servant be three hundred and ninety two . all these be the people who go up from tel melah tel harsha cherub addon and immer but because they have no knowledge of their father ' family or offspring it be not certain if they be israelites the child of delaiah the child of tobiah the child of nekoda six hundred and forty two . and of the priest the child of hobaiah the child of hakkoz the child of barzillai who be marry to one of the daughter of barzillai the gileadite and take their name . they make search for their record among the list of family but their name be nowhere to be see so they be look on a unclean and no long priest . and the tirshatha say that they be not to have the most holy thing for their food till a priest come to give decision by the urim and thummim . the number of all the people together be forty two thousand three hundred and sixty as well a their men servant and their woman servant of whom there be seven thousand three hundred and thirty seven and they have two hundred and forty five men and woman to make music . they have seven hundred and thirty six horse two hundred and forty five transport beast four hundred and thirty five camel six thousand seven hundred and twenty ass . and some of the head of family give money for the work . the tirshatha give into the store a thousand darics of gold fifty basins five hundred and thirty priest ' robe . and some of the head of family give into the store for the work twenty thousand darics of gold and two thousand two hundred pound of silver . and that which the rest of the people give be twenty thousand darics of gold and two thousand pound of silver and sixty seven priest ' robe . so the priest and the levite and the door keeper and the music maker and some of the people and the nethinim and all israel be live in their town .and when the seventh month come the child of israel be in their town . and all the people come together like one man into the wide place in front of the water doorway and they make a request to ezra the scribe that he would put before them the book of the law of moses which the lord have give to israel . and ezra the priest put the law before the meeting of the people before the men and woman and all those who be able to take it in on the first day of the seventh month . he be read it in the wide place in front of the water doorway from early morning till the middle of the day in the hearing of all those men and woman whose mind be able to take it in and the ear of all the people be open to the book of the law . and ezra the scribe take his place on a tower of wood which they have make for the purpose and by his side be place mattithiah and shema and anaiah and uriah and hilkiah and maaseiah on the right and on the left pedaiah and mishael and malchijah and hashum and hashbaddanah zechariah and meshullam . and ezra take the book open it before the eye of all the people for he be high than the people and when it be open all the people get to their foot and ezra give praise to the lord the great god . and all the people in answer say so be it so be it lift up their hand and with bent head they give worship to the lord go down on their face to the earth . and jeshua and ban and sherebiah and jamin akkub shabbethai hodiah maaseiah kelita azariah jozabad hanan pelaiah and the levite make the law clear to the people and the people keep in their place . and they give out the word of the book the law of god clearly and give the sense of it so that their mind be able to take it in . and nehemiah who be the tirshatha and ezra the priest and scribe and the levite who be the teacher of the people say to all the people this day be holy to the lord your god let there be no sorrow or weep for all the people be weep on hear the word of the law . then he say to them go away now and take the fat for your food and the sweet for your drink and send some to him for whom nothing be make ready for this day be holy to our lord and let there be no grief in your heart for the joy of the lord be your strong place . so the levite make all the people quiet say be quiet for the day be holy and do not give way to grief . and all the people go away to take food and drink and to send food to others and to be glad because the word which be say to them have be make clear . and on the second day the head of family of all the people and the priest and the levite come together to ezra the scribe to give attention to the word of the law . and they saw that it be record in the law that the lord have give order by moses that the child of israel be to have tent for their living place in the feast of the seventh month and that they be to give out an order and make it public in all their town and in jerusalem say go out to the mountain and get olive branch and branch of field olive and of myrtle and palm branch and branch of thick tree to make tent a it say in the book . and the people go out and get them and make themselves tent every one on the roof of his house and in the open space and in the open square of the house of god and in the wide place of the water doorway and the wide place of the doorway of ephraim . all the people who have be prisoner and have come back make tent and be live in them for from the time of jeshua the son of nun till that day the child of israel have not do so . and there be very great joy . and day by day from the first day till the last he be read from the book of the law of god . and they keep the feast for seven day and on the eighth day there be a holy meeting a it be order in the law .now on the twenty fourth day of this month the child of israel come together take no food and put haircloth and dust on their body . and the seed of israel make themselves separate from all the men of other nation publicly request forgiveness for their sin and the wrongdoing of their father . and for a fourth part of the day upright in their place they be read from the book of the law of their god and for a fourth part of the day they be request forgiveness and worship the lord their god . then jeshua and ban kadmiel shebaniah bunni sherebiah ban and chenani take their place on the step of the levite cry in a loud voice to the lord their god . then the levite jeshua and kadmiel ban hashabneiah sherebiah hodiah shebaniah and pethahiah say get up and give praise to the lord your god for ever and ever . praise be to your great name which be lift up high over all blessing and praise . you be the lord even you only you have make heaven the heaven of heaven with all their army the earth and all thing in it the sea and everything in them and you keep them from destruction and the army of heaven be your worshipper . you be the lord the god who take abram and make him yours guide him from ur of the chaldee and give him the name of abraham you saw that his heart be true to you and make an agreement with him to give the land of the canaanite the hittite the amorite and the perizzite and the jebusite and the girgashite even to give it to his seed and you have do what you say for righteousness be yours and you saw the trouble of our father in egypt and their cry come to your ear by the red sea and you do sign and wonder on pharaoh and all his servant and all the people of his land for you saw how cruel they be to them . so you get yourself a name a it be today . by you the sea be part before them so that they go through the sea on dry land and those who go after them go down into the deep like a stone into great water . and you go before them by day in a pillar of cloud and in a pillar of fire by night to give them light on the way they be to go . and you come down on mount sinai and your voice come to them from heaven give them right decision and true law good rule and order and you give them word of your holy sabbath and give them order and rule and a law by the hand of moses your servant and you give them bread from heaven when they be in need and make water come out of the rock for their drink and give them order to go in and take for their heritage the land which your hand have be lift up to give them . but they and our father in their pride make their neck stiff and give no attention to your order and would not do them and give no thought to the wonder you have do among them but make their neck stiff and turn away from you make a captain over themselves to take them back to their prison in egypt but you be a god of forgiveness full of grace and pity slow to wrath and great in mercy and you do not give them up . even when they have make for themselves an ox of metal and say this be your god who take you up out of egypt and have do so much to make you angry even then in your great mercy you do not give them up in the waste land the pillar of cloud still go before them by day guide them on their way and the pillar of fire by night to give them light and make clear the way they be to go . and you give your good spirit to be their teacher and do not keep back your manna from their mouth and give them water when they have need of it . truly for forty year you be their support in the waste land and they be in need of nothing their clothing do not get old or their foot become tired . and you give them kingdom and people make distribution to them in every part of the land so they take for their heritage the land of sihon even the land of the king of heshbon and the land of og king of bashan . and you make their child a great in number a the star of heaven and take them into the land of which you have say to their father that they be to go in and take it for themselves . so the child go in and take the land and you overcome before them the people of the land the canaanite and give them up into their hand with their king and the people of the land so that they might do with them whatever it be their pleasure to do . and they take wall town and a fat land and become the owner of house full of all good thing water hole cut in the rock vine garden and olive garden and a wealth of fruit tree so they have food enough and become fat and have joy in the good you give them . but they be hard hearted and go against your authority turn their back on your law and put to death your prophet who give witness against them with the purpose of turn them back again to you and they do much to make you angry . and so you give them up into the hand of their hater who be cruel to them and in the time of their trouble when they make their prayer to you you give ear to them from heaven and in your great mercy give them saviour who make them free from the hand of their hater . but when they have rest they do evil again before you so you give them into the hand of their hater who have rule over them but when they come back and make their prayer to you you give ear to them from heaven again and again in your mercy you give them salvation and give witness against them so that you might make them come back again to your law but their heart be lift up and they give no attention to your order and go against your decision which if a man keep them will be life to him and turn their back on you make their neck stiff and do not give ear . year after year you put up with them and give witness against them by your spirit through your prophet still they do not give ear and so you give them up into the hand of the people of the land . even then in your great mercy you do not put an end to them completely or give them up for you be a god of grace and mercy . and now our god the great the strong the god who be to be fear who keep faith and mercy let not all this trouble seem small to you which have come on u and on our king and our ruler and on our priest and our prophet and our father and on all your people from the time of the king of assyria till this day . but still you have be in the right in everything which have come on u you have be true to u but we have do evil and our king our ruler our priest and our father have not keep your law or give attention to your order and your witness with which you give witness against them . for they have not be your servant in their kingdom and in all the good thing you give them and in the great and fat land you give them and they have not be turn away from their evil do . now today we be servant and a for the land which you give to our father so that the produce of it and the good might be theirs see we be servant in it and it give much increase to the king whom you have put over u because of our sin and they have power over our body and over our cattle at their pleasure and we be in great trouble . and because of all this we be make an agreement in good faith and put it in write and our ruler our levite and our priest be put their name to it .now those who put down their name be nehemiah the tirshatha the son of hacaliah and zedekiah seraiah azariah jeremiah pashhur amariah malchijah hattush shebaniah malluch harim meremoth obadiah daniel ginnethon baruch meshullam abijah mijamin maaziah bilgai shemaiah these be the priest . and the levite by name jeshua the son of azaniah binnui of the son of henadad kadmiel and their brother shebaniah hodiah kelita pelaiah hanan mica rehob hashabiah zaccur sherebiah shebaniah hodiah ban beninu . the chief of the people parosh pahath moab elam zattu ban bunni azgad bebai adonijah bigvai adin ater hezekiah azzur hodiah hashum bezai hariph anathoth nobai magpiash meshullam hezir meshezabel zadok jaddua pelatiah hanan anaiah hoshea hananiah hasshub hallohesh pilha shobek rehum hashabnah maaseiah and ahiah hanan anan malluch harim baanah . and the rest of the people the priest the levite the door keepers the music maker the nethinim and all those who have make themselves separate from the people of the land to keep the law of god their wife their son and their daughter everyone who have knowledge and wisdom they be unite with their brother their ruler and put themselves under a curse and an oath to keep their step in the way of god 's law which be give by moses the servant of god and to keep and do all the order of the lord our lord and his decision and his rule and that we would not give our daughter to the people of the land or take their daughter for our son and if the people of the land come to do trade in good or food on the sabbath day that we would do no trade with them on the sabbath or on a holy day and that in the seventh year we would take no payment from any debtor . and we make rule for ourselves tax ourselves a third of a shekel every year for the upkeep of the house of our god for the holy bread and for the regular meal offering and the regular burned offering on the sabbath and at the new moon and the fixed feast and for the sin offering to take away the sin of israel and for all the work of the house of our god . and we the priest and the levite and the people make selection by the decision of the lord of those who be to take the wood offering into the house of god by family at the regular time year by year to be burn on the altar of the lord our god a it be record in the law and to take the first fruit of our land and the first fruit of every sort of tree year by year into the house of the lord as well a the first of our son and of our cattle a it be record in the law and the first lamb of our herd and of our flock which be to be take to the house of our god to the priest who be servant in the house of our god and that we would take the first of our rough meal and our lifted offering and the fruit of every sort of tree and wine and oil to the priest to the room of the house of our god and the tenth of the produce of our land to the levite for they the levite take a tenth in all the town of our ploughed land . and the priest the son of aaron be to be with the levite when the levite take the tenth and the levite be to take a tenth of the tenth into the house of our god to the room into the store house for the child of israel and the child of levi be to take the lifted offering of the grain and wine and oil into the room where the vessel of the holy place be together with the priest and the door keeper and the maker of music and we will not give up care for the house of our god .and the ruler of the people be live in jerusalem the rest of the people make selection by the decision of chance of one out of every ten to be live in jerusalem the holy town the other nine to go to the other town . and the people give a blessing to all the men who be freely offer to take up their place in jerusalem . now these be the chief of the division of the country who be live in jerusalem but in the town of judah everyone be live on his heritage in the town that be israel the priest the levite the nethinim and the child of solomon 's servant . and in jerusalem there be live certain of the child of judah and of benjamin . of the child of judah athaiah the son of uzziah the son of zechariah the son of amariah the son of shephatiah the son of mahalalel of the child of perez and maaseiah the son of baruch the son of col hozeh the son of hazaiah the son of adaiah the son of joiarib the son of zechariah the son of the shilonite . all the son of perez living in jerusalem be four hundred and sixty eight men of good position . and these be the son of benjamin sallu the son of meshullam the son of joed the son of pedaiah the son of kolaiah the son of maaseiah the son of ithiel the son of jeshaiah . and after him gabbai sallai nine hundred and twenty eight . and joel the son of zichri be their overseer and judah the son of hassenuah be second over the town . of the priest jedaiah the son of joiarib jachin seraiah the son of hilkiah the son of meshullam the son of zadok the son of meraioth the son of ahitub the ruler of the house of god and their brother who do the work of the house eight hundred and twenty two and adaiah the son of jeroham the son of pelaliah the son of amzi the son of zechariah the son of pashhur the son of malchijah and his brother head of family two hundred and forty two and amashsai the son of azarel the son of ahzai the son of meshillemoth the son of immer and their brother men of war a hundred and twenty eight and their overseer be zabdiel the son of haggedolim . and of the levite shemaiah the son of hasshub the son of azrikam the son of hashabiah the son of bunni and shabbethai and jozabad of the chief of the levite who be responsible for the outside business of the house of god and mattaniah the son of mica the son of zabdi the son of asaph who have to give the first note of the song of praise in prayer and bakbukiah the second among his brother and abda the son of shammua the son of galal the son of jeduthun . all the levite in the holy town be two hundred and eighty four . in addition the door keeper akkub talmon and their brother who keep watch at the door be a hundred and seventy two . and the rest of israel of the priest the levite be in all the town of judah every one in his heritage . but the nethinim be live in the ophel and ziha and gishpa be over the nethinim . and the overseer of the levite at jerusalem be uzzi the son of ban the son of hashabiah the son of mattaniah the son of mica of the son of asaph the music maker who be over the business of the house of god . for there be an order from the king about them and a regular amount for the music maker for their need day by day . and pethahiah the son of meshezabel of the son of zerah the son of judah be the king 's servant in everything to do with the people . and for the daughter town with their field some of the men of judah be live in kiriath arba and it daughter town and in dibon and it daughter town and in jekabzeel and it daughter town and in jeshua and in moladah and beth pelet and in hazar shual and in beer sheba and it daughter town and in ziklag and in meconah and it daughter town and in en rimmon and in zorah and in jarmuth zanoah adullam and their daughter town lachish and it field azekah and it daughter town . so they be live from beer sheba to the valley of hinnom . and the child of benjamin be live from geba at michmash and aija and at beth el and it daughter town at anathoth nob ananiah hazor ramah gittaim hadid zeboim neballat lod and ono the valley of expert worker . and of the levite certain division in judah be join to benjamin .now these be the priest and the levite who go up with zerubbabel the son of shealtiel and jeshua seraiah jeremiah ezra amariah malluch hattush shecaniah rehum meremoth iddo ginnethoi abijah mijamin maadiah bilgah shemaiah and joiarib jedaiah sallu amok hilkiah jedaiah . these be the chief of the priest and of their brother in the day of jeshua . and the levite jeshua binnui kadmiel sherebiah judah and mattaniah who be over the music maker he and his brother . and bakbukiah and unno their brother be opposite them in their watch . and jeshua be the father of joiakim and joiakim be the father of eliashib and eliashib be the father of joiada and joiada be the father of jonathan and jonathan be the father of jaddua . and in the day of joiakim there be priest head of family of seraiah meraiah of jeremiah hananiah of ezra meshullam of amariah jehohanan of malluchi jonathan of shebaniah joseph of harim adna of meraioth helkai of iddo zechariah of ginnethon meshullam of abijah zichri of miniamin of moadiah piltai of bilgah shammua of shemaiah jehonathan and of joiarib mattenai of jedaiah uzzi of sallai kallai of amok eber of hilkiah hashabiah of jedaiah nethanel . the levite in the day of eliashib joiada and johanan and jaddua be list a head of family and the priest when darius the persian be king . the son of levi head of family be record in the book of the history even till the day of johanan the son of eliashib . and the chief of the levite hashabiah sherebiah and jeshua the son of kadmiel with their brother opposite them to give blessing and praise a order by david the man of god watch against watch . mattaniah and bakbukiah obadiah meshullam talmon akkub be door keeper keep the watch at the store house of the door . these be in the day of joiakim the son of jeshua the son of jozadak and in the day of nehemiah the ruler and of ezra the priest the scribe . and when the time come for the wall of jerusalem to be make holy they send for the levite out of all their place to come to jerusalem to keep the feast with joy and with praise and melody with brass and cord instrument of music . and the son of the music maker come together from the lowland round about jerusalem and from the daughter town of the netophathites and from beth gilgal and from the field of geba and azmaveth for the music maker have make daughter town for themselves round about jerusalem . and the priest and the levite make themselves clean and they make the people clean and the doorway and the wall . then i make the ruler of judah come up on the wall and i put in position two great band of them who give praise walking in ordered line one go to the right on the wall in the direction of the doorway where the waste be put and after them go hoshaiah and half of the ruler of judah and azariah ezra and meshullam judah and benjamin and shemaiah and jeremiah and certain of the priest ' son with wind instrument zechariah the son of jonathan the son of shemaiah the son of mattaniah the son of micaiah the son of zaccur the son of asaph and his brother shemaiah and azarel milalai gilalai maai nethanel and judah hanani with the music instrument of david the man of god and ezra the scribe be at their head and by the doorway of the fountain and straight in front of them they go up by the step of the town of david at the slope up of the wall over the house of david as far a the water doorway to the east . and the other band of those who give praise go to the left and i go after them with half the people on the wall over the tower of the oven as far a the wide wall and over the doorway of ephraim and by the old door and the fish door and the tower of hananel and the tower of hammeah as far a the sheep door and at the doorway of the watchman they come to a stop . so the two band of those who give praise take up their position in the house of god and i and half of the chief with me and the priest eliakim maaseiah miniamin micaiah elioenai zechariah and hananiah with wind instrument and maaseiah and shemaiah and eleazar and uzzi and jehohanan and malchijah and elam and ezer . and the maker of melody make their voice loud with jezrahiah their overseer . and on that day they make great offering and be glad for god have make them glad with great joy and the woman and the child be glad with them so that the joy of jerusalem come to the ear of those who be far off . and on that day certain men be put over the room where the thing which have be give be store for the lifted offering and the first fruit and the tenth and to take into them the amount from the field of every town fix by the law for the priest and the levite for judah be glad on account of the priest and the levite who be in their place . and they keep the watch of their god and be responsible for make thing clean and so do the music maker and the door keeper a it be order by david and solomon his son . for in the day of david and asaph in the past there be a master of the music and song of blessing and praise to god . and all israel in the day of zerubbabel and in the day of nehemiah give what be need by the music maker and the door keeper day by day and they make the offering holy for the levite and the levite do the same for the son of aaron .on that day there be a reading from the book of moses in the hearing of the people and they saw that it say in the book that no ammonite or moabite might ever come into the meeting of god because they do not give the child of israel bread and water when they come to them but get balaam to put a curse on them though the curse be turn into a blessing by our god . so after hear the law they take out of israel all the mixed people . now before this eliashib the priest who have be place over the room of the house of our god be a friend of tobiah have make ready for him a great room where at one time they keep the meal offer the perfume and the vessel and the tenth of the grain and wine and oil which be give by order to the levite and the music maker and the door keeper and the lifted offering for the priest . but all this time i be not at jerusalem for in the thirty second year of artaxerxes king of babylon i go to the king and after some day i get the king to let me go and i come to jerusalem and it be clear to me what evil eliashib have do for tobiah in make ready for him a room in the building of the house of god . and it be evil in my eye so i have all tobiah 's thing put out of the room . then i give order and they make the room clean and i put back in them the vessel of the house of god with the meal offering and the perfume . and i saw that the levite have not be give what be need for their support so that the levite and the music maker who do the work have go away everyone to his field . then i make protest to the chief and say why have the house of god be give up ? and i get them together and put them in their place . then all judah come with the tenth part of the grain and wine and oil and put it into the store house . and i make controller over the store house shelemiah the priest and zadok the scribe and of the levite pedaiah and with them be hanan the son of zaccur the son of mattaniah they be take to be true men and their business be the distribution of these thing to their brother . keep me in mind o my god in connection with this and do not let the good which i have do for the house of my god and it worship go from your memory completely . in those day i saw in judah some who be crush grape on the sabbath and get in grain and put it on ass as well a wine and grape and fig and all sort of good which they take into jerusalem on the sabbath day and i give witness against them on the day when they be market food . and there be men of tyre there who come with fish and all sort of good trade with the child of judah and in jerusalem on the sabbath . then i make protest to the chief of judah and say to them what be this evil which you be do not keep the sabbath day holy ? do not your father do the same and do not our god send all this evil on u and on this town ? but you be cause more wrath to come on israel by not keep the sabbath holy . and so when the street of jerusalem be get dark before the sabbath i give order for the door to be shut and not to be open again till after the sabbath and i put some of my servant by the door so that nothing might be take in on the sabbath day . so the trader in all sort of good take their night 's rest outside jerusalem once or twice . then i give witness against them and say why be you wait all night by the wall ? if you do so again i will have you take prisoner . from that time they do not come again on the sabbath . and i give the levite order to make themselves clean and come and keep the door and make the sabbath holy . keep this in mind to my credit o my god and have mercy on me for great be your mercy . and in those day i saw the jew who be marry to woman of ashdod and ammon and moab and their child be talk half in the language of ashdod they have no knowledge of the jew ' language but make use of the language of the two people . and i take up the cause against them curse them and give blow to some of them and pull out their hair and i make them take an oath by god say you be not to give your daughter to their son or take their daughter for your son or for yourselves . be it not in these thing that solomon king of israel do wrong ? among a number of nation there be no king like him and he be dear to his god and god make him king over all israel but even he be make to do evil by strange woman . be we then without protest to let you do all this great evil sinning against our god by take strange woman for your wife ? and one of the son of joiada the son of eliashib the chief priest be son in law to sanballat the horonite so i send him away from me . keep them in mind o my god because they have put shame on the priest ' name and on the agreement of the priest and the levite . so i make them clean from all strange people and have regular watch fix for the priest and for the levite everyone in his work and for the wood offering at fix time and for the first fruit . keep me in mind o my god for good .now it come about in the day of ahasuerus that ahasuerus who be ruler of a hundred and twenty seven division of the kingdom from india as far a ethiopia that in those day when king ahasuerus be rule in shushan his strong town in the third year of his rule he give a feast to all his captain and his servant and the captain of the army of persia and medium the great men and the ruler of the division of his kingdom be present before him and for a long time even a hundred and eighty day he let them see all the wealth and the glory of his kingdom and the great power and honour which be his . and at the end of that time the king give a feast for all the people who be present in shushan the king 's town small as well a great for seven day in the outer square of the garden of the king 's house . there be fair hanging of white and green and blue fix with cord of purple and the best linen to silver ring and pillar of polished stone the seat be of gold and silver on a floor of red and white and yellow and black stone . and they give them drink in gold vessel every vessel be different and wine of the kingdom freely give by the king . and the drinking be in keep with the law no one be force for the king have give order to all the chief servant of his house to do a be please to every man . and vashti the queen give a feast for the woman in the house of king ahasuerus . on the seventh day when the heart of the king be glad with wine he give order to mehuman biztha harbona bigtha and abagtha zethar and carcas the seven unsexed servant who be wait before ahasuerus the king that vashti the queen be to come before him crown with her crown and let the people and the captain see her for she be very beautiful . but when the servant give her the king 's order vashti the queen say she would not come then the king be very angry and his heart be burn with wrath . and the king say to the wise men who have knowledge of the time for this be the king 's way with all who be expert in law and in the give of decision and second only to him be carshena shethar admatha tarshish mere marsena and memucan the seven ruler of persia and medium who be friend of the king and have the first place in the kingdom what be to be do by law to vashti the queen because she have not do what king ahasuerus by his servant give her order to do ? and before the king and the captain memucan give his answer vashti the queen have do wrong not only to the king but to all the captain and to all the people in all the division of the kingdom of king ahasuerus for news of what the queen have do will come to the ear of all woman and they will no longer give respect to their husband when it be say to them king ahasuerus give order for vashti the queen to come before him and she come not . and the wife of the captain of persia and medium hear what the queen have do will say the same to all the king 's captain . so there will be much shame and wrath . if it be please to the king let an order go out from him and let it be record among the law of the persian and the medes so that it may never be change that vashti be never again to come before king ahasuerus and let the king give her place to another who be good than she . and when this order give by the king be make public through all his kingdom for it be great all the wife will give honour to their husband great as well a small . and this suggestion seem good to the king and the captain and the king do a memucan say and send letter to all the division of the kingdom to every division in the writing commonly use there and to every people in the language which be theirs say that every man be to be the ruler in his house and that this order be to be give out in the language of his people .after these thing when the king 's feeling be calm the thought of vashti and what she have do and the order he have make against her come back to his mind . then the servant who be wait on the king say to him let search be make for some fair young virgin for the king let the king give authority to certain men in all the division of his kingdom to get together all the fair young virgin and send them to shushan the king 's town to the woman 's house under the care of hegai the king 's servant the keeper of the woman and let the thing need for make them clean be give to them and let the girl who be please to the king be queen in place of vashti . and the king be pleased with this suggestion and he do so . now there be a certain jew in shushan name mordecai the son of jair the son of shimei the son of kish a benjamite who have be take away from jerusalem among those who have be make prisoner with jeconiah king of judah when nebuchadnezzar king of babylon have take him away . and he have be a father to hadassah that be esther the daughter of his father 's brother for she have no father or mother and she be very beautiful and when her father and mother be dead mordecai take her for his daughter . so when the order make by the king be publicly give out and a number of girl have be place in the care of hegai in the king 's house in shushan esther be take into the king 's house and put in the care of hegai the keeper of the woman . and he be pleased with the girl and be kind to her and he quickly give her what be need for make her clean and the thing which be hers by right and seven servant girl who be to be hers from the king 's house and he have her and her servant girl move to the best place in the woman 's part of the house . esther have not say what family or people she come from for mordecai have give her order not to do so . and every day mordecai take his walk before the square of the woman 's house to see how esther be and what would be do to her . now every girl when her turn come have to go in to king ahasuerus after undergo for a space of twelve month what be order by the law for the woman for this be the time necessary for make them clean that be six month with oil of myrrh and six month with sweet perfume and such thing a be need for make woman clean and in this way the girl go in to the king whatever she have a desire for be give to her to take with her from the woman 's house into the house of the king . in the evening she go and on the day after she come back to the second house of the woman into the keep of shaashgaz one of the king 's unsexed servant who have the care of the king 's wife only if the king have delight in her and sent for her by name do she go in to him again . now when the time come for esther the daughter of abihail his father 's brother whom mordecai have take a his daughter to go in to the king she make request for nothing but what hegai the king 's servant and keeper of the woman have give her . and esther be look on kindly by all who saw her . so esther be take in to king ahasuerus in his house in the tenth month which be the month tebeth in the seventh year of his rule . and esther be more pleasing to the king than all the woman and to his eye she be fair and more full of grace than all the other virgin so he put his crown on her head and make her queen in place of vashti . then the king give a great feast for all his captain and his servant even esther 's feast and he give order through all the division of his kingdom for a day of rest from work and give wealth from his store . and when the virgin come together in the second house of the woman mordecai take his seat in the doorway of the king 's house . esther have still say nothing of her family or her people a mordecai have give her order for esther do what mordecai say a when she be live with him . in those day while mordecai be seat at the king 's doorway two of the king 's servant bigthan and teresh keeper of the door be angry be look for a chance to make an attack on king ahasuerus . and mordecai have knowledge of their purpose send word of it to esther the queen and esther give the news to the king in mordecai 's name . and when the thing have be look into it be see to be true and the two of them be put to death by hang on a tree and it be put down in the record before the king .after these thing by the order of the king haman the son of hammedatha the agagite be lift up and give a position of honour and a high place than all the other captain who be with him . and all the king 's servant who be in the king 's house go down to the earth before haman and give him honour for so the king have give order . but mordecai do not go down before him or give him honour . then the king 's servant who be in the king 's house say to mordecai why do you go against the king 's order ? now when they have say this to him day after day and he give no attention they let haman have news of it to see if mordecai 's behaviour would be overlook for he have say to them that he be a jew . and when haman saw that mordecai do not go down before him and give him honour haman be full of wrath . but it be not enough for him to make an attack on mordecai only for they have make clear to him who mordecai 's people be so haman make it his purpose to put an end to all the jew even mordecai 's people through all the kingdom of ahasuerus . in the first month the month nisan in the twelfth year of king ahasuerus from day to day and from month to month they go on look for a sign give by pur that be chance before haman till the sign come out for the thirteenth day of the twelfth month the month adar . and haman say to king ahasuerus there be a certain nation living here and there in small group among the people in all the division of your kingdom their law be different from those of any other nation and they do not keep the king 's law for this reason it be not right for the king to let them be . if it be the king 's pleasure let a statement order their destruction be put in writing and i will give to those responsible for the king 's business ten thousand talent of silver for the king 's store house . and the king take his ring from his hand and give it to haman the son of hammedatha the agagite the hater of the jew . and the king say to haman the money be yours and the people to do with them whatever seem right to you . then on the thirteenth day of the first month the king 's scribe be send for and they put in write haman 's order to all the king 's captain and the ruler of every division of his kingdom and the chief of every people for every division of the kingdom in the writing commonly use there and to every people in the language which be theirs it be sign in the name of king ahasuerus and stamp with the king 's ring . and letter be send by the runner into every division of the kingdom order the death and destruction of all jew young and old little child and woman on the same day even the thirteenth day of the twelfth month the month adar and the taking of all their good by force . a copy of the writing to be make public in every part of the kingdom be send out to all the people so that they might be ready when that day come . the runner go out quickly by the king 's order and a public statement be make in shushan and the king and haman take wine together but the town of shushan be trouble .now when mordecai saw what be do pull off his robe he put on haircloth with dust on his head and go out into the middle of the town cry out with a loud and bitter cry . and he come even before the king 's doorway for no one might come inside the king 's door clothe in haircloth . and in every part of the kingdom wherever the king 's word and his order come there be great sorrow among the jew and weep and cry and go without food and number of them be stretch on the earth cover with dust and haircloth . and esther 's woman and her servant come and give her word of it . then great be the grief of the queen and she send robe for mordecai so that his clothing of haircloth might be take off but he would not have them . then esther send for hathach one of the king 's unsexed servant whom he have give her for wait on her and she give him order to go to mordecai and see what this be and why it be . so hathach go out and saw mordecai in the open square of the town before the king 's doorway . and mordecai give him an account of what have take place and of the amount of money which haman have say he would put into the king 's store for the destruction of the jew . and he give him the copy of the order which have be give out in shushan for their destruction order him to let esther see it and to make it clear to her and to say to her that she be to go in to the king request his mercy and make prayer for her people . and hathach come back and give esther an account of what mordecai have say . then esther send hathach to say to mordecai it be common knowledge among all the king 's servant and the people of every part of the kingdom that if anyone man or woman come to the king in his inner room without be send for there be only one law for him that he be to be put to death only those to whom the king 's rod of gold be stretch out may keep their life but i have not be send for to come before the king these thirty day . and they say these word to mordecai . then mordecai sent this answer back to esther do not have the idea that you in the king 's house will be safe from the fate of all the jew . if at this time you say nothing then help and salvation will come to the jew from some other place but you and your father 's family will come to destruction and who be to say that you have not come to the kingdom even for such a time a this ? then esther send them back to mordecai with this answer go get together all the jew who be present in shushan and go without food for me take no food or drink night or day for three day and i and my woman will do the same and so i will go in to the king which be against the law and if death be to be my fate then let it come . so mordecai go away and do everything a esther have say .now on the third day esther put on her queen 's robe and take her place in the inner room of the king 's house face the king 's house and the king be seat on his high seat in the king 's house face the doorway of the house . and when the king saw esther the queen wait in the inner room look kindly on her he put out the rod of gold in his hand to her . so esther come near and put her finger on the top of the rod . then the king say what be your desire queen esther and what be your request ? i will give it to you even to the half of my kingdom . and esther in answer say if it seem good to the king let the king and haman come today to the feast which i have make ready for him . then the king say let haman come quickly so that what esther have say may be do . so the king and haman come to the feast which esther have make ready . and while they be drink wine the king say to esther what be your prayer ? for it will be give to you and what be your request ? for it will be do even to the half of my kingdom . then esther say in answer my prayer and my request be this if i have the king 's approval and if it be the king 's pleasure to give me my prayer and do my request let the king and haman come to the feast which i will make ready for them and tomorrow i will do a the king have say . then on that day haman go out full of joy and glad in heart but when he saw mordecai in the king 's doorway and he do not get to his foot or give any sign of fear before him haman be full of wrath against mordecai . but control himself he go to his house and he send for his friend and zeresh his wife . and he give them an account of the glory of his wealth and the number of child he have and the way in which he have be honour by the king and how he have put him over the captain and servant of the king . and haman say far truly esther the queen let no man but myself come in to the feast which she have make ready for the king and tomorrow again i be to be her guest with the king . but all this be nothing to me while i see mordecai the jew seat by the king 's doorway . then his wife zeresh and all his friend say to him let a pillar fifty cubit high be make ready for hang him and in the morning get the king to give order for the hanging of mordecai then you will be able to go to the feast with the king with a glad heart . and haman be pleased with the suggestion and he have the pillar make .that night the king be unable to get any sleep and he send for the book of the record and while some one be read them to the king it come out that it be record in the book how mordecai have give word of the design of bigthana and teresh two of the king 's servant keeper of the door by whom an attack on the king have be design . and the king say what honour and reward have be give to mordecai for this ? then the servant who be wait on the king say nothing have be do for him . then the king say who be in the outer room ? now haman have come into the outer room to get the king 's authority for the hanging of mordecai on the pillar which he have make ready for him . and the king 's servant say to him see haman be wait in the outer room . and the king say let him come in . so haman come in . and the king say to him what be to be do to the man whom the king have delight in honour ? then the thought come into haman 's mind whom more than myself would the king have pleasure in honour ? and haman answer the king say for the man whom the king have delight in honour let them take the robe which the king generally put on and the horse on which the king go and the crown which be on his head and let the robe and the horse be give to one of the king 's most noble captain so that they may put them on the man whom the king have delight in honour and let him go on horseback through the street of the town with men cry out before him so let it be do to the man whom the king have delight in honour . then the king say to haman go quickly and take the robe and the horse a you have say and do even so to mordecai the jew who be seat at the king 's doorway see that you do everything a you have say . then haman take the robe and the horse and dress mordecai in the robe he make him go on horseback through the street of the town cry out before him so let it be do to the man whom the king have delight in honouring . and mordecai come back to the king 's doorway . but haman go quickly back to his house sad and with his head cover . and haman give his wife zeresh and all his friend an account of what have take place . then his wise men and his wife zeresh say to him if mordecai who be start to get the good of you be of the seed of the jew you will not be able to do anything against him but you will certainly go down before him . while they be still talk the king 's servant come to take haman to the feast which esther have make ready .so the king and haman come to take wine with esther the queen . and the king say to esther again on the second day while they be drink what be your prayer queen esther ? for it will be give to you and what be your request ? for it will be do even to the half of my kingdom . then esther the queen answering say if i have your approval o king and if it be the king 's pleasure let my life be give to me in answer to my prayer and my people at my request for we be give up i and my people to destruction and death and to be cut off . if we have be take a men servant and woman servant for a price i would have say nothing for our trouble be little in comparison with the king 's loss . then king ahasuerus say to esther the queen who be he and where be he who have have this evil thought in his heart ? and esther say our hater and attacker be this evil haman . then haman be full of fear before the king and the queen . and the king in his wrath get up from the feast and go into the garden and haman get to his foot to make a prayer for his life to esther the queen for he saw that the king 's purpose be evil against him . then the king come back from the garden into the room where they have be drink and haman be stretch out on the seat where esther be . then the king say be he take the queen by force before my eye in my house ? and while the word be on the king 's lip they put a cloth over haman 's face . then harbonah one of the unsexed servant wait before the king say see the pillar fifty cubit high which haman make for mordecai who say a good word for the king be still in it place in haman 's house . then the king say put him to death by hang him on it . so haman be put to death by hang him on the pillar he have make for mordecai . then the king 's wrath become less .that day the king give all the family of haman the hater of the jew to esther the queen . and mordecai come before the king for esther have make clear what he be to her . and the king take off his ring which he have take from haman and give it to mordecai . and esther put mordecai over the family of haman . then esther again come before the king fall down at his foot and make request to him with weep that he would put a stop to the evil purpose of haman the agagite and the design which he have make against the jew . then the king put out the rod of gold to esther and she get up before the king . and she say if it be the king 's pleasure and if i have his approval and this thing seem right to the king and i be please to him then let letter be send give order against those which haman the son of hammedatha the agagite send out for the destruction of the jew in all division of the kingdom for how be it possible for me to see the evil which be to overtake my nation ? how may i see the destruction of my people ? then king ahasuerus say to esther the queen and to mordecai the jew see now i have give esther the family of haman and he have come to his death by hang because he make an attack on the jew . so now send a letter about the jew write whatever seem good to you in the king 's name and stamp it with the king 's ring for a writing sign in the king 's name and stamp with the king 's ring may not be change . then at that time on the twenty third day of the third month which be the month sivan the king 's scribe be send for and everything order by mordecai be put in writing and send to the jew and the captain and the ruler and the chief of all the division of the kingdom from india to ethiopia a hundred and twenty seven division to every division in the writing commonly use there and to every people in their language and to the jew in their writing and their language . the letter be send in the name of king ahasuerus and stamp with his ring and they be take by men on horseback go on the quick running horse use for the king 's business the offspring of his best horse in these letter the king give authority to the jew in every town to come together and make a fight for their life and to send death and destruction on the power of any people in any part of the kingdom attack them or their child or their woman and to take their good from them by force on one day in every division of the kingdom of ahasuerus that be on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month the month adar . a copy of the writing to be make public a an order in every division of the kingdom be give out to all the people so that the jew might be ready when that day come to give punishment to their hater . so the men go out on the quick running horse use on the king 's business waste no time and force on by the king 's order and the order be give out in shushan the king 's town . and mordecai go out from before the king dress in king like robe of blue and white and with a great crown of gold and clothing of purple and the best linen and all the town of shushan give loud cry of joy . and the jew have light and joy and honour . and in every part of the kingdom and in every town wherever the king 's letter and his order come the jew be glad with great joy and have a feast and a good day . and a great number of the people of the land become jew for the fear of the jew have come on them .now on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month which be the month adar when the time come for the king 's order to be put into effect on the very day when the hater of the jew have be hop to have rule over them though the opposite have come about and the jew have rule over their hater on that day the jew come together in their town through all the division of the kingdom of ahasuerus for the purpose of attack all those who be attempt evil against them and everyone have to give way before them for the fear of them have come on all the people . and all the chief and the captain and the ruler and those who do the king 's business give support to the jew because the fear of mordecai have come on them . for mordecai be great in the king 's house and word of him go out through every part of the kingdom for the man mordecai become great and great . so the jew overcome all their attacker with the sword and with death and destruction and do to their hater whatever they have a desire to do . and in shushan the jew put to death five hundred men . they put to death parshandatha dalphon aspatha poratha adalia aridatha parmashta arisai aridai and vaizatha the ten son of haman the son of hammedatha the hater of the jew but they put not a hand on any of their good . on that day the number of those who have be put to death in the town of shushan be give to the king . and the king say to esther the queen the jew have put five hundred men to death in shushan as well a the ten son of haman what then have they do in the rest of the kingdom ! now what be your prayer ? for it will be give to you what other request have you ? and it will be do . then esther say if it be the king 's pleasure let authority be give to the jew in shushan to do tomorrow a have be do today and let order be give for the hanging of haman 's ten son . and the king say that this be to be do and the order be give out in shushan and the hanging of haman 's ten son be effect . for the jew who be in shushan come together again on the fourteenth day of the month adar and put to death three hundred men in shushan but they put not a hand on their good . and the other jew in every division of the kingdom come together fight for their life and get salvation from their hater and put seventy five thousand of them to death but they do not put a hand on their good . this they do on the thirteenth day of the month adar and on the fourteenth day of the same month they take their rest and make it a day of feasting and joy . but the jew in shushan come together on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth day of the month and on the fifteenth day they take their rest and make it a day of feasting and joy . so the jew of the country place live in unwalled town make the fourteenth day of the month adar a day of feasting and joy and a good day a day for send offering one to another . and mordecai sent letter to all the jew in every division of the kingdom of ahasuerus near and far order them to keep the fourteenth day of the month adar and the fifteenth day of the same month every year a day on which the jew have rest from their hater and the month which for them be turn from sorrow to joy and from weep to a good day and that they be to keep them a day of feasting and joy of send offering to one another and good thing to the poor . and the jew give their word to go on a they have be do and a mordecai have give them order in writing because haman the son of hammedatha the agagite the hater of all the jew have make design for their destruction attempt to get a decision by pur that be chance with a view to put an end to them and cut them off but when the business be put before the king he give order by letter that the evil design which he have make against the jew be to be turn against himself and that he and his son be to be put to death by hang . so these day be name purim after the name of pur . and so because of the word of this letter and of what they have see in connection with this business and what have come to them the jew make a rule and give an undertaking cause their seed and all those who be join to them to do the same so that it might be in force for ever that they would keep those two day a order in the letter at the fixed time every year and that those day be to be keep in memory through every generation and every family in every division of the kingdom and every town that there might never be a time when these day of purim would not be keep among the jew or when the memory of them would go from the mind of their seed . then esther the queen daughter of abihail and mordecai the jew send a second letter give the force of their authority to the order about the purim . and he send letter to all the jew in the hundred and twenty seven division of the kingdom of ahasuerus with true word of peace give the force of law to these day of purim at their fixed time a they have be order by mordecai the jew and esther the queen and in keep with the rule they have make for themselves and their seed in connection with their time of go without food and their cry for help . the order give by esther give the force of law to the rule about the purim and it be record in the book .and king ahasuerus put a tax on the land and on the island of the sea . and all his act of power and his great strength and the full story of the high place which the king give mordecai be they not record in the book of the history of the king of medium and persia ? for mordecai the jew be second only to king ahasuerus and great among the jew and respect by the body of his countryman work for the good of his people and say word of peace to all his seed .there be a man in the land of uz whose name be job . he be without sin and upright fearing god and keep himself far from evil . and he have seven son and three daughter . and of cattle he have seven thousand sheep and goat and three thousand camel and a thousand ox and five hundred she asses and a very great number of servant . and the man be great than any of the son of the east . his son regularly go to one another 's house and every one on his day give a feast and at these time they send for their three sister to take part in their feast with them . and at the end of their day of feast job sent and make them clean get up early in the morning and offering burn offering for them all . for job say it may be that my son have do wrong and say evil of god in their heart . and job do this whenever the feast come round . and there be a day when the son of the god come together before the lord and the satan come with them . and the lord say to the satan where do you come from ? and the satan say in answer from wander this way and that on the earth and walk about on it . and the lord say to the satan have you take note of my servant job for there be no one like him on the earth a man without sin and upright fearing god and keep himself far from evil ? and the satan say in answer to the lord be it for nothing that job be a god fear man ? have you yourself not put a wall round him and his house and all he have on every side bless the work of his hand and increase his cattle in the land ? but now put out your hand against all he have and he will be curse you to your face . and the lord say to the satan see i give all he have into your hand only do not put a finger on the man himself . and the satan go out from before the lord . and there be a day when his son and daughter be feast in the house of their old brother and a man come to job and say the ox be plough and the ass be take their food by their side and the men of sheba come against them and take them away put the young men to the sword and i be the only one who get away safe to give you the news . and this one be still talk when another come and say the fire of god come down from heaven burn up the sheep and the goat and the young men completely and i be the only one who get away safe to give you the news . and this one be still talk when another come and say the chaldaean make themselves into three band and come down on the camel and take them away put the young men to the sword and i be the only one who get away safe to give you the news . and this one be still talk when another come and say your son and your daughter be feast together in their old brother 's house when a great wind come rush from the waste land against the four side of the house and it come down on the young men and they be dead and i be the only one who get away safe to give you the news . then job get up and after part his clothing and cut off his hair he go down on his face to the earth and give worship and say with nothing i come out of my mother 's body and with nothing i will go back there the lord give and the lord have take away let the lord 's name be praise . in all this job do no sin and do not say that god 's act be foolish .and there be a day when the son of the god come together before the lord and the satan come with them . and the lord say to the satan where do you come from ? and the satan say in answer from wander this way and that on the earth and walk about on it . and the lord say to the satan have you take note of my servant job for there be no one like him on the earth a man without sin and upright fearing god and keep himself far from evil ? and he still keep his righteousness though you have be move me to send destruction on him without cause . and the satan say in answer to the lord skin for skin all a man have he will give for his life . but now if you only put your hand on his bone and his flesh he will certainly be curse you to your face . and the lord say to the satan see he be in your hand only do not take his life . and the satan go out from before the lord and send on job an evil disease cover his skin from his foot to the top of his head . and he take a broken bit of a pot and seat in the dust be rub himself with the sharp edge of it . and his wife say to him be you still keep your righteousness ? say a curse against god and put an end to yourself . and he say to her you be talk like one of the foolish woman . if we take the good god send u be we not to take the evil when it come ? in all this job keep his lip from sin . and job 's three friend have word of all this evil which have come on him . and they come every one from his place eliphaz the temanite and bildad the shuhite and zophar the naamathite . so they come together to a meeting place in order that they might go and make clear to job their grief for him and give him comfort . and lift up their eye when they be still far off it do not seem that the man they saw be job because of the change in him . and they give way to bitter weep with sign of grief and put dust on their head . and they take their seat on the earth by his side for seven day and seven night but no one say a word to him for they saw that his pain be very great .then open his mouth and curse the day of his birth job make answer and say let destruction take the day of my birth and the night on which it be say a man child have come into the world . that day let it be dark let not god take note of it from on high and let not the light be shin on it let the dark and the black night take it for themselves let it be cover with a cloud let the dark shade of day send fear on it . that night let the thick dark take it let it not have joy among the day of the year let it not come into the number of the month . a for that night let it have no fruit let no voice of joy be sound in it let it be curse by those who put a curse on the day who be ready to make leviathan awake . let it morning star be dark let it be look for light but may it not have any let it not see the eye of the dawn . because it do not keep the door of my mother 's body shut so that trouble might be veil from my eye . why do death not take me when i come out of my mother 's body why do i not when i come out give up my last breath ? why do the knee take me or why the breast that they might give me milk ? for then i might have go to my rest in quiet and in sleep have be in peace with king and the wise one of the earth who put up great house for themselves or with ruler who have gold and whose house be full of silver or a a child dead at birth i might never have come into existence like young child who have not see the light . there the passion of the evil be over and those whose strength have come to an end have rest . there the prisoner be at peace together the voice of the overseer come not again to their ear . the small and the great be there and the servant be free from his master . why do he give light to him who be in trouble and life to the bitter in soul to those whose desire be for death but it come not who be search for it more than for secret wealth who be glad with great joy and full of delight when they come to their last resting place to a man whose way be veil and who be shut in by god ? in place of my food i have grief and cry of sorrow come from me like water . for i have a fear and it come on me and my heart be greatly troubled . i have no peace no quiet and no rest nothing but pain come on me .and eliphaz the temanite make answer and say if one say a word will it be a weariness to you ? but who be able to keep from say what be in his mind ? truly you have be a helper to others and you have make feeble hand strong he who be near to fall have be lift up by your word and you have give strength to bend knee . but now it have come on you and it be a weariness to you you be touch by it and your mind be troubled . be not your fear of god your support and your upright way of life your hope ? have you ever see destruction come to an upright man ? or when be the god fear ever cut off ? what i have see be that those by whom trouble have be plough and evil plant get the same for themselves . by the breath of god destruction take them and by the wind of his wrath they be cut off . though the noise of the lion and the sounding of his voice may be loud the teeth of the young lion be break . the old lion come to his end for need of food and the young of the she lion go wander in all direction . a word be give to me secretly and the low sound of it come to my ear . in troubled thought from vision of the night when deep sleep come on men fear come on me and shake and my bone be full of trouble and a breath be move over my face the hair of my flesh become stiff something be present before me but i be not able to see it clearly there be a form before my eye a quiet voice come to my ear say may a man be upright before god ? or a man be clean before his maker ? truly he put no faith in his servant and he see error in his angels how much more those live in house of earth whose base be in the dust ! they be crush more quickly than an insect between morning and evening they be completely broken they come to an end for ever and no one take note . if their tent cord be pull up do they not come to an end and without wisdom ?give now a cry for help be there anyone who will give you an answer ? and to which of the holy one will you make your prayer ? for wrath be the cause of death to the foolish and he who have no wisdom come to his end through passion . i have see the foolish taking root but suddenly the curse come on his house . now his child have no safe place and they be crush before the judge for no one take up their cause . their produce be take by him who have no food and their grain go to the poor and he who be in need of water get it from their spring . for evil do not come out of the dust or trouble out of the earth but trouble be man 's fate from birth a the flame go up from the fire . but a for me i would make my prayer to god and i would put my cause before him who do great thing outside our knowledge wonder without number who give rain on the earth and send water on the field lift up those who be low and put the sad in a safe place who make the design of the wise go wrong so that they be unable to give effect to their purpose . he take the wise in their secret design and the purpose of the twist be cut off suddenly . in the daytime it become dark for them and in the sunlight they go feel about a if it be night . but he keep safe from their sword those who have no father and the poor from the power of the strong . so the poor man have hope and the mouth of the evil doer be stop . truly that man be happy who have training from the hand of god so do not let your heart be shut to the teaching of the ruler of all . for after his punishment he give comfort and after wound his hand make you well . he will keep you safe from six trouble and in seven no evil will come near you . when there be need of food he will keep you from death and in war from the power of the sword . he will keep you safe from the evil tongue and you will have no fear of waste when it come . you will make sport of destruction and need and will have no fear of the beast of the earth . for you will be in agreement with the stone of the earth and the beast of the field will be at peace with you . and you will be certain that your tent be at peace and after look over your property you will see that nothing be go . you will be certain that your seed will be great and your offspring like the plant of the earth . you will come to your last resting place in full strength a the grain be take up to the crush floor in it time . see we have make search with care and it be so it have come to our ear see that you take note of it for yourself .and job make answer and say if only my passion might be measure and put into the scale against my trouble ! for then it weight would be more than the sand of the sea because of this my word have be uncontrolled . for the arrow of the ruler of all be present with me and their poison go deep into my spirit his army of fear be put in order against me . do the as of the field give out his voice when he have grass ? or do the ox make sound over his food ? will a man take food which have no taste without salt ? or be there any taste in the soft substance of purslain ? my soul have no desire for such thing they be a disease in my food . if only i might have an answer to my prayer and god would give me my desire ! if only he would be please to put an end to me and would let loose his hand so that i might be cut off ! so i would still have comfort and i would have joy in the pain of death for i have not be false to the word of the holy one . have i strength to go on wait or have i any end to be look forward to ? be my strength the strength of stone or be my flesh brass ? i have no help in myself and wisdom be completely go from me . he whose heart be shut against his friend have give up the fear of the ruler of all . my friend have be false like a stream like stream in the valley which come to an end which be dark because of the ice and the snow fall into them under the burn sun they be cut off and come to nothing because of the heat . the camel train go out of their way they go up into the waste and come to destruction . the camel train of tema be search with care the band of sheba be wait for them they be put to shame because of their hope they come and their hope be go . so have you now become to me you see my sad condition and be in fear . do i say give me something ? or make a payment for me out of your wealth ? or get me out of the power of my hater ? or give money so that i may be free from the power of the cruel one ? give me teach and i will be quiet and make me see my error . how pleasing be upright word ! but what force be there in your argument ? my word may seem wrong to you but the word of him who have no hope be for the wind . truly you be such a would give up the child of a dead man to his creditor and would make a profit out of your friend . now then let your eye be turn to me for truly i will not say what be false to your face . let your mind be change and do not have an evil opinion of me yes be change for my righteousness be still in me . be there evil in my tongue ? be not the cause of my trouble clear to me ?have not man his ordered time of trouble on the earth ? and be not his day like the day of a servant working for payment ? a a servant desire the shade of evening and a workman look for his payment so i have for my heritage month of pain to no purpose and night of weariness be give to me . when i go to my bed i say when will it be time to get up ? but the night be long and i be turn from side to side till morning light . my flesh be cover with worm and dust my skin get hard and then be crack again . my day go quick than the cloth worker 's thread and come to an end without hope . o keep in mind that my life be wind my eye will never again see good . the eye of him who see me will see me no longer your eye will be look for me but i will be go . a cloud come to an end and be go so he who go down into the underworld come not up again . he will not come back to his house and his place will have no more knowledge of him . so i will not keep my mouth shut i will let the word come from it in the pain of my spirit my soul will make a bitter outcry . be i a sea or a sea beast that you put a watch over me ? when i say in my bed i will have comfort there i will get rest from my disease then you send dream to me and vision of fear so that a hard death seem good to my soul than my pain . i have no desire for life i would not be live for ever ! keep away from me for my day be a a breath . what be man that you have make him great and that your attention be fix on him and that your hand be on him every morning and that you be test him every minute ? how long will it be before your eye be turn away from me so that i may have a minute 's breathe space ? if i have do wrong what have i do to you o keeper of men ? why have you make me a mark for your blow so that i be a weariness to myself ? and why do you not take away my sin and let my wrongdoing be end ? for now i go down to the dust and you will be search for me with care but i will be go .then bildad the shuhite make answer and say how long will you say these thing and how long will the word of your mouth be like a strong wind ? do god give wrong decision ? or be the ruler of all not upright in his judging ? if your child have do evil against him then their punishment be from his hand . if you will make search for god with care and put your request before the ruler of all if you be clean and upright then he will certainly be move to take up your cause and will make clear your righteousness by build up your house again . and though your start be small your end will be very great . put the question now to the past generation and give attention to what have be search out by their father for we be but of yesterday and have no knowledge because our day on earth be go like a shade will they not give you teach and say word of wisdom to you ? will the river plant come up in it pride without wet earth ? will the grass get tall without water ? when it be still green without be cut down it become dry and dead before any other plant . so be the end of all who do not keep god in mind and the hope of the evil doer come to nothing whose support be cut off and whose hope be no strong than a spider 's thread . he be look to his family for support but it be not there he put his hope in it but it come to nothing . he be full of strength before the sun and his branch go out over his garden . his root be twist round the stone force their way in between them . if he be take away from his place then it will say i have not see you . such be the joy of his way and out of the dust another come up to take his place . truly god will not give up him who be without sin and will not take evil doer by the hand . the time will come when your mouth will be full of laugh and cry of joy will come from your lip . your hater will be clothe with shame and the tent of the sinner will not be see again .and job make answer and say truly i see that it be so and how be it possible for a man to get his right before god ? if a man be desire to go to law with him he would not be able to give him an answer to one out of a thousand question . he be wise in heart and great in strength who ever make his face hard against him and any good come of it ? it be he who take away the mountain without their knowledge overturn them in his wrath who be move the earth out of it place so that it pillar be shake who give order to the sun and it do not give it light and who keep the star from shin . by whose hand the heaven be stretch out and who be walk on the wave of the sea who make the bear and orion and the pleiades and the store house of the south who do great thing not to be search out yes wonder without number . see he go past me and i see him not he go on before but i have no knowledge of him . if he put out his hand to take by whom may it be turn back ? who may say to him what be you do ? god 's wrath may not be turn back the helper of rahab be bent down under him . how much less may i give an answer to him use the right word in argument with him ? even if my cause be good i would not be able to give an answer i would make request for grace from him who be against me . if i have send for him to be present and he have come i would have no faith that he would give ear to my voice . for i would be crush by his storm my wound would be increase without cause . he would not let me take my breath but i would be full of bitter grief . if it be a question of strength he say here i be ! and if it be a question of a cause at law he say who will give me a fixed day ? though i be in the right he would say that i be in the wrong i have do no evil but he say that i be a sinner . i have do no wrong i give no thought to what become of me i have no desire for life . it be all the same to me so i say he put an end to the sinner and to him who have do no wrong together . if death come suddenly through disease he make sport of the fate of those who have do no wrong . the land be give into the power of the evil doer the face of it judge be cover if not by him then who have do it ? my day go quicker than a post runner they go in flight they see no good . they go rush on like reed boat like an eagle drop suddenly on it food . if i say i will put my grief out of mind i will let my face be sad no longer and i will be bright i go in fear of all my pain i be certain that i will not be free from sin in your eye . you will not let me be clear of sin ! why then do i take trouble for nothing ? if i be wash with snow water and make my hand clean with soap then you will have me push into the dust so that i will seem disgust to my very clothing . for he be not a man a i be that i might give him an answer that we might come together before a judge . there be no one to give a decision between u who might have control over u . let him take away his rod from me and not send his fear on me then i would say what be in my mind without fear of him for there be no cause of fear in myself .my soul be tire of life i will let my sad thought go free in word my soul will make a bitter outcry . i will say to god do not put me down a a sinner make clear to me what you have against me . what profit be it to you to be cruel to give up the work of your hand look kindly on the design of evil doer ? have you eye of flesh or do you see a man see ? be your day a the day of man or your year like his that you take note of my sin searching after my wrongdoing though you see that i be not an evil doer and there be no one who be able to take a man out of your hand ? your hand make me and i be form by you but then change your purpose you give me up to destruction . o keep in mind that you make me out of earth and will you send me back again to dust ? be i not drain out like milk become hard like cheese ? by you i be clothe with skin and flesh and join together with bone and muscle . you have be kind to me and your grace have be with me and your care have keep my spirit safe . but you keep these thing in the secret of your heart i be certain this be in your thought that if i do wrong you would take note of it and would not make me clear from sin that if i be an evil doer the curse would come on me and if i be upright my head would not be lift up be full of shame and overcome with trouble . and that if there be cause for pride you would go after me like a lion and again put out your wonder against me that you would send new witness against me increase your wrath against me and let loose new army on me . why then do you make me come out of my mother 's body ? it would have be good for me to have take my last breath and for no eye to have see me and for me to have be a if i have not be to have be take from my mother 's body straight to my last resting place . be not the day of my life small in number ? let your eye be turn away from me so that i may have a little pleasure before i go to the place from which i will not come back to the land where all be dark and black a land of thick dark without order where the very light be dark .then zophar the naamathite make answer and say be all these word to go unanswered ? and be a man see to be right because he be full of talk ? be your word of pride to make men keep quiet ? and be you to make sport with no one to put you to shame ? you may say my way be clean and i be free from sin in your eye . but if only god would take up the word open his lip in argument with you and would make clear to you the secret of wisdom and the wonder of his purpose ! be you able to take god 's measure to make discovery of the limit of the ruler of all ? they be high than heaven what be there for you to do ? deep than the underworld and outside your knowledge longer in measure than the earth and wider than the sea . if he go on his way shut a man up and put him to death who may make him go back from his purpose ? for in his eye men be a nothing he see evil and take note of it . and so a hollow mind man will get wisdom when a young as of the field get teach . but if you put your heart right stretch out your hand to him if you put far away the evil of your hand and let no wrongdoing have a place in your tent then truly your face will be lift up with no mark of sin and you will be fix in your place without fear for your sorrow will go from your memory like water flow away and your life will be bright than day though it be dark it will become like the morning . and you will be safe because there be hope after look round you will take your rest in quiet sleep with no fear of danger and men will be desire to have grace in your eye but the eye of the evil doer will be waste away their way of flight be go and their only hope be the take of their last breath .and job make answer and say no doubt you have knowledge and wisdom will come to an end with you . but i have a mind as well a you i be equal to you yes who have not knowledge of such thing a these ? it seem that i be to be a one who be a cause of laugh to his neighbour one who make his prayer to god and be answer ! the upright man who have do no wrong be to be make sport of ! in the thought of him who be in comfort there be no respect for one who be in trouble such be the fate of those whose foot be slip . there be wealth in the tent of those who make destruction and those by whom god be move to wrath be safe even those whose god be their strength . but put now a question to the beast and get teach from them or to the bird of the heaven and they will make it clear to you or to the thing which go flat on the earth and they will give you wisdom and the fish of the sea will give you news of it . who do not see by all these that the hand of the lord have do this ? in whose hand be the soul of every living thing and the breath of all flesh of man . be not word test by the ear even a food be taste by the mouth ? old men have wisdom and a long life give knowledge . with him there be wisdom and strength power and knowledge be his . truly there be no build up of what be pull down by him when a man be shut up by him no one may let him loose . truly he keep back the water and they be dry he send them out and the earth be overturn . with him be strength and wise design he who be guide into error together with his guide be in his hand he take away the wisdom of the wise guide and make judge foolish he undo the chain of king and put his band on them he make priest prisoner overturn those in safe position he make the word of responsible person without effect and take away the good sense of the old he put shame on chief and take away the power of the strong uncovering deep thing out of the dark and make the deep shade bright increase nation and send destruction on them make wide the land of people and then give them up . he take away the wisdom of the ruler of the earth and send them wander in a waste where there be no way . they go feel about in the dark without light wander without help like those overcome with wine .truly my eye have see all this word of it have come to my ear and i have knowledge of it . the same thing be in my mind a in yours i be equal to you . but i would have talk with the ruler of all and my desire be to have an argument with god . but you put a false face on thing all your attempt to put thing right be of no value . if only you would keep quiet it would be a sign of wisdom ! give ear to the argument of my mouth and take note of the word of my lip . will you say in god 's name what be not right and put false word into his mouth ? will you have respect for god 's person in this cause and put yourselves forward a his supporter ? will it be good for you to be search out by him or have you the thought that he may be guide into error like a man ? he will certainly put you right if you have respect for person in secret . will not his glory put you in fear so that your heart will be overcome before him ? your wise saying be only dust and your strong place be only earth . keep quiet and let me say what be in my mind whatever may come to me . i will take my flesh in my teeth and put my life in my hand . truly he will put an end to me i have no hope but i will not give way in argument before him and that will be my salvation for an evil doer would not come before him give ear with care to my word and keep what i say in your mind . see now i have put my cause in order and i be certain that i will be see to be right . be any one able to take up the argument against me ? if so i would keep quiet and give up my breath . only two thing do not do to me then i will come before your face take your hand far away from me and let me not be overcome by fear of you . then at the sound of your voice i will give answer or let me put forward my cause for you to give me an answer . what be the number of my evil doings and my sin ? give me knowledge of them . why be your face veil from me a if i be number among your hater ? will you be hard on a leaf in flight before the wind ? will you make a dry stem go more quickly on it way ? for you put bitter thing on record against me and send punishment on me for the sin of my early year and you put chain on my foot watch all my way and make a limit for my step though a man come to nothing like a bit of dead wood or like a robe which have become food for the worm .a for man the son of woman his day be short and full of trouble . he come out like a flower and be cut down he go in flight like a shade and be never see again . be it on such a one a this that your eye be fix with the purpose of judge him ? if only a clean thing might come out of an unclean ! but it be not possible . if his day be order and you have knowledge of the number of his month have give him a fixed limit past which he may not go let your eye be turn away from him and take your hand from him so that he may have pleasure at the end of his day like a servant working for payment . for there be hope of a tree if it be cut down it will come to life again and it branch will not come to an end . though it root may be old in the earth and it cut off end may be dead in the dust still at the smell of water it will make bud and put out branch like a young plant . but man come to his death and be go he give up his spirit and where be he ? the water go from a pool and a river become waste and dry so man go down to his last resting place and come not again till the heaven come to an end they will not be awake or come out of their sleep . if only you would keep me safe in the underworld put me in a secret place till your wrath be past give me a fixed time when i might come to your memory again ! if death take a man will he come to life again ? all the day of my trouble i would be wait till the time come for me to be free . at the sound of your voice i would give an answer and you would have a desire for the work of your hand . for now my step be number by you and my sin be not overlook . my wrongdoing be cord up in a bag and my sin be shut up safe . but truly a mountain fall come to dust and a rock be move from it place the stone be crush small by the force of the water the dust of the earth be wash away by their overflowing and so you put an end to the hope of man . you overcome him for ever and he be go his face be change in death and you send him away . his son come to honour and he have no knowledge of it they be make low but he be not conscious of it . only his flesh still have pain and his soul be sad .and eliphaz the temanite make answer and say will a wise man make answer with knowledge of no value or will he give birth to the east wind ? will he make argument with word in which be no profit and with saying which have no value ? truly you make the fear of god without effect so that the time of quiet worship before god be make less by your outcry . for your mouth be guide by your sin and you have take the tongue of the false for yourself . it be by your mouth even yours that you be judge to be in the wrong and not by me and your lip give witness against you . be you the first man to come into the world ? or do you come into be before the hill ? be you present at the secret meeting of god ? and have you take all wisdom for yourself ? what knowledge have you which we have not ? be there anything in your mind which be not in ours ? with u be men who be grey haired and full of year much old than your father . be the comfort of god not enough for you and the gentle word which be say to you ? why be your heart uncontrolled and why be your eye lift up so that you be turn your spirit against god and let such word go out of your mouth ? what be man that he may be clean ? and how may the son of woman be upright ? truly he put no faith in his holy one and the heaven be not clean in his eye how much less one who be disgust and unclean a man who take in evil like water ! take note and give ear to my word and i will say what i have see the thing which wise men have get from their father and have not keep secret from u for only to them be the land give and no strange people be among them the evil man be in pain all his day and the number of the year store up for the cruel be small . a sound of fear be in his ear in time of peace destruction will come on him he have no hope of come safe out of the dark and his fate will be the sword he be wander about in search of bread say where be it ? and he be certain that the day of trouble be ready for him he be greatly in fear of the dark day trouble and pain overcome him because his hand be stretch out against god and his heart be lift up against the ruler of all run against him like a man of war cover by his thick breastplate even like a king ready for the fight because his face be cover with fat and his body have become thick and he have make his rest place in the town which have be pull down in house where no man have a right to be whose fate be to become mass of broken wall . he do not get wealth for himself and be unable to keep what he have get the head of his grain be not bent down to the earth . he do not come out of the dark his branch be burn by the flame and the wind take away his bud . let him not put his hope in what be false fall into error for he will get deceit a his reward . his branch be cut off before it time and his leaf be no longer green . he be like a vine whose grape do not come to full growth or an olive tree drop it flower . for the band of the evil doer give no fruit and the tent of those who give wrong decision for reward be burn with fire . evil have make them with child and they give birth to trouble and the fruit of their body be shame for themselves .and job make answer and say such thing have frequently come to my ear you be comforter who only give trouble . may word which be like the wind be stop ? or what be trouble you to make answer to them ? it would not be hard for me to say such thing if your soul be in my soul 's place joining word together against you and shake my head at you i might give you strength with my mouth and not keep back the comfort of my lip . if i say what be in my mind my pain become no less and if i keep quiet how much of it go from me ? but now he have overcome me with weariness and fear and i be in the grip of all my trouble . it have come up a a witness against me and the wasting of my flesh make answer to my face . i be break by his wrath and his hate have go after me he have make his teeth sharp against me my hater be look on me with cruel eye their mouth be open wide against me the blow of his bitter word be fall on my face all of them come together in a mass against me . god give me over to the power of sinner send me violently into the hand of evil doer . i be in comfort but i have be break up by his hand he have take me by the neck shake me to bits he have put me up a a mark for his arrow . his bowman come round about me their arrow go through my body without mercy my life be drain out on the earth . i be break with wound after wound he come rush on me like a man of war . i have make haircloth the clothing of my skin and my horn be roll in the dust . my face be red with weep and my eye be become dark though my hand have do no violent act and my prayer be clean . o earth let not my blood be cover and let my cry have no rest place ! even now my witness be in heaven and the supporter of my cause be on high . my friend make sport of me to god my eye be weep so that he may give decision for a man in his cause with god and between a son of man and his neighbour . for in a short time i will take the journey from which i will not come back .my spirit be break my day be end the last resting place be ready for me . truly those who make sport of me be round about me and my eye become dark because of their bitter laughing . be please now to be responsible for me to yourself for there be no other who will put his hand in mine . you have keep their heart from wisdom for this cause you will not give them honour . a for him who be false to his friend for a reward light will be cut off from the eye of his child . he have make me a word of shame to the people i have become a mark for their sport . my eye have become dark because of my pain and all my body be waste to a shade . the upright be surprise at this and he who have do no wrong be troubled because of the evil doer . still the upright keep on his way and he who have clean hand get new strength . but come back now all of you come and i will not see a wise man among you . my day be past my purpose be break off even the desire of my heart . they be change night into day they say the light be near the dark . if i be wait for the underworld a my house if i have make my bed in the dark if i say to the earth you be my father and to the worm my mother and my sister where then be my hope ? and who will see my desire ? will they go down with me into the underworld ? will we go down together into the dust ?then bildad the shuhite make answer and say how long will it be before you have do talk ? get wisdom and then we will say what be in our mind . why do we seem a beast in your eye and a completely without knowledge ? but come back now come you who be wound yourself in your passion will the earth be give up because of you or a rock be move out of it place ? for the light of the sinner be put out and the flame of his fire be not shin . the light be dark in his tent and the light shin over him be put out . the step of his strength become short and by his design destruction overtake him . his foot take him into the net and he go walk into the cord . his foot be take in the net he come into it grip . the twisted cord be put secretly in the earth to take him and the cord be place in his way . he be overcome by fear on every side they go after him at every step . his strength be make feeble for need of food and destruction be wait for his fall footstep . his skin be waste by disease and his body be food for the bad of disease . he be pull out of his tent where he be safe and he be take away to the king of fear . in his tent will be see that which be not his burn stone be drop on his house . under the earth his root be dry and over it his branch be cut off . his memory be go from the earth and in the open country there be no knowledge of his name . he be send away from the light into the dark he be force out of the world . he have no offspring or family among his people and in his living place there be no one of his name . at his fate those of the west be shock and those of the east be overcome with fear . truly these be the house of the sinner and this be the place of him who have no knowledge of god .and job make answer and say how long will you make my life bitter crush me with word ? ten time now you have make sport of me it give you no sense of shame to do me wrong . and truly if i have be in error the effect of my error be only on myself . if you make yourselves great against me use my punishment a an argument against me be certain that it be god who have do me wrong and have take me in his net . truly i make an outcry against the violent man but there be no answer i give a cry for help but no one take up my cause . my way be wall up by him so that i may not go by he have make my road dark . he have put off my glory from me and take the crown from my head . i be break down by him on every side and i be go my hope be uproot like a tree . his wrath be burn against me and i be to him a one of his hater . his army come on together they make their road high against me and put up their tent round mine . he have take my brother far away from me they have see my fate and have become strange to me . my relation and my near friend have give me up and those living in my house have put me out of their mind . i be strange to my woman servant and seem to them a one from another country . at my cry my servant give me no answer and i have to make a prayer to him . my breath be strange to my wife and i be disgust to the offspring of my mother 's body . even young child have no respect for me when i get up their back be turn on me . all the men of my circle keep away from me and those dear to me be turn against me . my bone be join to my skin and i have get away with my flesh in my teeth . have pity on me have pity on me o my friend ! for the hand of god be on me . why be you cruel to me like god for ever say evil against me ? if only my word might be record ! if they might be put in writing in a book ! and with an iron pen and lead be cut into the rock for ever ! but i be certain that he who will take up my cause be live and that in time to come he will take his place on the dust and ... without my flesh i will see god whom i will see on my side and not a one strange to me . my heart be break with desire . if you say how cruel we will be to him ! because the root of sin be clearly in him be in fear of the sword for the sword be the punishment for such thing so that you may be certain that there be a judge .then zophar the naamathite make answer and say for this cause my thought be trouble me and drive me on . i have to give ear to argument which put me to shame and your answer to me be wind without wisdom . have you knowledge of this from early time when man be place on the earth that the pride of the sinner be short and the joy of the evil doer but for a minute ? though he be lift up to the heaven and his head go up to the cloud like the waste from his body he come to an end for ever those who have see him say where be he ? he be go like a dream and be not see again he go in flight like a vision of the night . the eye which saw him see him no longer and his place have no more knowledge of him . his child be hop that the poor will be kind to them and his hand give back his wealth . his bone be full of young strength but it will go down with him into the dust . though evil do be sweet in his mouth and he keep it secretly under his tongue though he take care of it and do not let it go but keep it still in his mouth his food becomes bitter in his stomach the poison of snake be inside him . he take down wealth a food and send it up again it be force out of his stomach by god . he take the poison of snake into his mouth the tongue of the snake be the cause of his death . let him not see the river of oil the stream of honey and milk . he be force to give back the fruit of his work and may not take it for food he have no joy in the profit of his trading . because he have be cruel to the poor turn away from them in their trouble because he have take a house by force which he do not put up there be no peace for him in his wealth and no salvation for him in those thing in which he take delight . he have never enough for his desire for this cause his well be will quickly come to an end . even when his wealth be great he be full of care for the hand of everyone who be in trouble be turn against him . god give him his desire and send the heat of his wrath on him make it come down on him like rain . he may go in flight from the iron spear but the arrow from the bow of brass will go through him he be pull it out and it come out of his back and it shining point come out of his side he be overcome by fear . all his wealth be store up for the dark a fire not make by man send destruction on him and on everything in his tent . the heaven make clear his sin and the earth give witness against him . the produce of his house be take away into another country like thing give into the hand of others in the day of wrath . this be the reward of the evil man and the heritage give to him by god .then job make answer and say give attention with care to my word and let this be your comfort . let me say what be in my mind and after that go on make sport of me . a for me be my outcry against man ? be it then to be wonder at if my spirit be trouble ? take note of me and be full of wonder put your hand on your mouth . at the very thought of it my flesh be shake with fear . why be life give to the evil doer ? why do they become old and strong in power ? their child be ever with them and their offspring before their eye . their house be free from fear and the rod of god do not come on them . their ox be ready at all time to give seed their cow give birth without drop her young . they send out their young one like a flock and their child have pleasure in the dance they make song to the instrument of music and be glad at the sound of the pipe . their day come to an end without trouble and suddenly they go down to the underworld . though they say to god go away from u for we have no desire for the knowledge of your way . what be the ruler of all that we may give him worship ? and what profit be it to u to make prayer to him ? truly be not their well be in their power ? the purpose of the evil doer be far from me . how frequently be the light of the evil doer put out or do trouble come on them ? how frequently do his wrath take them with cord ? how frequently be they a dry stem before the wind or a grass take away by the storm wind ? you say god keep punishment store up for his child . let him send it on the man himself so that he may have the punishment of it ! let his eye see his trouble and let him be full of the wrath of the ruler of all ! for what interest have he in his house after him when the number of his month be end ? be anyone able to give teaching to god ? for he be the judge of those who be on high . one come to his end in complete well be full of peace and quiet his bucket be full of milk and there be no loss of strength in his bone . and another come to his end with a bitter soul without ever taste good . together they go down to the dust and be cover by the worm . see i be conscious of your thought and of your violent purpose against me for you say where be the house of the ruler and where be the tent of the evil doer ? have you not put the question to the traveller and do you not take note of their experience ? how the evil man go free in the day of trouble and have salvation in the day of wrath ? who will make his way clear to his face ? and if he have do a thing who give him punishment for it ? he be take to his last resting place and keep watch over it . the earth of the valley cover his bone be sweet to him and all men come after him a there be unnumbered before him . why then do you give me comfort with word in which there be no profit when you see that there be nothing in your answer but deceit ?then eliphaz the temanite make answer and say be it possible for a man to be of profit to god ? no for a man 's wisdom be only of profit to himself . be it of any interest to the ruler of all that you be upright ? or be it of use to him that your way be without sin ? be it because you give him honour that he be send punishment on you and be judge you ? be not your evil do great ? and there be no end to your sin . for you have take your brother 's good when he be not in your debt and have take away the clothing of those who have need of it . you do not give water to the tired traveller and from him who have no food you keep back bread . for it be the man with power who have the land and the man with an honour name who be live in it . you have send widow away without hear their cause and you have take away the support of the child who have no father . for this cause net be round your foot and you be overcome with sudden fear . your light be make dark so that you be unable to see and you be cover by a mass of water . be not god as high a heaven ? and see the star how high they be ! and you say what knowledge have god ? be he able to give decision through the deep dark ? thick cloud be cover him so that he be unable to see and he be walk on the arch of heaven . will you keep the old way by which evil men go ? who be violently take away before their time who be overcome by the rush of water who say to god go away from u and what be the ruler of all able to do to u ? though he make their house full of good thing but the purpose of the evil doer be far from me ! the upright saw it and be glad and those who have do no wrong make sport of them say truly their substance be cut off and their wealth be food for the fire . put yourself now in a right relation with him and be at peace so will you do well in your undertaking . be pleased to take teaching from his mouth and let his word be store up in your heart . if you come back to the ruler of all make yourself low before him if you put evil far away from your tent and put your gold in the dust even your gold of ophir among the rock of the valley then the ruler of all will be your gold and his teaching will be your silver for then you will have delight in the ruler of all and your face will be lift up to god . you will make your prayer to him and be answer and you will give effect to your oath . your purpose will come about and light will be shin on your way . for god make low those whose heart be lift up but he be a saviour to the poor in spirit . he make safe the man who be free from sin and if your hand be clean salvation will be yours .and job make answer and say even today my outcry be bitter his hand be hard on my sorrow . if only i have knowledge of where he might be see so that i might come even to his seat ! i would put my cause in order before him and my mouth would be full of argument . i would see what his answer would be and have knowledge of what he would say to me . would he make use of his great power to overcome me ? no but he would give attention to me . there an upright man might put his cause before him and i would be free for ever from my judge . see i go forward but he be not there and back but i do not see him i be look for him on the left hand but there be no sign of him and turn to the right i be not able to see him . for he have knowledge of the way i take after i have be test i will come out like gold . my foot have go in his step i have keep in his way without turn to one side or to the other . i have never go against the order of his lip the word of his mouth have be store up in my heart . but his purpose be fix and there be no change it and he give effect to the desire of his soul . for what have be order for me by him will be go through to the end and his mind be full of such design . for this cause i be in fear before him my thought of him overcome me . for god have make my heart feeble and my mind be trouble before the ruler of all . for i be overcome by the dark and by the black night which be cover my face .why be time not store up by the ruler of all and why do those who have knowledge of him not see his day ? the landmark be change by evil men they violently take away flock together with their keeper . they send away the as of him who have no father they take the widow 's ox for debt . the crush be turn out of the way all the poor of the earth go into a secret place together . like ass in the waste land they go out to their work look for food with care from the waste land they get bread for their child . they get mixed grain from the field and they take away the late fruit from the vine of those who have wealth . they take their rest at night without clothing and have no cover in the cold . they be wet with the rain of the mountain and get into the crack of the rock for cover . the child without a father be force from it mother 's breast and they take the young child of the poor for debt . others go about without clothing and though they have no food they get in the grain from the field . between the line of olive tree they make oil though they have no drink they be crush out the grape . from the town come sound of pain from those who be near death and the soul of the wound be cry out for help but god do not take note of their prayer . then there be those who be hater of the light who have no knowledge of it way and do not go in them . he who be purpose death get up before day so that he may put to death the poor and those in need . and the man whose desire be for the wife of another be wait for the evening say no eye will see me and he put a cover on his face . and in the night the thief go about in the dark he make hole in the wall of house in the daytime they be shut themselves up they have no knowledge of the light . for the middle of the night be a morning to them they be not trouble by the fear of the dark . they go quickly on the face of the water their heritage be curse in the earth the step of the crusher of grape be not turn to their vine garden . snow water become dry with the heat so do sinner go down into the underworld . the public place of his town have no more knowledge of him and his name have go from the memory of men he be root up like a dead tree . he be not kind to the widow and he have no pity for her child . but god by his power give long life to the strong he get up again though he have no hope of life . he take away his fear of danger and give him support and his eye be on his way . for a short time they be lift up then they be go they be make low they be pull off like fruit and like the head of grain they be cut off . and if it be not so now who will make it clear that my word be false and that what i say be of no value ?then bildad the shuhite make answer and say rule and power be his he make peace in his high place . be it possible for his army to be number ? and on whom be not his light shin ? how then be it possible for man to be upright before god ? or how may he be clean who be a son of woman ? see even the moon be not bright and the star be not clean in his eye how much less man who be an insect and the son of man who be a worm !then job make answer and say how have you give help to him who have no power ! how have you be the salvation of the arm which have no strength ! how have you give teach to him who have no wisdom and fully make clear true knowledge ! to whom have your word be say ? and whose spirit come out from you ? the shade in the underworld be shake the water and those living in them . the underworld be uncover before him and destruction have no veil . by his hand the north be stretch out in space and the earth be hang on nothing . by him the water be shut up in his thick cloud and the cloud do not give way under them . by him the face of his high seat be veil and his cloud stretch out over it . by him a circle be mark out on the face of the water to the limit of the light and the dark . the pillar of heaven be shake and be overcome by his sharp word . by his power the sea be make quiet and by his wisdom rahab be wound . by his wind the heaven become bright by his hand the quickly move snake be cut through . see these be only the outskirt of his way and how small be that which come to our ear about him ! but the thunder of his act of power be outside all knowledge .and job again take up the word and say by the life of god who have take away my right and of the ruler of all who have make my soul bitter for all my breath be still in me and the spirit of god be my life truly there be no deceit in my lip and my tongue do not say what be false . let it be far from me ! i will certainly not say that you be right ! i will come to death before i give up my righteousness . i will keep it safe and will not let it go my heart have nothing to say against any part of my life . let my hater be like the evil man and let him who come against me be a the sinner . for what be the hope of the sinner when he be cut off when god take back his soul ? will his cry come to the ear of god when he be in trouble ? will he take delight in the ruler of all and make his prayer to god at all time ? i will give you teach about the hand of god i will not keep secret from you what be in the mind of the ruler of all . truly you have all see it yourselves why then have you become completely foolish ? this be the punishment of the evil doer from god and the heritage give to the cruel by the ruler of all . if his child be increase it be for the sword and his offspring have not enough bread . when those of his house who be still live come to their end by disease they be not put into the earth and their widow be not weep for them . though he may get silver together like dust and make ready great store of clothing he may get them ready but the upright will put them on and he who be free from sin will take the silver for a heritage . his house have no more strength than a spider 's thread or a watchman 's tent . he go to rest full of wealth but do so for the last time on open his eye he see it there no long . fear overtake him like rush water in the night the storm wind take him away . the east wind take him up and he be go he be force violently out of his place . god send his arrow against him without mercy he go in flight before his hand . men make sign of joy because of him drive him from his place with sound of hissing .truly there be a mine for silver and a place where gold be wash out . iron be take out of the earth and stone be change into brass by the fire . man put an end to the dark search out to the farthest limit the stone of the deep place of the dark . he make a deep mine far away from those live in the light of day when they go about on the earth they have no knowledge of those who be under them who be hang far from men twist from side to side on a cord . a for the earth bread come out of it but under it face it be turn up a if by fire . it stone be the place of sapphire and it have dust of gold . no bird have knowledge of it and the hawk 's eye have never see it . the great beast have not go over it and the cruel lion have not take that way . man put out his hand on the hard rock overturn mountain by the root . he make deep way cut through the rock and his eye see everything of value . he keep back the stream from flow and make the secret thing come out into the light . but where may wisdom be see ? and where be the rest place of knowledge ? man have not see the way to it and it be not in the land of the living . the deep water say it be not in me and the sea say it be not with me . gold may not be give for it or a weight of silver in payment for it . it may not be value with the gold of ophir with the onyx of great price or the sapphire . gold and glass be not equal to it in price and it may not be exchange for jewel of the best gold . there be no need to say anything about coral or crystal and the value of wisdom be great than that of pearl . the topaz of ethiopia be not equal to it and it may not be value with the best gold . from where then do wisdom come and where be the rest place of knowledge ? for it be keep secret from the eye of all live unseen by the bird of the air . destruction and death say we have only have word of it with our ear . god have knowledge of the way to it and of it rest place for his eye go to the end of the earth and he see everything under heaven . when he make a weight for the wind measure out the water when he make a law for the rain and a way for the thunder flame then he saw it and put it on record he give it it fixed form search it out completely . and he say to man truly the fear of the lord be wisdom and to keep from evil be the way to knowledge .and job again take up the word and say if only i might again be a i be in the month which be past in the day when god be watch over me ! when his light be shin over my head and when i go through the dark by his light . a i be in my flowering year when my tent be cover by the hand of god while the ruler of all be still with me and my child be round me when my step be wash with milk and river of oil be flow out of the rock for me . when i go out of my door to go up to the town and take my seat in the public place the young men saw me and go away and the old men get up from their seat the ruler keep quiet and put their hand on their mouth the chief keep back their word and their tongue be join to the roof of their mouth . for when it come to their ear men say that i be truly happy and when their eye saw they give witness to me for i be a saviour to the poor when he be cry for help to the child with no father and to him who have no supporter . the blessing of him who be near to destruction come on me and i put a song of joy into the widow 's heart . i put on righteousness a my clothing and be full of it right decision be to me a robe and a head dress . i be eye to the blind and foot to him who have no power of walk . i be a father to the poor search out the cause of him who be strange to me . by me the great teeth of the evil doer be break and i make him give up what he have violently take away . then i say i will come to my end with my child round me my day will be a the sand in number my root will be open to the water and the night mist will be on my branch my glory will be ever new and my bow will be readily bent in my hand . men give ear to me wait and keep quiet for my suggestion . after i have say what be in my mind they be quiet and let my word go deep into their heart they be wait for me a for the rain open their mouth wide a for the spring rain . i be laugh at them when they have no hope and the light of my face be never cloud by their fear . i take my place a a chief guide them on their way and i be a a king among his army . ...but now those who be young than i make sport of me those whose father i would not have put with the dog of my flock . of what use be the strength of their hand to me ? all force be go from them . they be waste for need of food bite the dry earth their only hope of life be in the waste land . they be pull off the salt leave from the brushwood and make a meal of root . they be send out from among their townsman men be cry after them a thief they have to get a resting place in the hollow of the valley in hole of the earth and rock . they make noise like ass among the brushwood they get together under the thorn . they be son of shame and of men without a name who have be force out of the land . and now i have become their song and i be a word of shame to them . i be disgust to them they keep away from me and put mark of shame on me . for he have make loose the cord of my bow and put me to shame he have send down my flag to the earth before me . the line of his men of war put themselves in order and make high their way of destruction against me they have make waste my road with a view to my destruction his bowman come round about me a through a wide broken place in the wall they come on i be overturn by the shock of their attack . fear have come on me my hope be go like the wind and my well be like a cloud . but now my soul be turn to water in me day of trouble overtake me the flesh be go from my bone and they give me no rest there be no end to my pain . with great force he take a grip of my clothing pull me by the neck of my coat . truly god have make me low even to the earth and i have become like dust . you give no answer to my cry and take no note of my prayer . you have become cruel to me the strength of your hand be hard on me . lift me up you make me go on the wing of the wind i be break up by the storm . for i be certain that you will send me back to death and to the meeting place order for all living . have not my hand be stretch out in help to the poor ? have i not be a saviour to him in his trouble ? have i not be weep for the crush ? and be not my soul sad for him who be in need ? for i be look for good and evil come i be wait for light and it become dark . my feeling be strongly move and give me no rest day of trouble have overtake me . i go about in dark clothing uncomforted i get up in the public place cry out for help . i have become a brother to the jackal and go about in the company of ostrich . my skin be black and drop off me and my bone be burn with the heat of my disease . and my music have be turn to sorrow and the sound of my pipe into the noise of weep .i make an agreement with my eye how then might my eye be look on a virgin ? for what be god 's reward from on high or the heritage give by the ruler of all from heaven ? be it not trouble for the sinner and destruction for the evil doer ? do he not see my way and be not my step all number ? if i have go in false way or my foot have be quick in work deceit let me be measure in upright scale and let god see my righteousness if my step have be turn out of the way or if my heart go after my eye or if the property of another be in my hand let me put seed in the earth for another to have the fruit of it and let my produce be uproot . if my heart go after another man 's wife or if i be wait secretly at my neighbour 's door then let my wife give pleasure to another man and let others make use of her body . for that would be a crime it would be an act for which punishment would be measure out by the judge it would be a fire burn even to destruction and take away all my produce . if i do wrong in the cause of my man servant or my woman servant when they go to law with me what then will i do when god come a my judge ? and what answer may i give to his question ? do not god make him as well a me ? do he not give u life in our mother ' body ? if i keep back the desire of the poor if the widow 's eye be look for help to no purpose if i keep my food for myself and do not give some of it to the child with no father for i be care for by god a by a father from my early day he be my guide from the body of my mother if i saw one near to death for need of clothing and that the poor have nothing cover him if his back do not give me a blessing and the wool of my sheep do not make him warm if my hand have be lift up against him who have do no wrong when i saw that i be support by the judge may my arm be pull from my body and be break from it base . for the fear of god keep me back and because of his power i might not do such thing . if i make gold my hope or if i ever say to the best gold i have put my faith in you if i be glad because my wealth be great and because my hand have get together a great store if when i saw the sun shining and the moon move on it bright way a secret feeling of worship come into my heart and my hand give kiss from my mouth that would have be another sin to be reward with punishment by the judge for i would have be false to god on high . if i be glad at the trouble of my hater and give cry of joy when evil overtook him for i do not let my mouth give way to sin in put a curse on his life if the men of my tent do not say who have not have full measure of his meat ? the traveller do not take his night 's rest in the street and my door be open to anyone on a journey if i keep my evil doings cover and my sin in the secret of my breast for fear of the great body of people or for fear that family might make sport of me so that i keep quiet and do not go out of my door if only god would give ear to me and the ruler of all would give me an answer ! or if what he have against me have be put in writing ! truly i would take up the book in my hand it would be to me a a crown i would make clear the number of my step i would put it before him like a prince ! the word of job be end . if my land have make an outcry against me or the ploughed earth have be in sorrow if i have take it produce without payment cause the death of it owner then in place of grain let thorn come up and in place of barley evil smelling plant .so these three men give no more answer to job because he seem to himself to be right . and elihu the son of barachel the buzite of the family of ram be angry burning with wrath against job because he seem to himself more right than god and he be angry with his three friend because they have be unable to give him an answer and have not make job 's sin clear . now elihu have keep quiet while job be talk because they be old than he and when elihu saw that there be no answer in the mouth of the three men he be very angry . and elihu the son of barachel the buzite make answer and say i be young and you be very old so i be in fear and keep myself from put my knowledge before you . i say to myself it be right for the old to say what be in their mind and for those who be far on in year to give out wisdom . but truly it be the spirit in man even the breath of the ruler of all which give them knowledge . it be not the old who be wise and those who be full of year have not the knowledge of what be right . so i say give ear to me and i will put forward my knowledge . i be wait for your word i be give ear to your wise saying while you be search out what to say i be take note and truly not one of you be able to make clear job 's error or to give an answer to his word . take care that you do not say wisdom be here god may overcome him but not man . i will not put forward word like these or make use of your saying in answer to him . fear have overcome them they have no more answer to give they have come to an end of word . and be i to go on wait while they have nothing to say ? while they keep quiet and give no more answer ? i will give my answer i will put forward my knowledge for i be full of word i be unable to keep in my breath any long my stomach be like wine which be unable to get out like skin full of new wine it be almost burst . let me say what be in my mind so that i may get comfort let me give answer with open mouth . let me not give respect to any man or give name of honour to any living . for i be not able to give name of honour to any man and if i do my maker would quickly take me away .and now o job give ear to my word and take note of all i say . see now my mouth be open my tongue give out word . my heart be overflow with knowledge my lip say what be true . the spirit of god have make me and the breath of the ruler of all give me life . if you be able give me an answer put your cause in order and come forward . see i be the same a you be in the eye of god i be cut off from the same bit of wet earth . fear of me will not overcome you and my hand will not be hard on you . but you say in my hearing and your voice come to my ear i be clean without sin i be wash and there be no evil in me see he be look for something against me in his eye i be a one of his hater he put chain on my foot he be watch all my way . truly in say this you be wrong for god be great than man . why do you put forward your cause against him say he give no answer to any of my word ? for god give his word in one way even in two and man be not conscious of it in a dream in a vision of the night when deep sleep come on men while they take their rest on their bed then he make his secret clear to men so that they be full of fear at what they see in order that man may be turn from his evil work and that pride may be take away from him to keep back his soul from the underworld and his life from destruction . pain be send on him a a punishment while he be on his bed there be no end to the trouble in his bone he have no desire for food and his soul be turn away from delicate meat his flesh be so wasted away that it may not be see and his bone . ... and his soul come near to the underworld and his life to the angel of death . if now there may be an angel sent to him one of the thousand which there be to be between him and god and to make clear to man what be right for him and if he have mercy on him and say let him not go down to the underworld i have give the price for his life then his flesh become young again and he come back to the day of his early strength he make his prayer to god and he have mercy on him he see god 's face with cry of joy he give news of his righteousness to men he make a song say i do wrong turning from the straight way but he do not give me the reward of my sin . he keep my soul from the underworld and my life see the light in full measure . truly god do all these thing to man twice and three time keep back his soul from the underworld so that he may see the light of life . take note o job give ear to me keep quiet while i say what be in my mind . if you have anything to say give me an answer for it be my desire that you may be judge free from sin . if not give attention to me and keep quiet and i will give you wisdom .and elihu make answer and say give ear you wise to my word and you who have knowledge give attention to me for word be test by the ear a food be taste by the mouth . let u make the decision for ourselves a to what be right let u have the knowledge among ourselves of what be good . for job have say i be upright and it be god who have take away my right though i be right still i be in pain my wound may not be make well though i have do no wrong . what man be like job a man who freely make sport of god and go in the company of evil doer walk in the way of sinner ? for he have say it be no profit to a man to take delight in god . now then you wise take note you men of knowledge give ear to me . let it be far from god to do evil and from the ruler of all to do wrong . for he give to every man the reward of his work and see that he get the fruit of his way . truly god do not do evil and the ruler of all be not a false judge . who put the earth into his care or make him responsible for the world ? if he make his spirit come back to him take his breath into himself again all flesh would come to an end together and man would go back to the dust . if you be wise take note of this give ear to the voice of my word . how may a hater of right be a ruler ? and will you say that the upright ruler of all be evil ? he who say to a king you be an evil doer and to ruler you be sinner who have no respect for ruler and who give no more attention to those who have wealth than to the poor for they be all the work of his hand . suddenly they come to an end even in the middle of the night the blow come on the men of wealth and they be go and the strong be take away without the hand of man . for his eye be on the way of a man and he see all his step . there be no dark place and no thick cloud in which the worker of evil may take cover . for he do not give man a fixed time to come before him to be judge . he send the strong to destruction without search out their cause and put others in their place . for he have knowledge of their work overturn them in the night so that they be crush . the evil doer be break by his wrath he put his hand on them with force before the eye of all onlooker . because they do not go after him and take no note of his way so that the cry of the poor might come up to him and the prayer of those in need come to his ear . ... ... ... ... ... men of knowledge and all wise men hear me will say job 's word do not come from knowledge they be not the fruit of wisdom . may job be test to the end because his answer have be like those of evil men . for in addition to his sin he be uncontrolled in heart before our eye he make sport of god increase his word against him .and elihu make answer and say do it seem to you to be right and righteousness before god to say what profit be it to me and how be i good off than if i have do wrong ? i will make answer to you and to your friend let your eye be turn to the heaven and lift up to see the sky they be high than you . if you have do wrong be he any the bad for it ? and if your sin be great in number what be it to him ? if you be upright what do you give to him ? or what do he take from your hand ? your evil do may have an effect on a man like yourself or your righteousness on a son of man . because the hand of the cruel be hard on them men be make sound of grief they be cry out for help because of the arm of the strong . but no one have say where be god my maker who give song in the night who give u more knowledge than the beast of the earth and make u wise than the bird of the heaven ? there they be cry out because of the pride of the evil doer but he give them no answer . but god will not give ear to what be false or the ruler of all take note of it how much less when you say that you do not see him that the cause be before him and you be wait for him . and now ... and job 's mouth be open wide to give out what be of no profit increase word without knowledge .and elihu go on to say give me a little more time and i will make it clear to you for i have still something to say for god . i will get my knowledge from far and i will give righteousness to my maker . for truly my word be not false one who have all knowledge be talk with you . truly god give up the hard hearted and will not give life to the sinner . his eye be ever on the upright and he give to the crush their right lift them up to the seat of king and make them safe for ever . and if they have be prisoned in chain and take in cord of trouble then he make clear to them what they have do even their evil work in which they have take pride . their ear be open to his teaching and he give them order so that their heart may be turn from evil . if they give ear to his voice and do his word then he give them long life and year full of pleasure . but if not they come to their end and give up their breath without knowledge . those who have no fear of god keep wrath store up in their heart they give no cry for help when they be make prisoner . they come to their end while they be still young their life be short like that of those who be use for sex purpose in the worship of their god . he make the wrong do to the poor the way of their salvation open their ear by their trouble . ... ... ... ... ... take care not to be turn to sin for you have take evil for your part in place of sorrow . truly god be lift up in strength who be a ruler like him ? who ever give order to him or say to him you have do wrong ? see that you give praise to his work about which men make song . all people be look on it man see it from far . truly god be great great than all our knowledge the number of his year may not be search out . for he take up the drop from the sea he send them through his mist a rain flow down from the sky and drop on the people . and who have knowledge of how the cloud be stretch out or of the thunder of his tent ? see he be stretch out his mist cover the top of the mountain with it . for by these he give food to the people and bread in full measure . he take the light in his hand send it against the mark . the thunder make clear his passion and the storm give news of his wrath .at this my heart be shake it be move out of it place . give ear to the roll noise of his voice to the hollow sound which go out of his mouth . he send it out through all the heaven and his thunder flame to the end of the earth . after it a voice be sound thunder out the word of his power he do not keep back his thunder flame from his mouth his voice be sound . he do wonder more than may be search out great thing of which we have no knowledge for he say to the snow make the earth wet and to the rain storm come down . he put an end to the work of every man so that all may see his work . then the beast go into their hole and take their rest . out of it place come the storm wind and the cold out of it store house . by the breath of god ice be make and the wide water be shut in . the thick cloud be weight with thunder flame and the cloud send out it light and it go this way and that round about turn itself by his guiding to do whatever he give order to be do on the face of his world of men for a rod or for a curse or for mercy cause it to come on the mark . give ear to this o job and keep quiet in your place and take note of the wonder work by god . have you knowledge of god 's ordering of his work how he make the light of his cloud to be see ? have you knowledge of the balancing of the cloud the wonder of him who have all wisdom ? you whose clothing be warm when the earth be quiet because of the south wind will you with him make the sky smooth and strong a a polished look glass ? make clear to me what we be to say to him we be unable to put our cause before him because of the dark . how may he have knowledge of my desire for talk with him ? or do any man ever say may destruction come on me ? and now the light be not see for it be dark because of the cloud but a wind come clear them away . a bright light come out of the north god 's glory be greatly to be fear . there be no search out of the ruler of all his strength and his judging be great he be full of righteousness do no wrong . for this cause men go in fear of him he have no respect for any who be wise in heart .and the lord make answer to job out of the storm wind and say who be this who make the purpose of god dark by word without knowledge ? get your strength together like a man of war i will put question to you and you will give me the answer . where be you when i put the earth on it base ? say if you have knowledge . by whom be it measure fix ? say if you have wisdom or by whom be the line stretch out over it ? on what be it pillar base or who put down it angle stone when the morning star make song together and all the son of the god give cry of joy ? or where be you when the sea come to birth push out from it secret place when i make the cloud it robe and put thick cloud a band round it order a fixed limit for it with lock and door and say so far you may come and no farther and here the pride of your wave will be stop ? have you from your early day give order to the morning or make the dawn conscious of it place so that it might take a grip of the skirt of the earth shake all the evil doer out of it ? it be change like wet earth under a stamp and be colour like a robe and from the evil doer their light be keep back and the arm of pride be break . have you come into the spring of the sea walking in the secret place of the deep ? have the door of death be open to you or have the door keeper of the dark ever see you ? have you take note of the wide limit of the earth ? say if you have knowledge of it all . which be the way to the rest place of the light and where be the store house of the dark so that you might take it to it limit guide it to it house ? no doubt you have knowledge of it for then you have come to birth and the number of your day be great . have you come into the secret place of snow or have you see the store house of the ice drop which i have keep for the time of trouble for the day of war and fighting ? which be the way to the place where the wind be measure out and the east wind send out over the earth ? by whom have the way be cut for the flowing of the rain and the flaming of the thunder cause rain to come on a land where no man be live on the waste land which have no people to give water to the land where there be waste and destruction and to make the dry land green with young grass ? have the rain a father ? or who give birth to the drop of night mist ? out of whose body come the ice ? and who give birth to the cold mist of heaven ? the water be join together hard a a stone and the face of the deep be cover . be the band of the pleiades fix by you or be the cord of orion make loose ? do you make mazzaroth come out in it right time or be the bear and it child guide by you ? have you knowledge of the law of the heaven ? do you give them rule over the earth ? be your voice send up to the cloud so that you may be cover by the weight of water ? do you send out the thunder flame so that they may go and say to you here we be ? who have put wisdom in the high cloud or give knowledge to the light of the north ? by whose wisdom be the cloud number or the water skin of the heaven turn to the earth when the earth become hard a metal and be join together in mass ? do you go after food for the she lion or get meat so that the young lion may have enough when they be stretch out in their hole and be wait in the brushwood ? who give in the even the meat he be search for when his young one be cry to god when the young lion with loud noise go wander after their food ?have you knowledge of the rock goat ? or do you see the roe give birth to their young ? be the number of their month fix by you ? or be the time when they give birth order by you ? they be bent down they give birth to their young they let loose the fruit of their body . their young one be strong living in the open country they go out and do not come back again . who have let the as of the field go free ? or make loose the band of the loud voice beast ? to whom i have give the waste land for a heritage and the salt land a a living place . he make sport of the noise of the town the voice of the driver do not come to his ear he go look for his grass land in the mountain search out every green thing . will the ox of the mountain be your servant ? or be his night 's rest place by your food store ? will he be pull your plough with cord turn up the valley after you ? will you put your faith in him because his strength be great ? will you give the fruit of your work into his care ? will you be look for him to come back and get in your seed to the crush floor ? be the wing of the ostrich feeble or be it because she have no feather that she put her egg on the earth warm them in the dust without a thought that they may be crush by the foot and break by the beast of the field ? she be cruel to her young one a if they be not hers her work be to no purpose she have no fear . for god have take wisdom from her mind and give her no measure of knowledge . when she be shake her wing on high she make sport of the horse and of him who be seat on him . do you give strength to the horse ? be it by your hand that his neck be clothe with power ? be it through you that he be shake like a locust in the pride of his loud sound breath ? he be stamp with joy in the valley he make sport of fear . in his strength he go out against the arm of war turn not away from the sword . the bow be sound against him he see the shin point of spear and arrow . shake with passion he be bite the earth he be not able to keep quiet at the sound of the horn when it come to his ear he say aha ! he be smell the fight from far off and hear the thunder of the captain and the war cry . be it through your knowledge that the hawk take his flight stretch out his wing to the south ? or be it by your order that the eagle go up and make his rest place on high ? on the rock be his house and on the mountain top his strong place . from there he be watch for food his eye see it far off . his young have blood for their drink and where the dead body be there be he to be see .... will he who be protest give teaching to the ruler of all ? let him who have argument to put forward against god give an answer . and job say in answer to the lord truly i be of no value what answer may i give to you ? i will put my hand on my mouth . i have say once and even twice what be in my mind but i will not do so again . then the lord make answer to job out of the storm wind and say get your strength together like a man of war i will put question to you and you will give me the answer . will you even make my right of no value ? will you say that i be wrong in order to make clear that you be right ? have you an arm like god ? have you a voice of thunder like his ? put on the ornament of your pride be clothe with glory and power let your wrath be overflow let your eye see all the son of pride and make them low . send destruction on all who be lift up pull down the sinner from their place . let them be cover together in the dust let their face be dark in the secret place of the underworld . then i will give praise to you say that your right hand be able to give you salvation . see now the great beast whom i make even a i make you he take grass for food like the ox . his strength be in his body and his force in the muscle of his stomach . his tail be curve like a cedar the muscle of his leg be join together . his bone be pipe of brass his leg be like rod of iron . he be the chief of the way of god make by him for his pleasure . he take the produce of the mountain where all the beast of the field be at play . he take his rest under the tree of the river and in the pool under the shade of the water plant . he be cover by the branch of the tree the grass of the stream be round him . truly if the river be overflow it give him no cause for fear he have no sense of danger even if jordan be rush against his mouth . will anyone take him when he be on the watch or put metal teeth through his nose ?be it possible for leviathan to be pull out with a fish hook or for a hook to be put through the bone of his mouth ? will you put a cord into his nose or take him away with a cord round his tongue ? will he make prayer to you or say soft word to you ? will he make an agreement with you so that you may take him a a servant for ever ? will you make sport with him a with a bird ? or put him in chain for your young woman ? will the fisherman make profit out of him ? will they have him cut up for the trader ? will you put sharp pointed iron into his skin or fish spear into his head ? only put your hand on him and see what a fight you will have you will not do it again ! truly the hope of his attacker be false he be overcome even on see him ! he be so cruel that no one be ready to go against him . who then be able to keep his place before me ? who ever go against me and get the good of me ? there be no one under heaven ! i will not keep quiet about the part of his body or about his power and the strength of his frame . who have ever take off his outer skin ? who may come inside his inner coat of iron ? who have make open the door of his face ? fear be round about his teeth . his back be make of line of plate join tight together one against the other like a stamp . one be so near to the other that no air may come between them . they take a grip of one another they be join together so that they may not be part . his sneezing give out flame and his eye be like the eye of the dawn . out of his mouth go burn light and flame of fire be jump up . smoke come out of his nose like a pot boil on the fire . his breath put fire to coal and a flame go out of his mouth . strength be in his neck and fear go dance before him . the plate of his flesh be join together fix and not to be move . his heart be as strong a a stone hard a the low crushing stone . when he get ready for the fight the strong be overcome with fear . the sword may come near him but be not able to go through him the spear or the arrow or the sharp pointed iron . iron be to him a dry grass and brass a soft wood . the arrow be not able to put him to flight stone be no more to him than dry stem . a thick stick be no good than a leaf of grass and he make sport of the onrush of the spear . under him be sharp edge of broken pot a if he be pull a grain crush instrument over the wet earth . the deep be boil like a pot of spice and the sea like a perfume vessel . after him his way be shin so that the deep seem white . on earth there be not another like him who be make without fear . everything which be high go in fear of him he be king over all the son of pride .and job say in answer to the lord i see that you be able to do every thing and to give effect to all your design . who be this who make dark the purpose of god by word without knowledge ? for i have be talk without knowledge about wonder not to be search out . give ear to me and i will say what be in my mind i will put question to you and you will give me the answer . word of you have come to my ear but now my eye have see you . for this cause i give witness that what i say be false and in sorrow i take my seat in the dust . and it come about after he have say these word to job that the lord say to eliphaz the temanite i be very angry with you and your two friend because you have not say what be right about me a my servant job have . and now take seven ox and seven sheep and go to my servant job and give a burned offering for yourselves and my servant job will make prayer for you that i may not send punishment on you because you have not say what be right about me a my servant job have . and eliphaz the temanite and bildad the shuhite and zophar the naamathite go and do a the lord have say . and the lord give ear to job . and the lord make up to job for all his loss after he have make prayer for his friend and all job have before be increase by the lord twice as much . and all his brother and sister and his friend of early day come and take food with him in his house and make clear their grief for him and give him comfort for all the evil which the lord have send on him and they all give him a bit of money and a gold ring . and the lord 's blessing be great on the end of job 's life than on it start and so he come to have fourteen thousand sheep and goat and six thousand camel and two thousand ox and a thousand she asses . and he have seven son and three daughter . and he give the first the name of jemimah the second keziah and the third keren happuch and there be no woman so beautiful a the daughter of job in all the earth and their father give them a heritage among their brother . and after this job have a hundred and forty year of life and saw his son and his son ' son even four generation . and job come to his end old and full of day .happy be the man who do not go in the company of sinner or take his place in the way of evil doer or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the lord . but whose delight be in the law of the lord and whose mind be on his law day and night . he will be like a tree plant by the river of water which give it fruit at the right time whose leaf will ever be green and he will do well in all his undertaking . the evil doer be not so but be like the dust from the grain which the wind take away . for this cause there will be no mercy for sinner when they be judge and the evil doer will have no place among the upright because the lord see the way of the upright but the end of the sinner be destruction .why be the nation so violently move and why be the thought of the people so foolish ? the king of the earth have take their place and the ruler be fix in their purpose against the lord and against the king of his selection say let their chain be break and their cord take from off u . then he whose seat be in the heaven will be laugh the lord will make sport of them . then will his angry word come to their ear and by his wrath they will be trouble but i have put my king on my holy hill of zion . i will make clear the lord 's decision he have say to me you be my son this day have i give you be . make your request to me and i will give you the nation for your heritage and the farthest limit of the earth will be under your hand . they will be rule by you with a rod of iron they will be break like a potter 's vessel . so now be wise you king take his teach you judge of the earth . give worship to the lord with fear kiss his foot and give him honour for fear that he may be angry cause destruction to come on you because he be quickly move to wrath . happy be all those who put their faith in him .lt a psalm . of david . when he go in flight from absalom his son . gt lord how greatly be they increase who make attack on me ! in great number they come against me . unnumbered be those who say of my soul there be no help for him in god . selah . but your strength o lord be round me you be my glory and the lifter up of my head . i send up a cry to the lord with my voice and he give me an answer from his holy hill . selah . i take my rest in sleep and then again i be awake for the lord be my support . i will have no fear though ten thousand have come round me put themselves against me . come to me lord keep me safe o my god for you have give all my hater blow on their face bone the teeth of the evil doer have be break by you . salvation come from the lord your blessing be on your people . selah .lt to the chief music maker on corded instrument . a psalm . of david . gt give answer to my cry o god of my righteousness make me free from my trouble have mercy on me and give ear to my prayer . o you son of men how long will you go on turn my glory into shame ? how long will you give your love to foolish thing go after what be false ? selah . see how the lord have make great his mercy for me the lord will give ear to my cry . let there be fear in your heart and do no sin have bitter feeling on your bed but make no sound . selah . give the offering of righteousness and put your faith in the lord . there be number who say who will do u any good ? the light of his face have go from u . lord you have put joy in my heart more than they have when their grain and their wine be increase . i will take my rest on my bed in peace because you only lord keep me safe .lt to the chief music maker on wind instrument . a psalm . of david . gt give ear to my word o lord give thought to my heart searchings . let the voice of my cry come to you my king and my god for to you will i make my prayer . my voice will come to you in the morning o lord in the morning will i send my prayer to you and keep watch . for you be not a god who take pleasure in wrongdoing there be no evil with you . the son of pride have no place before you you be a hater of all worker of evil . you will send destruction on those whose word be false the cruel man and the man of deceit be hat by the lord . but a for me i will come into your house in the full measure of your mercy and in your fear i will give worship turn my eye to your holy temple . be my guide o lord in the way of your righteousness because of those who be against me make your way straight before my face . for no faith may be put in their word their inner part be nothing but evil their throat be like an open place for the dead smooth be the word of their tongue . send them to destruction o lord let their evil design be the cause of their fall let them be force out by all their sin because they have go against your authority . but let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cry of joy at all time and let all the lover of your name be glad in you . for you lord will send a blessing on the upright man your grace will be round him and you will be his strength .lt to the chief music maker on corded instrument on the sheminith . a psalm . of david . gt o lord do not be bitter with me in your wrath do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion . have mercy on me o lord for i be waste away make me well for even my bone be trouble . my soul be in bitter trouble and you o lord how long ? come back o lord make my soul free o give me salvation because of your mercy . for in death there be no memory of you in the underworld who will give you praise ? the voice of my sorrow be a weariness to me all the night i make my bed wet with weep it be water by the drop flow from my eye . my eye be waste away with trouble they be become old because of all those who be against me . go from me all you worker of evil for the lord have give ear to the voice of my weeping . the lord have give ear to my request the lord have let my prayer come before him . let all those who be against me be sham and deeply troubled let them be turn back and suddenly put to shame .lt shiggaion of david a song which he make to the lord about the word of cush the benjamite . gt o lord my god i put my faith in you take me out of the hand of him who be cruel to me and make me free so that he may not come rush on my soul like a lion wound it while there be no one to be my saviour . o lord my god if i have do this if my hand have do any wrong if i have give back evil to him who do evil to me or have take anything from him who be against me without cause let my hater go after my soul and take it let my life be crush to the earth and my honour into the dust . selah . come up lord in your wrath be lift up against my hater be awake my god give order for the judging . the meeting of the nation will be round you take your seat then over them on high . the lord will be judge of the people give a decision for me o lord because of my righteousness and let my virtue have it reward . o let the evil of the evil doer come to an end but give strength to the upright for men 's mind and heart be test by the god of righteousness . god who be the saviour of the upright in heart be my breastplate . god be the judge of the upright and be angry with the evil doer every day . if a man be not turn from his evil he will make his sword sharp his bow be bent and ready . he have make ready for him the instrument of death he make his arrows flame of fire . that man be a worker of evil the seed of wrongdoing have give birth to deceit . he have make a hole deep in the earth and be fall into the hole which he have make his wrongdoing will come back to him and his violent behaviour will come down on his head . i will give praise to the lord for his righteousness i will make a song to the name of the lord most high .lt to the chief music maker on the gittith . a psalm . of david . gt o lord our lord whose glory be high than the heaven how noble be your name in all the earth ! you have make clear your strength even out of the mouth of baby at the breast because of those who be against you so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man . when i see your heaven the work of your finger the moon and the star which you have put in their place what be man that you keep him in mind ? the son of man that you take him into account ? for you have make him only a little low than the god crown him with glory and honour . you have make him ruler over the work of your hand you have put all thing under his foot all sheep and ox and all the beast of the field the bird of the air and the fish of the sea and whatever go through the deep water of the sea . o lord our lord how noble be your name in all the earth !lt to the chief music maker on muthlabben . a psalm . of david . gt i will give you praise o lord with all my heart i will make clear all the wonder of your work . i will be glad and have delight in you i will make a song of praise to your name o most high . when my hater be turn back they will be break and overcome before you . for you give approval to my right and my cause you be seat in your high place judging in righteousness . you have say sharp word to the nation you have send destruction on the sinner you have put an end to their name for ever and ever . you have give their town to destruction the memory of them have go they have become waste for ever . but the lord be king for ever he have make ready his high seat for judging . and he will be the judge of the world in righteousness give true decision for the people . the lord will be a high tower for those who be crush down a high tower in time of trouble and those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you because you lord have ever give your help to those who be wait for you . make song of praise to the lord whose house be in zion make his doings clear to the people . when he make search for blood he have them in his memory he be not without think for the cry of the poor . have mercy on me o lord and see how i be trouble by my hater let me be lift up from the door of death so that i may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of zion i will be glad because of your salvation . the nation have go down into the hole which they make in their secret net be their foot take . the lord have give knowledge of himself through his judge the evil doer be take in the net which his hand have make . higgaion . selah . the sinner and all the nation who have no memory of god will be turn into the underworld . for the poor will not be without help the hope of those in need will not be crush for ever . up ! o lord let not man overcome you let the nation be judge before you . put them in fear o lord so that the nation may see that they be only men . selah .why do you keep far away o lord ? why be you not to be see in time of trouble ? the evil doer in his pride be cruel to the poor let him be take by the trick of his invention . for the evil doer be lift up because of the purpose of his heart and he whose mind be fix on wealth be turn away from the lord say evil against him . the evil doer in his pride say god will not make a search . all his thought be there be no god . his way be ever fix your decision be high than he may see a for his hater they be a nothing to him . he have say in his heart i will not be move through all generation i will never be in trouble . his mouth be full of curse and deceit and false word under his tongue be evil purpose and dark thought . he be wait in the dark place of the town in the secret place he put to death those who have do no wrong his eye be secretly turn against the poor . he keep himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole wait to put his hand on the poor man and pull him into his net . the upright be crush and make low and the feeble be overcome by his strong one . he say in his heart god have no memory of me his face be turn away he will never see it . up ! o lord let your hand be lift give thought to the poor . why have the evil doer a low opinion of god say in his heart you will not make search for it ? you have see it for your eye be on sorrow and grief to take it into your hand the poor man put his faith in you you have be the helper of the child who have no father . let the arm of the sinner and the evil doer be break go on search for his sin till there be no more . the lord be king for ever and ever the nation be go from his land . lord you have give ear to the prayer of the poor you will make strong their heart you will give them a hearing to give decision for the child without a father and for the broken hearted so that the man of the earth may no longer be fear .lt for the chief music maker . of david . gt in the lord put i my faith how will you say to my soul go in flight like a bird to the mountain ? see the bow of the evil doer be bent they make ready their arrow on the cord so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart . if the base be break down what be the upright man to do ? the lord be in his holy temple the lord 's seat be in heaven his eye be watch and test the child of men . the lord put the upright and the sinner to the test but he have hate in his soul for the lover of violent act . on the evil doer he will send down fire and flame and a burning wind with these will their cup be full . for the lord be upright he be a lover of righteousness the upright will see his face .lt for the chief music maker on the sheminith . a psalm . of david . gt send help lord for mercy have come to an end there be no more faith among the child of men . everyone say false word to his neighbour their tongue be smooth in their talk and their heart be full of deceit . the smooth lip and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the lord . they have say with our tongue will we overcome our lip be ours who be lord over u ? because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need now will i come to his help say the lord i will give him the salvation which he be desire . the word of the lord be true word like silver test by fire and burn clean seven time . you will keep them o lord you will keep them safe from this generation for ever . the sinner be walk on every side and evil be honour among the child of men .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt will you for ever put me out of your memory o lord ? will your face for ever be turn away from me ? how long be my soul to be in doubt with sorrow in my heart all the day ? how long will he who be against me be give power over me ? let my voice come before you and give me an answer o lord my god let your light be shin on me so that the sleep of death may not overtake me and he who be against me may not say i have overcome him and those who be trouble me may not be glad when i be move . but i have have faith in your mercy my heart will be glad in your salvation . i will make a song to the lord because he have give me my reward .lt to the chief music maker . of david . gt the foolish man have say in his heart god will not do anything . they be unclean they have do evil work there be not one who do good . the lord be look down from heaven on the child of men to see if there be any who have wisdom search after god . they have all go out of the way together they be unclean there be not one who do good no not one . have all the worker of evil no knowledge ? they take my people for food a they would take bread they make no prayer to the lord . then be they in great fear for god be in the generation of the upright . you have put to shame the thought of the poor but the lord be his support . may the salvation of israel come out of zion ! when the fate of his people be change by the lord jacob will have joy and israel will be glad .lt a psalm . of david . gt lord who may have a resting place in your tent a living place on your holy hill ? he who go on his way uprightly do righteousness and say what be true in his heart whose tongue be not false who do no evil to his friend and do not take away the good name of his neighbour who give honour to those who have the fear of the lord turn away from him who have not the lord 's approval . he who take an oath against himself and make no change . he who do not put out his money at interest or for payment give false decision against men who have do no wrong . he who do these thing will never be move .lt michtam . of david . gt keep me safe o god for in you i have put my faith . o my soul you have say to the lord you be my lord i have no good but you . a for the saint who be in the earth they be the noble in whom be all my delight . their sorrow will be increase who go after another god i will not take drink offering from their hand or take their name on my lip . the lord be my heritage and the wine of my cup you be the supporter of my right . fair be the place mark out for me i have a noble heritage . i will give praise to the lord who have be my guide knowledge come to me from my thought in the night . i have put the lord before me at all time because he be at my right hand i will not be move . because of this my heart be glad and my glory be full of joy while my flesh take it rest in hope . for you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld you will not let your loved one see the place of death . you will make clear to me the way of life where you be joy be complete in your right hand there be pleasure for ever and ever .lt a prayer . of david . gt let my cause come to your ear o lord give attention to my cry give ear to my prayer which go not out from false lip . be my judge for your eye see what be right . you have put my heart to the test search me in the night you have put me to the test and see no evil purpose in me i will keep my mouth from sin . a for the work of men by the word of your lip i have keep myself from the way of the violent . i have keep my foot in your way my step have not be turn away . my cry have go up to you for you will give me an answer o god let your ear be turn to me and give attention to my word . make clear the wonder of your mercy o saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand from those who come out against them . keep me a the light of your eye cover me with the shade of your wing from the evil doer who be violent to me and from those who be round me desire my death . they be shut up in their fat with their mouth they say word of pride . they have make a circle round our step their eye be fix on u force u down to the earth like a lion desire it food and like a young lion wait in secret place . up ! lord come out against him make him low with your sword be my saviour from the evil doer . with your hand o lord from men even men of the world whose heritage be in this life and whom you make full with your secret wealth they be full of child after their death their offspring take the rest of their good . a for me i will see your face in righteousness when i be awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form .lt to the chief music maker . of the servant of the lord of david who say the word of this song to the lord on the day when the lord make him free from the hand of all his hater and from the hand of saul and he say gt i will give you my love o lord my strength . the lord be my rock my walled town and my saviour my god my rock in him will i put my faith my breastplate and the horn of my salvation and my high tower . i will send up my cry to the lord who be to be praise so will i be make safe from those who be against me . the cord of death be round me and the sea of evil put me in fear . the cord of hell be round me the net of death come on me . in my trouble my voice go up to the lord and my cry to my god my voice come to his hearing in his holy temple and my prayer come before him even into his ear . then trouble and shock come on the earth and the base of the mountain be move and shake because he be angry . there go up a smoke from his nose and a fire of destruction from his mouth flame be light by it . the heaven be bent so that he might come down and it be dark under his foot . and he go in flight through the air seat on a storm cloud go quickly on the wing of the wind . he make the dark his secret place his tent round him be the dark water and thick cloud of the sky . before his shin light his dark cloud go past raining ice and fire . the lord make thunder in the heaven and the voice of the high be sound out a rain of ice and fire . he send out his arrow drive them in all direction by his flame of fire they be trouble . then the deep bed of the water be see and the base of the world be uncovered because of your word of wrath o lord because of the breath from your mouth . he send from on high he take me pull me out of great water . he make me free from my strong hater and from those who be against me because they be strong than i. they come on me in the day of my trouble but the lord be my support . he take me out into a wide place he be my saviour because he have delight in me . the lord give me the reward of my righteousness because my hand be clean before him . for i have keep the way of the lord i have not be turn away in sin from my god . for all his decision be before me and i do not put away his law from me . and i be upright before him and i keep myself from sin . because of this the lord have give me the reward of my righteousness because my hand be clean in his eye . on him who have mercy you will have mercy to the upright you will be upright he who be holy will see that you be holy but to the man whose way be not straight you will be a hard judge . for you be the saviour of those who be in trouble but eye full of pride will be make low . you o lord will be my light by you my god the dark will be make bright for me . by your help i have make a way through the wall which be shut me in by the help of my god i have go over a wall . a for god his way be completely good the word of the lord be test he be a breastplate for all those who put their faith in him . for who be god but the lord ? or who be a rock but our god ? god put a strong band about me guide me in a straight way . he make my foot like roe ' foot and put me on high place . he make my hand expert in war so that a bow of brass be bent by my arm . you have give me the breastplate of your salvation your right hand have be my support and your mercy have make me great . you have make my step wide under me so that my foot be keep from slip . i go after my hater and overtake them not turn back till they be all overcome . i will give them wound so that they be not able to get up they be stretch under my foot . for i have be arm by you with strength for the fight you have make low under me those who come out against me . by you their back be turn in flight so that my hater be cut off . they be cry out but there be no one to come to their help even to the lord but he give them no answer . then they be crush as small a dust before the wind they be drain out like the waste of the street . you have make me free from the fighting of the people you have make me the head of the nation a people of whom i have no knowledge will be my servant . from the time when my name come to their ear they will be rule by me men of other country will with false heart put themselves under my authority . they will be waste away they will come out of their secret place shake with fear . the lord be live praise be to my rock and let the god of my salvation be honour . it be god who send punishment on my hater and put people under my rule . he make me free from my hater i be lift up over those who come up against me you have make me free from the violent man . because of this i will give you praise o lord among the nation and will make a song of praise to your name . great salvation do he give to his king he have mercy on the king of his selection david and on his seed for ever .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt the heaven be sound the glory of god the arch of the sky make clear the work of his hand . day after day it send out it word and night after night it give knowledge . there be no word or language their voice make no sound . their line have go out through all the earth and their word to the end of the world . in them have he put a tent for the sun who be like a newly marry man come from his bride tent and be glad like a strong runner start on his way . his go out be from the end of the heaven and his circle to the end of it there be nothing which be not open to his heat . the law of the lord be good give new life to the soul the witness of the lord be certain give wisdom to the foolish . the order of the lord be right make glad the heart the rule of the lord be holy give light to the eye . the fear of the lord be clean and have no end the decision of the lord be true and full of righteousness . more to be desire be they than gold even than much shin gold sweeter than the drop honey . by them be your servant make conscious of danger and in keep them there be great reward . who have full knowledge of his error ? make me clean from secret evil . keep your servant back from sin of pride let them not have rule over me then will i be upright and free from great sin . let the word of my mouth and the thought of my heart be please in your eye o lord my strength and my salvation .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt may the lord give ear to you in the day of trouble may you be place on high by the name of the god of jacob may he send you help from the holy place and give you strength from zion may he keep all your offering in mind and be please with the fat of your burned offering selah . may he give you your heart 's desire and put all your purpose into effect . we will be glad in your salvation and in the name of our god we will put up our flag may the lord give you all your request . now be i certain that the lord give salvation to his king he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand . some put their faith in carriage and some in horse but we will be strong in the name of the lord our god . they be bent down and make low but we have be lift up . come to our help lord let the king give ear to our cry .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt the king will be glad in your strength o lord how great will be his delight in your salvation ! you have give him his heart 's desire and have not keep back the request of his lip . selah . for you go before him with the blessing of good thing you put a crown of fair gold on his head . he make request to you for life and you give it to him long life for ever and ever . his glory be great in your salvation honour and authority have you put on him . for you have make him a blessing for ever you have give him joy in the light of your face . for the king have faith in the lord and through the mercy of the most high he will not be move . your hand will make a search for all your hater your right hand will be hard on all those who be against you . you will make them like a flame oven before you the lord in his wrath will put an end to them and they will be burn up in the fire . their fruit will be cut off from the earth and their seed from among the child of men . for their thought be bitter against you they have an evil design in their mind which they be not able to put into effect . their back will be turn when you make ready the cord of your bow against their face . be lift up o lord in your strength so will we make song in praise of your power .lt to the chief music maker on aijeleth hash shahar . a psalm . of david . gt my god my god why be you turn away from me ? why be you so far from help me and from the word of my cry ? o my god i make my cry in the day and you give no answer and in the night and have no rest . but you be holy o you who be seat among the praise of israel . our father have faith in you they have faith and you be their saviour . they send up their cry to you and be make free they put their faith in you and be not put to shame . but i be a worm and not a man curse by men and look down on by the people . i be laugh at by all those who see me push out their lip and shake their head they say he put his faith in the lord let the lord be his saviour now let the lord be his saviour because he have delight in him . but it be you who take care of me from the day of my birth you give me faith even from my mother 's breast . i be in your hand even before my birth you be my god from the time when i be in my mother 's body . be not far from me for trouble be near there be no one to give help . a great herd of ox be round me i be shut in by the strong ox of bashan . i saw their mouth wide open like lion cry after food . i be flow away like water and all my bone be out of place my heart be like wax it have become soft in my body . my throat be dry like a broken vessel my tongue be fix to the roof of my mouth and the dust of death be on my lip . dog have come round me i be shut in by the band of evil doer they make wound in my hand and foot . i be able to see all my bone their look be fix on me they make a division of my robe among them by the decision of chance they take my clothing . do not be far from me o lord o my strength come quickly to my help . make my soul safe from the sword my life from the power of the dog . be my saviour from the lion 's mouth let me go free from the horn of the cruel ox . i will give the knowledge of your name to my brother i will give you praise among the people . you who have fear of the lord give him praise all you seed of jacob give him glory go in fear of him all you seed of israel . for he have not be unmoved by the pain of him who be troubled or keep his face cover from him but he have give an answer to his cry . my praise will be of you in the great meeting i will make my offering before his worshipper . the poor will have a feast of good thing those who make search for the lord will give him praise your heart will have life for ever . all the end of the earth will keep it in mind and be turn to the lord all the family of the nation will give him worship . for the kingdom be the lord 's he be the ruler among the nation . all the fat one of the earth will give him worship all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him even he who have not enough for the life of his soul . a seed will be his servant the doings of the lord will be make clear to the generation which come after . they will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he have do this .lt a psalm . of david . gt the lord take care of me a his sheep i will not be without any good thing . he make a resting place for me in the green field he be my guide by the quiet water . he give new life to my soul he be my guide in the way of righteousness because of his name . yes though i go through the valley of deep shade i will have no fear of evil for you be with me your rod and your support be my comfort . you make ready a table for me in front of my hater you put oil on my head my cup be overflow . truly bless and mercy will be with me all the day of my life and i will have a place in the house of the lord all my day .lt a psalm . of david . gt the earth be the lord 's with all it wealth the world and all the people live in it . for by him it be base on the sea and make strong on the deep river . who may go up into the hill of the lord ? and who may come into his holy place ? he who have clean hand and a true heart whose desire have not go out to foolish thing who have not take a false oath . he will have blessing from the lord and righteousness from the god of his salvation . this be the generation of those whose heart be turn to you even to your face o god of jacob . selah . let your head be lift up o door be lift up o you eternal door that the king of glory may come in . who be the king of glory ? the lord of strength and power the lord strong in war . let your head be lift up o door let them be lift up o you eternal door that the king of glory may come in . who be the king of glory ? the lord of army he be the king of glory . selah .lt of david . gt to you o lord my soul be lift up . o my god i have put my faith in you let me not be sham let not my hater be glory over me . let no servant of yours be put to shame may those be sham who be false without cause . make your step clear to me o lord give me knowledge of your way . be my guide and teacher in the true way for you be the god of my salvation i be wait for your word all the day . o lord keep in mind your pity and your mercy for they have be from the early time . do not keep in mind my sin when i be young or my wrongdoing let your memory of me be full of mercy o lord because of your righteousness . good and upright be the lord so he will be the teacher of sinner in the way . he will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit he will make his way clear to them . all the way of the lord be mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness . because of your name o lord let me have forgiveness for my sin which be very great . if a man have the fear of the lord the lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure . his soul will be full of good thing and his seed will have the earth for it heritage . the secret of the lord be with those in whose heart be the fear of him he will make his agreement clear to them . my eye be turn to the lord at all time for he will take my foot out of the net . be turn to me and have mercy on me for i be trouble and have no helper . the trouble of my heart be increase o take me out of my sorrow . give thought to my grief and my pain and take away all my sin . see how those who be against me be increase for bitter be their hate of me . o keep my soul and take me out of danger let me not be sham for i have put my faith in you . for my clean and upright way keep me safe because my hope be in you . give israel salvation o god out of all his trouble .lt of david . gt o lord be my judge for my behaviour have be upright i have put my faith in the lord i be not in danger of slip . put me in the scale o lord so that i may be test let the fire make clean my thought and my heart . for your mercy be before my eye and i have go in the way of your good faith . i have not take my seat with foolish person and i do not go with false men . i have be a hater of the band of wrongdoer and i will not be seat among sinner . i will make my hand clean from sin so will i go round your altar o lord that i may give out the voice of praise and make public all the wonder which you have do . lord your house have be dear to me and the rest place of your glory . let not my soul be number among sinner or my life among men of blood in whose hand be evil design and whose right hand take money for judge falsely . but a for me i will go on in my upright way be my saviour and have mercy on me . i have a safe resting place for my foot i will give praise to the lord in the meeting of the people .lt of david . gt the lord be my light and my salvation who be then a cause of fear to me ? the lord be the strength of my life who be a danger to me ? when evil doer even my hater come on me to put an end to me they be break and put to shame . even if an army come against me with it tent my heart would have no fear if war be make on me my faith would not be move . one prayer have i make to the lord and this be my heart 's desire that i may have a place in the house of the lord all the day of my life look on his glory and get wisdom in his temple . for in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men 's eye high on a rock he will put me . and now my head will be lift up high than my hater who be round me because of this i will make offering of joy in his tent i will make a song truly i will make a song of praise to the lord . o lord let the voice of my cry come to your ear have mercy on me and give me an answer . when you say make search for my face my heart say to you for your face will i make my search . let not your face be cover from me do not put away your servant in wrath you have be my help do not give me up or take your support from me o god of my salvation . when my father and my mother be turn away from me then the lord will be my support . make your way clear to me o lord guide me by the right way because of my hater . do not give me into their hand because false witness have come out against me and men breathe destruction . i have almost give up my hope of see the blessing of the lord in the land of the living . let your hope be in the lord take heart and be strong yes let your hope be in the lord .lt of david . gt my cry go up to you o lord my rock do not keep back your answer from me so that i may not become like those who go down into the underworld . give ear to the voice of my prayer when i be cry to you when my hand be lift up to your holy place . do not take me away with the sinner and the worker of evil who say word of peace to their neighbour but evil be in their heart . give them the right reward of their act and of their evil doings give them punishment for the work of their hand let them have their full reward . because they have no respect for the work of the lord or for the thing which his hand have make they will be break down and not lift up by him . may the lord be praise because he have give ear to the voice of my prayer . the lord be my strength and my breastplate my heart have faith in him and i be help for this cause my heart be full of rapture and i will give him praise in my song . the lord be their strength and a strong place of salvation for his king . be a saviour to your people and send a blessing on your heritage be their guide and let them be lift up for ever .lt a psalm . of david . gt give to the lord you son of the god give to the lord glory and strength . give to the lord the full glory of his name give him worship in holy robe . the voice of the lord be on the water the god of glory be thunder the lord be on the great water . the voice of the lord be full of power the voice of the lord have a noble sound . by the voice of the lord be the cedar tree break even the cedar of lebanon be break by the lord . he make them go jump about like a young ox lebanon and sirion like a young mountain ox . at the voice of the lord flame of fire be see . at the voice of the lord there be a shaking in the waste land even a shaking in the waste land of kadesh . at the voice of the lord the roe give birth the leaf be take from the tree in his temple everything say glory . the lord have his seat a king when the water come on the earth the lord be seat a king for ever . the lord will give strength to his people the lord will give his people the blessing of peace .lt a psalm . a song at the blessing of the house . of david . gt i will give you praise and honour o lord because through you i have be lift up you have not give my hater cause to be glad over me . o lord my god i send up my cry to you and you have make me well . o lord you have make my soul come again from the underworld you have give me life and keep me from go down among the dead . make song to the lord o you saint of his and give praise to his holy name . for his wrath be only for a minute in his grace there be life weep may be for a night but joy come in the morning . when thing go well for me i say i will never be move . lord by your grace you have keep my mountain strong when your face be turn from me i be trouble . my voice go up to you o lord i make my prayer to the lord . what profit be there in my blood if i go down into the underworld ? will the dust give you praise or be a witness to your help ? give ear to me o lord and have mercy on me lord be my helper . by you my sorrow be turn into dance you have take away my clothing of grief and give me robe of joy so that my glory may make song of praise to you and not be quiet . o lord my god i will give you praise for ever .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt in you o lord have i put my hope let me never be sham keep me safe in your righteousness . let your ear be turn to me take me quickly out of danger be my strong rock my place of strength where i may be safe . for you be my rock and my strong tower go in front of me and be my guide because of your name . take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly for you be my strength . into your hand i give my spirit you be my saviour o lord god for ever true . i be full of hate for those who go after false god but my hope be in the lord . i will be glad and have delight in your mercy because you have see my trouble you have have pity on my soul in it sorrow and you have not give me into the hand of my hater you have put my foot in a wide place . have mercy on me o lord for i be in trouble my eye be waste with grief i be waste in soul and body . my life go on in sorrow and my year in weep my strength be almost go because of my sin and my bone be waste away . because of all those who be against me i have become a word of shame to my neighbour a cause of shake the head and a fear to my friend those who saw me in the street go in flight from me . i have go from men 's mind and memory like a dead man i be like a broken vessel . false statement against me have come to my ear fear be on every side they be talk together against me design to take away my life . but i have faith in you o lord i say you be my god . the chance of my life be in your hand take me out of the hand of my hater and of those who go after me . let your servant see the light of your face in your mercy be my saviour . let me not be sham o lord for i have make my prayer to you let the sinner be sham and let their mouth be shut in the underworld . let the false lip be shut which say evil against the upright look down on him in their pride . o how great be your grace which you have put in store for your worshipper and which you have make clear to those who have faith in you before the son of men ! you will keep them safe in your house from the design of man in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongue . may the lord be praise because he have make clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town . and a for me i say in my fear i be cut off from before your eye but you give ear to the voice of my prayer when my cry go up to you . o have love for the lord all you his saint for the lord keep safe from danger all those who be true to him and give the worker of pride their right reward . put away fear and let your heart be strong all you whose hope be in the lord .lt of david . maschil . gt happy be he who have forgiveness for his wrongdoing and whose sin be cover . happy be the man in whom the lord see no evil and in whose spirit there be no deceit . when i keep my mouth shut my bone be waste because of my cry all through the day . for the weight of your hand be on me day and night my body become dry like the earth in summer . selah . i make my wrongdoing clear to you and do not keep back my sin . i say i will put it all before the lord and you take away my wrongdoing and my sin . selah . for this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you be near then the overflowing of the great water will not overtake him . you be my safe and secret place you will keep me from trouble you will put song of salvation on the lip of those who be round me . selah . i will give you knowledge teach you the way to go my eye will be your guide . do not be like the horse or the as without sense ... the sinner will be full of trouble but mercy will be round the man who have faith in the lord . be glad in the lord with joy you upright men give cry of joy all you whose heart be true .be glad in the lord o doer of righteousness for praise be beautiful for the upright . give praise to the lord on the corded instrument make melody to him with instrument of music . make a new song to him play expertly with a loud noise . for the word of the lord be upright and all his work be certain . his delight be in righteousness and wisdom the earth be full of the mercy of the lord . by the word of the lord be the heaven make and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth . he make the water of the sea come together in a mass he keep the deep sea in store house . let the earth be full of the fear of the lord let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him . for he give the word and it be do by his order it be fix for ever . the lord undo the design of the nation he make the thought of the people without effect . the lord 's purpose be eternal the design of his heart go on through all the generation of man . happy be the nation whose god be the lord and the people whom he have take for his heritage . the lord be look down from heaven he see all the son of men from his house he keep watch on all who be live on the earth he make all their heart their work be clear to him . a king 's salvation be not in the power of his army a strong man do not get free by his great strength . a horse be a false hope his great power will not make any man free from danger . see the eye of the lord be on those in whose heart be the fear of him on those whose hope be in his mercy to keep their soul from death and to keep them live in time of need . our soul be wait for the lord he be our help and our salvation . for in him our heart have joy in his holy name be our hope . let your mercy be on u o lord a we be wait for you .lt of david . when he make a change in his behaviour before abimelech who send him away and he go . gt i will be bless the lord at all time his praise will be ever in my mouth . my soul will say great thing of the lord the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad . o give praise to the lord with me let u be witness together of his great name . i be search for the lord and he give ear to my voice and make me free from all my fear . let your eye be turn to him and you will have light and your face will not be sham . this poor man 's cry come before the lord and he give him salvation from all his trouble . the angel of the lord be ever watch over those who have fear of him to keep them safe . by experience you will see that the lord be good happy be the man who have faith in him . keep yourselves in the fear of the lord all you his saint for those who do so will have no need of anything . the young lion be in need and have no food but those who be look to the lord will have every good thing . come child give attention to me i will be your teacher in the fear of the lord . what man have a love of life and a desire that his day may be increase so that he may see good ? keep your tongue from evil and your lip from word of deceit . be turn from evil and do good make a search for peace desire it with all your heart . the eye of the lord be on the upright and his ear be open to their cry . the face of the lord be against those who do evil to take away the memory of them from the earth . the cry of the upright come before the lord and he take them out of all their trouble . the lord be near the broken hearted he be the saviour of those whose spirit be crush down . great be the trouble of the upright but the lord take him safely out of them all . he keep all his bone not one of them be break . evil will put an end to the sinner and those who be hater of righteousness will come to destruction . the lord will be the saviour of the soul of his servant and no one who have faith in him will be put to shame .lt of david . gt o lord be on my side against those who be judge me be at war with those who make war against me . be a breastplate to me and give me your help . take up your spear and keep back my attacker say to my soul i be your salvation . let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempt to take my soul let those who would do me damage be turn back and make foolish . let them be like dust from the grain before the wind let the angel of the lord send them in flight . let their way be dark and full of danger let them be trouble by the angel of the lord . for without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly in which to take my soul . let destruction come on them without their knowledge let them be take themselves in their secret net fall into the same destruction . and my soul will have joy in the lord it will be glad in his salvation . all my bone will say lord who be like you ? the saviour of the poor man from the hand of the strong of him who be poor and in need from him who take his good . false witness get up they put question to me about crime of which i have no knowledge . they give me back evil for good trouble my soul . but a for me when they be ill i put on the clothing of sorrow i go without food and be sad and my prayer come back again to my heart . my behaviour be a if it have be my friend or my brother i be bent low in grief like one whose mother be dead . but they take pleasure in my trouble and come together yes low person come together against me without my knowledge they never come to an end of wound me . like men of deceit they put me to shame the voice of their wrath be loud against me . lord how long will you be look on ? take my soul from their destruction my life from the lion . i will give you praise in the great meeting i will give you honour among a strong people . do not let my hater be glad over me falsely let not those who be against me without cause make sport of me . for they do not say word of peace in their deceit they be design evil thing against the quiet one in the land . their mouth be open wide against me and they say aha aha our eye have see it . you have see this o lord be not unmoved o lord be not far from me . be awake o lord be move to take up my cause my god and my lord . be my judge o lord my god in your righteousness do not let them be glad over me . let them not say in their heart so we will have it let them not say we have put an end to him . let all those who take pleasure in my trouble be sham and come to nothing let those who be lift up against me be cover with shame and have no honour . let those who be on my side give cry of joy let them ever say the lord be praise for he have pleasure in the peace of his servant . and my tongue will be talk of your righteousness and of your praise all the day .lt to the chief music maker . of the servant of the lord . of david . gt the sin of the evil doer say in his heart there be no fear of the lord before his eye . for he take comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncover and hat . in the word of his mouth be evil and deceit he have give up be wise and do good . he give think to evil on his bed he take a way which be not good he be not a hater of evil . your mercy o lord be in the heaven and your strong purpose be as high a the cloud . your righteousness be like the mountain of god your judging be like the great deep o lord you give life to man and beast . how good be your love mercy o god ! the child of men take cover under the shade of your wing . the delight of your house will be shower on them you will give them drink from the river of your pleasure . for with you be the fountain of life in your light we will see light . o let there be no end to your love mercy to those who have knowledge of you or of your righteousness to the upright in heart . let not the foot of pride come against me or the hand of the evil doer put me out of my place . there the worker of evil have come down they have be make low and will not be lift up .lt of david . gt do not be angry because of the wrongdoer or have envy of the worker of evil . for they will quickly be cut down like grass and become dry like the green plant . have faith in the lord and do good be at rest in the land and go after righteousness . so will your delight be in the lord and he will give you your heart 's desire . put your life in the hand of the lord have faith in him and he will do it . and he will make your righteousness be see like the light and your cause like the shining of the sun . take your rest in the lord wait quietly for him do not be angry because of the man who do well in his evil way and give effect to his bad design . put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter do not give way to angry feeling which be a cause of sin . for the evil doer will be cut off but those who have faith in the lord will have the earth for their heritage . for in a short time the evil doer will be go you will go search for his place and it will not be there . but the gentle will have the earth for their heritage they will take their delight in peace without measure . the sinner have evil design against the upright lift up the voice of wrath against him . he will be laugh at by the lord who see that his day be come . the evil doer have take out their sword their bow be bent for crush the poor and to put to death those who be upright in their way . but their sword will be turn into their heart and their bow will be break . the little which the good man have be well than the wealth of evil doer . for the arm of the evil doer will be break but the lord be the support of the good . the day of the upright be number by the lord and their heritage will be for ever . they will not be sham in the evil time and in the day when all be in need of food they will have enough . but the wrongdoer will come to destruction and the hater of the lord will be like the fat of lamb they will be burn up they will go up in smoke and never again be see . the sinner take money and do not give it back but the upright man have mercy and give to others . those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage but those who be curse by him will be cut off . the step of a good man be order by the lord and he take delight in his way . even if he have a fall he will not be without help for the hand of the lord be support him . i have be young and now be old but i have not see the good man without help or his child look for bread . all the day he be ready to have mercy and to give his child be a blessing . be turn from evil and do good and your place will be for ever . for the lord be a lover of righteousness and take care of his saint they will be keep safe for ever but the seed of the evil doer will be cut off . the upright will have the earth for their heritage and will go on living there for ever . the mouth of the good man say word of wisdom the talk of his tongue be of righteousness . the law of his god be in his heart he will never make a false step . the sinner be watch the upright man desire to put him to death . the lord will not give him into their hand or be against him when he be judge . be wait for the lord and keep his way and you will be lift up and have the land for your heritage when the evil doer be cut off you will see it . i have see the evil doer in great power cover the earth like a great tree . but he come to an end and there be no sign of him i make a search for him and he be not there . give attention to the good man and take note of the upright because the end of that man be peace . but a for the sinner they will be cut off together the end of the wrongdoer be destruction . but the lord be the saviour of the upright he be their strength in the time of trouble . and the lord will be their help and keep them safe he will take them out of the hand of the evil doer and be their saviour because they have faith in him .lt a psalm . of david . to keep in memory . gt o lord be not bitter with me in your wrath let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion . for your arrow have go into my flesh and i be crush under the weight of your hand . my flesh be waste because of your wrath and there be no peace in my bone because of my sin . for my crime have go over my head they be like a great weight which be more than my strength . my wound be poison and evil smelling because of my foolish behaviour . i be troubled i be make low i go weep all the day . for my body be full of burn all my flesh be unhealthy . i be feeble and crush down i give a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart . lord all my desire be before you my sorrow be not keep secret from you . my heart go out in pain my strength be waste away a for the light of my eye it be go from me . my lover and my friend keep away from my disease my relation keep far away . those who have a desire to take my life put net for me those who be design my destruction say evil thing against me all the day their mind be full of deceit . but i keep my ear shut like a man without hear like a man without a voice never open his mouth . so i be like a man whose ear be shut and in whose mouth there be no sharp word . in you o lord be my hope you will give me an answer o lord my god . i say let them not be glad over me when my foot be move let them not be lift up with pride against me . my foot be near to fall and my sorrow be ever before me . i will make clear my wrongdoing with sorrow in my heart for my sin . but they be strong who have hate for me without cause those who be against me falsely be increase in number . they give me back evil for good they be my hater because i go after the thing which be right . do not give me up o lord o my god be near to me . come quickly to give me help o lord my salvation .lt to the chief music maker . of jeduthun . a psalm . of david . gt i say i will give attention to my way so that my tongue may do no wrong i will keep my mouth under control while the sinner be before me . i make no sound i say no word even of good and i be move with sorrow . my heart be burn in my breast while i be deep in thought the fire be light then i say with my tongue lord give me knowledge of my end and of the measure of my day so that i may see how feeble i be . you have make my day no long than a hand 's measure and my year be nothing in your eye truly every man be but a breath . selah . truly every man go on his way like an image he be trouble for no purpose he make a great store of wealth and have no knowledge of who will get it . and now lord what be i wait for ? my hope be in you . make me free from all my sin do not let me be sham by the man of evil behaviour . i be quiet and keep my mouth shut because you have do it . no longer let your hand be hard on me i be waste by the blow of your hand . by the weight of your wrath against man 's sin the glory of his form be waste away truly every man be but a breath . selah . let my prayer come to your ear o lord and give attention to my cry make an answer to my weep for my time here be short before you and in a little time i will be go like all my father . let your wrath be turn away from me so that i may be comfort before i go away from here and become nothing .lt to the chief music maker . of david . a psalm . gt when i be wait quietly for the lord his heart be turn to me and he give ear to my cry . he take me up out of a deep waste place out of the soft and sticky earth he put my foot on a rock and make my step certain . and he put a new song in my mouth even praise to our god number have see it with fear and put their faith in the lord . happy be the man who have faith in the lord and do not give honour to the men of pride or to those who be turn away to deceit . o lord my god great be the wonder which you have do in your thought for u it be not possible to put them out in order before you when i would give an account of them their number be great than i may say . you have no desire for offering of beast or fruit of the earth ears you make for me for burn offering and sin offering you make no request . then i say see i come it be record of me in the roll of the book my delight be to do your pleasure o my god truly your law be in my heart . i have give news of righteousness in the great meeting o lord you have knowledge that i have not keep back my word . your righteousness have not be fold away in my heart i have make clear your true word and your salvation i have not keep secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting . take not away your gentle mercy from me o lord let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever . for unnumbered evil be round about me my sin have overtake me so that i be bent down with their weight they be more than the hair of my head my strength be go because of them . be pleased o lord to take me out of danger o lord come quickly and give me help . let those who go after my soul for it destruction have shame and trouble together let them be turn back and make foolish who take pleasure in my trouble . let those who say to me aha aha ! be surprised because of their shame . let all those who be look for you be glad and have joy in you let the lover of your salvation ever say may the lord be great . though i be poor and in need the lord have me in mind you be my help and my saviour let there be no wait o my god .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt happy be the man who give think to the poor the lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble . the lord will keep him safe and give him life the lord will let him be a blessing on the earth and will not give him into the hand of his hater . the lord will be his support on his bed of pain by you will all his grief be turn to strength . i say lord have mercy on me make my soul well because my faith be in you . my hater say evil against me when will he be dead and his name come to an end ? if one come to see me deceit be in his heart he keep a store of evil which he make public in every place . all my hater be talk secretly together against me they be design my downfall . they say he have an evil disease which will not let him go and now that he be down he will not get up again . even my dear friend in whom i have faith who take bread with me be turn against me . but you o lord have mercy on me lift me up so that i may give them their punishment . by this i see that you have pleasure in me because my hater do not overcome me . and a for me you be my support in my righteousness give me a place before your face for ever . may the lord god of israel be praise through eternal day and for ever . so be it . so be it .lt to the chief music maker . maschil . of the son of korah . gt like the desire of the roe for the water stream so be my soul 's desire for you o god . my soul be dry for need of god the living god when may i come and see the face of god ? my tear have be my food day and night while they keep say to me where be your god ? let my soul be overflow with grief when these thing come back to my mind how i go in company to the house of god with the voice of joy and praise with the song of those who be keep the feast . why be you crush down o my soul ? and why be you trouble in me ? put your hope in god for i will again give him praise who be my help and my god . my soul be crush down in me so i will keep you in mind from the land of jordan and of the hermons from the hill mizar . deep be sound to deep at the noise of your waterfall all your wave have go rolling over me . but the lord will send his mercy in the daytime and in the night his song will be with me a prayer to the god of my life . i will say to god my rock why have you let me go from your memory ? why do i go in sorrow because of the attack of my hater ? the cruel word of my hater be like a crushing of my bone when they say to me every day where be your god ? why be you crush down o my soul ? and why be you trouble in me ? put your hope in god for i will again give him praise who be my help and my god .be my judge o god support my cause against a nation without religion o keep me from the false and evil man . you be the god of my strength why have you put me from you ? why do i go in sorrow because of the attack of my hater ? o send out your light and your true word let them be my guide let them take me to your holy hill and to your tent . then i will go up to the altar of god to the god of my joy i will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music o god my god . why be you crush down o my soul ? and why be you trouble in me ? put your hope in god for i will again give him praise who be my help and my god .lt to the chief music maker . of the son of korah maschil . gt it have come to our ear o god our father have give u the story of the work which you do in their day in the old time uproot the nation with your hand and plant our father in their place cut down the nation but increase the growth of your people . for they do not make the land theirs by their sword and it be not their arm which keep them safe but your right hand and your arm and the light of your face because you have pleasure in them . you be my king and my god order salvation for jacob . through you will we overcome our hater by your name will they be crush under our foot who be violent against u . i will not put faith in my bow my sword will not be my salvation . but it be you who have be our saviour from those who be against u and have put to shame those who have hate for u . our pride be in god at all time to his name we give praise for ever . selah . but now you have send u away from you and put u to shame you do not go out with our army . because of this we be turn back by the attacker those who have hate for u take our good for themselves . you have make u like sheep which be take for meat we be put to flight among the nation . you let your people go for nothing your wealth be not increase by their price . you have make u to be look down on by our neighbour we be laugh at and sham by those who be round about u . our name be a word of shame among the nation a sign for the shaking of head among the people . my downfall be ever before me and i be cover with the shame of my face because of the voice of him who say sharp and bitter word because of the hater and him who be the instrument of punishment . all this have come on u but still we have keep you in our memory and we have not be false to your word . our heart have not go back and our step have not be turn out of your way though you have let u be crush in the place of jackal though we be cover with dark shade . if the name of our god have go out of our mind or if our hand have be stretch out to a strange god will not god make search for it ? for he see the secret of the heart . truly because of you we be put to death every day we be number like sheep for destruction . why be you sleep o lord ? awake ! and come to our help do not give u up for ever . why be your face cover and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate ? for our soul be crush down to the dust our body be stretch out on the earth . up ! and come to our help and give u salvation because of your mercy .lt to the chief music maker put to shoshannim . of the son of korah . maschil . a song of love . gt my heart be flow over with good thing my word be of that which i have make for a king my tongue be the pen of a ready writer . you be fair than the child of men grace be flow through your lip for this cause the blessing of god be with you for ever . put on your sword make it ready at your side o strong chief with your glory and power . and go nobly on in your power because you be good and true and without pride and your right hand will be teach you thing of fear . your arrow be sharp in the heart of the king 's hater because of them the people be fall under you . your seat of power o god be for ever and ever the rod of your kingdom be a rod of honour . you have be a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil and so god your god have put the oil of joy on your head lift you high over all other king . your robe be full of the smell of all sort of perfume and spice music from the king 's ivory house have make you glad . king ' daughter be among your noble woman on your right be the queen in gold of ophir . o daughter give thought and attention and let your ear be open no longer keep in mind your people and your father 's house so will the king have a great desire for you see how beautiful you be because he be your lord give him honour . and the daughter of tyre will be there with an offering those who have wealth among the people will be look for your approval . in the great house the king 's daughter be all shin her clothing be work with gold . she will come before the king in robe of needlework the virgin in her train will come before you . with joy and rapture will they come they will go into the king 's house . your child will take the place of your father so that you may make them ruler over all the earth . i will keep the memory of your name live through all generation and because of this the people will give you praise for ever .lt to the chief music maker . of the son of korah put to alamoth . a song . gt god be our harbour and our strength a very present help in trouble . for this cause we will have no fear even though the earth be change and though the mountain be move in the heart of the sea though it water be sound and troubled and though the mountain be shake with their violent motion . selah . there be a river whose stream make glad the rest place of god the holy place of the tent of the most high . god have take his place in her she will not be move he will come to her help at the dawn of morning . the nation be angry the kingdom be move at the sound of his voice the earth become like wax . the lord of army be with u the god of jacob be our high tower . selah . come see the work of the lord the destruction which he have make in the earth . he put an end to war over all the earth by him the bow be break and the spear cut in two and the carriage burn in the fire . be at peace in the knowledge that i be god i will be lift up among the nation i will be honour through all the earth . the lord of army be with u the god of jacob be our high tower . selah .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of the son of korah . gt o make a glad noise with your hand all you people let your voice go up to god with joy . for the lord most high be to be fear he be a great king over all the earth . he will put down the people under u and the nation under our foot . he will give u our heritage the glory of jacob who be dear to him . selah . god have go up with a glad cry the lord with the sound of the horn . give praise to god make song of praise give praise to our king make song of praise . for god be the king of all the earth make song of praise with knowledge . god be the ruler over the nation god be on the high seat of his holy rule . the ruler of the people have come together with the people of the god of abraham because the power of the earth be god 's he be lift up on high .lt a song . a psalm . of the son of korah . gt great be the lord and greatly to be praise in the town of our god in his holy mountain . beautiful in it high position the joy of all the earth be the mountain of zion the mountain of god the town of the great king . in it building god be see to be a high tower . for see ! the king come together by agreement they be join together . they saw it and so be full of wonder they be trouble and go quickly away in fear . shake come on them and pain a on a woman in childbirth . by you the ship of tarshish be break a by an east wind . a it come to our ear so have we see it in the town of the lord of army in the town of our god god will keep it fix for ever . selah . our thought be of your mercy o god while we be in your temple . a your name be o god so be your praise to the end of the earth your right hand be full of righteousness . let there be joy in the mountain of zion and let the daughter of judah be glad because of your wise decision . make your way about zion and go round it number it tower . take note of it strong wall look well at it fair building so that you may give word of it to the generation which come after . because this god be our god for ever and ever he will be our guide .lt alamoth . to the chief music maker . of the son of korah . a psalm . gt give attention to this all you people let your ear be open all you who be live in the world . high and low together the poor and those who have wealth . from my mouth will come word of wisdom and in the thought of my heart will be knowledge . i will put my teach into a story i will make my dark saying clear with music . what cause have i for fear in the day of evil when the evil do of those who be work for my downfall be round about me ? even of those whose faith be in their wealth and whose heart be lift up because of their store . truly no man may get back his soul for a price or give to god the payment for himself because it take a great price to keep his soul from death and man be not able to give it . so that he might have eternal life and never see the underworld . for he see that wise men come to their end and foolish person of low behaviour come to destruction together let their wealth go to others . the place of the dead be their house for ever and their resting place through all generation those who come after them give their name to their land . but man like the animal do not go on for ever he come to an end like the beast . this be the way of the foolish their silver be for those who come after them and their child get the pleasure of their gold . selah . death will give them their food like sheep the underworld be their fate and they will go down into it their flesh be food for worm their form be waste away the underworld be their resting place for ever . but god will get back my soul for he will take me from the power of death . selah . have no fear when wealth come to a man and the glory of his house be increase for at his death he will take nothing away his glory will not go down after him . though he might have pride in his soul in his life time and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself he will go to the generation of his father he will not see the light again . man like the animal do not go on for ever he come to an end like the beast .lt a psalm . of asaph . gt the god of god even the lord have send out his voice and the earth be full of fear from the come up of the sun to it go down . from zion most beautiful of place god have send out his light . our god will come and will not keep quiet with fire burning before him and storm wind round him . his voice will go out to the heaven and to the earth for the judging of his people let my saint come together to me those who have make an agreement with me by offering . and let the heaven make clear his righteousness for god himself be the judge . selah . give ear o my people to my word o israel i will be a witness against you i be god even your god . i will not take up a cause against you because of your offering or because of your burn offering which be ever before me . i will take no ox out of your house or he goats from your flock for every beast of the woodland be mine and the cattle on a thousand hill . i see all the bird of the mountain and the beast of the field be mine . if i have need of food i would not give you word of it for the earth be mine and all it wealth . be i to take the flesh of the ox for my food or the blood of goat for my drink ? make an offering of praise to god keep the agreement which you have make with the most high let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble i will be your saviour so that you may give glory to me . but to the sinner god say what be you do talk of my law or take the word of my agreement in your mouth ? see that you have no desire for my teach turn your back on my word . when you saw a thief you be in agreement with him and you be join with those who take other men 's wife . you have give your mouth to evil your tongue to word of deceit . you say evil of your brother you make false statement against your mother 's son . these thing have you do and i say nothing it seem to you that i be such a one a yourself but i will make a protest against you and put them in order before your eye . now keep this in mind you who have no memory of god for fear that you may be crush under my hand with no one to give you help whoever make an offering of praise give glory to me and to him who be upright in his way i will make clear the salvation of god .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . when nathan the prophet come to him after he have go in to bath sheba . gt have pity on me o god in your mercy out of a full heart take away my sin . let all my wrongdoing be wash away and make me clean from evil . for i be conscious of my error my sin be ever before me . against you you only have i do wrong working that which be evil in your eye so that your word may be see to be right and you may be clear when you be judge . truly i be form in evil and in sin do my mother give me birth . your desire be for what be true in the inner part in the secret of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom . make me free from sin with hyssop let me be wash white than snow . make me full of joy and rapture so that the bone which have be break may be glad . let your face be turn from my wrongdoing and take away all my sin . make a clean heart in me o god give me a right spirit again . do not put me away from before you or take your holy spirit from me . give me back the joy of your salvation let a free spirit be my support . then will i make your way clear to wrongdoer and sinner will be turn to you . be my saviour from violent death o god the god of my salvation and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness . o lord let my lip be open so that my mouth may make clear your praise . you have no desire for an offering or i would give it you have no delight in burned offering . the offering of god be a broken spirit a broken and sorrow heart o god you will not put from you . do good to zion in your good pleasure build up the wall of jerusalem . then you will have delight in the offering of righteousness in burned offering and offering of beast then they will make offering of ox on your altar .lt to the chief music maker . maschil . of david . when doeg the edomite come to saul say david have come to the house of ahimelech . gt why do you take pride in wrongdoing lift yourself up against the upright man all the day ? purpose destruction use deceit your tongue be like a sharp blade . you have more love for evil than for good for deceit than for work of righteousness . selah . destruction be in all your word o false tongue . but god will put an end to you for ever drive you out from your tent uproot you from the land of the living . selah . the upright will see it with fear and will say laugh at you see this be the man who do not make god his strength but have faith in his good and his property and make himself strong in his wealth . but i be like a branch olive tree in the house of god i have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever . i will give you praise without end for what you have do i will give honour to your name before your saint for it be good .lt to the chief music maker put to mahalath . maschil . of david . gt the foolish man have say in his heart god will not do anything . they be unclean they have do evil work there be not one who do good . god be look down from heaven on the child of men to see if there be any who have wisdom search after god . every one of them have go back they be unclean there be not one who do good no not one . have the worker of evil no knowledge ? they take my people for food a they would take bread they make no prayer to god . they be in great fear where there be no cause for fear for the bone of those who make war on you have be break by god you have put them to shame because god have no desire for them . may the salvation of israel come out of zion ! when the fate of his people be change by god jacob will have joy and israel will be glad .lt to the chief music maker on neginoth . maschil . of david . when the ziphites come and say to saul be not david keep himself secret among u ? gt let your name be my salvation o god let my cause be judge by your strength . let my prayer come before you o god give ear to the word of my mouth . for men who be go after me have come out against me violent men be purpose to take my soul they have not put god before their eye . selah . see god be my helper the lord be the great supporter of my soul . let the evil work of my hater come back on them again let them be cut off by your good faith . freely will i make my offering to you i will give praise to your name o lord for it be good . because it have be my saviour from all my trouble and my eye have see the punishment of my hater .lt to the chief music maker on neginoth . maschil . of david . gt give hearing to my prayer o god and let not your ear be shut against my request . give thought to me and let my prayer be answer i have be make low in sorrow i be trouble because of the voice of the cruel one because of the loud cry of the evil doer for they put a weight of evil on me and they be cruel in their hate for me . my heart be deeply wounded and the fear of death have come on me . fear and shake have come over me with deep fear i be cover . and i say if only i have wing like a dove ! for then i would go in flight from here and be at rest . i would go wander far away live in the waste land . selah . i would quickly take cover from the drive storm and from the violent wind . send destruction on them o lord make a division of tongue among them for i have see fighting and violent act in the town . by day and night they go round the town on the wall trouble and sorrow be in the heart of it . evil be there cruel rule and deceit be ever in the street . for it be not my hater who say evil of me that would have be no grief to me it be not one outside the number of my friend who make himself strong against me or i would have keep myself from him in a secret place but it be you my equal my guide my well love friend . we have love talk together and go to the house of god in company . let the hand of death come on them suddenly and let them go down live into the underworld because evil be in their house and in their heart . a for me i will make my prayer to god and he will be my saviour . in the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day i will make my prayer with sound of grief and my voice will come to his ear . he have take my soul away from the attack which be make against me and give it peace for great number be against me . god will give thought to me he who from early time be strong will send pain and trouble on them . selah . because they be unchanged they have no fear of god . he have put out his hand against those who be at peace with him he have not keep his agreement . the word of his mouth be smooth than butter but war be in his heart his word be soft than oil but they be sharp sword . put your care on the lord and he will be your support he will not let the upright man be move . but you o god will send them down into the underworld the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their day be end but i will have faith in you .lt to the chief music maker put to jonath elem rehokim . of david . michtam . when the philistine take him in gath . gt have mercy on me o god for man be attempt my destruction every day he make cruel attack against me . my hater be ever ready to put an end to me great number be lift themselves up against me . in the time of my fear i will have faith in you . in god will i give praise to his word in god have i put my hope i will have no fear of what flesh may do to me . every day they make wrong use of my word all their thought be against me for evil . they come together they be wait in secret place they take note of my step they be wait for my soul . by evil do they will not get free from punishment . in wrath o god let the people be make low . you have see my wandering put the drop from my eye into your bottle be they not in your record ? when i send up my cry to you my hater will be turn back i be certain of this for god be with me . in god will i give praise to his word in the lord will i give praise to his word . in god have i put my hope i will have no fear of what man may do to me . i keep the memory of my debt to you o god i will give you the offering of praise . because you have take my soul from the power of death and keep my foot from fall so that i may be walk before god in the light of life .lt to the chief music maker put to al tashheth . michtam . of david . when he go in flight from saul in the hole of the rock . gt have mercy on me o god have mercy on me for the hope of my soul be in you i will keep myself safely under the shade of your wing till these trouble be past . i will send up my cry to the most high god to god who do all thing for me . he will send from heaven and take me from the power of him whose desire be for my destruction . god will send out his mercy and his good faith . my soul be among lion i be stretch out among those who be on fire even the son of men whose teeth be spear and arrow and whose tongue be a sharp sword . o god be lift up high than the heaven let your glory be over all the earth . they have make ready a net for my step my soul be bent down they have make a great hole before me and have go down into it themselves . selah . my heart be fix o god my heart be fix i will make song and give praise . you be my glory let the instrument of music be awake i myself will be awake with the dawn . i will give you praise o lord among the people i will make song to you among the nation . for your mercy be great stretch up to the heaven and your righteousness go up to the cloud . be lift up o god high than the heaven let your glory be over all the earth .lt to the chief music maker put to al tashheth . michtam . of david . gt be there righteousness in your mouth o you god ? be you upright judge o you son of men ? the purpose of your heart be evil your hand be full of cruel doings on the earth . the evil doer be strange from the first from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way say false word . their poison be like the poison of a snake they be like the adder whose ear be shut who will not be move by the voice of the wonder worker however great be his power . o god let their teeth be break in their mouth let the great teeth of the young lion be pull out o lord . let them be turn to liquid like the ever flow water let them be cut off like the grass by the way . let them be like an after birth which be turn to water and come to an end like the fruit of a woman who give birth before her time let them not see the sun . before they be conscious of it let them be cut down like thorn let a strong wind take them away like waste growth . the upright man will be glad when he see their punishment his foot will be wash in the blood of the evil doer . so that men will say truly there be a reward for righteousness truly there be a god who be judge on the earth .lt to the chief music maker put to at tashheth . michtam . of david . when saul send and they be watch the house to put him to death . gt take me out of the hand of the cruel one o my god keep me safe from those who come up against me . take me out of the power of the worker of evil and keep me safe from the men of blood . for see they be watch in secret for my soul the strong have come together against me ? but not because of my sin or my evil do o lord . for no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready be awake and come to my help and see . you o lord god of army be the god of israel come now and give punishment to the nation have no mercy on any worker of deceit . selah . they come back in the evening they make a noise like a dog and go round the town . see hate be drop from their lip curse be on their tongue they say who give attention to it ? but you be laugh at them o lord you will make sport of all the nation . o my strength i will put my hope in you because god be my strong tower . the god of my mercy will go before me god will let me see my desire effect on my hater . put them not to death for so my people will keep the memory of them let them be send in all direction by your power make them low o lord our saviour . because of the sin of their mouth and the word of their lip let them even be take in their pride and for their curse and their deceit put an end to them in your wrath put an end to them so that they may not be see again let them see that god be rule in jacob and to the end of the earth . selah . and in the evening let them come back and make a noise like a dog and go round the town . let them go wander up and down in search of food and be there all night if they have not enough . but i will make song of your power yes i will give cry of joy for your mercy in the morning because you have be my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble . to you o my strength will i make my song because god be my high tower even the god of my mercy .lt to the chief music maker put to shushan eduth . michtam . of david . for teach . when he be fight against aram naharaim and aramzobah when joab come back and put twelve thousand of the edomites to death in the valley of salt . gt god you have put u away from you you have send u in all direction you have be angry o be turn to u again . by the power of your hand the earth be shake and broken make it strong again for it be move . you have make the people see hard time you have give u the wine of shake for our drink . give a safe place to those who have fear of you where they may go in flight from before the bow . selah . so that your loved one may be make safe let your right hand be my salvation and give me an answer . god have say in his holy place i will be glad i will make a division of shechem and the valley of succoth will be measure out . gilead be mine and manasseh be mine and ephraim be the strength of my head judah be my law giver moab be my washpot over edom will i put out my shoe over philistia will a glad cry be sound . who will take me into the strong town ? who will be my guide into edom ? have not you put u away o god ? and you have not go out with our army . give u help in our trouble for there be no help in man . through god we will do great thing for through him our hater will be crush under our foot .lt to the chief music maker . on a corded instrument . of david . gt let my cry come to you o god let your ear be open to my prayer . from the end of the earth will i send up my cry to you when my heart be overcome take me to the rock which be over high for me . for you have be my secret place and my high tower from those who make war on me . i will make your tent my rest place for ever i will keep myself under the cover of your wing . selah . for you o god have make answer to my prayer you have give me the heritage of those who give honour to your name . you will give the king long life and make his year go on through the generation . may the seat of his authority be before god for ever may mercy and righteousness keep him safe . so will i make song in praise of your name for ever give to god that which be right day by day .lt to the chief music maker . after jeduthun . a psalm . of david . gt my soul put all your faith in god for from him come my salvation . he only be my rock and my salvation he be my high tower i will not be greatly move . how long will you go on design evil against a man ? run against him a against a broken wall which be on the point of fall ? their only thought be to put him down from his place of honour their delight be in deceit blessing be in their mouth but curse in their heart . selah . my soul put all your faith in god for from him come my hope . he only be my rock and my salvation he be my high tower i will not be greatly move . in god be my salvation and my glory the rock of my strength and my safe place . have faith in him at all time you people let your heart go flow out before him god be our safe place . selah . truly men of low birth be nothing and men of high position be not what they seem if they be put in the scale together they be less than a breath . have no faith in the reward of evil do or in profit wrongly make if your wealth be increase do not put your hope on it . once have god say twice have it come to my ear that power be god 's and mercy o lord be yours for you give to every man the reward of his work .lt a psalm . of david . when he be in the waste land of judah . gt o god you be my god early will i make my search for you my soul be dry for need of you my flesh be waste with desire for you a a dry and burn land where no water be to see your power and your glory a i have see you in the holy place . because your mercy be good than life my lip will give you praise . so will i go on bless you all my life lift up my hand in your name . my soul will be comfort a with good food and my mouth will give you praise with song of joy when the memory of you come to me on my bed and when i give think to you in the night time . because you have be my help i will have joy in the shade of your wing . my soul keep ever near you your right hand be my support . but those whose desire be my soul 's destruction will go down to the low part of the earth . they will be cut off by the sword they will be food for fox . but the king will have joy in god everyone who take an oath by him will have cause for pride but the false mouth will be stop .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt o god let the voice of my grief come to your ear keep my life from the fear of those who be against me . keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoer from the band of the worker of evil who make their tongue sharp like a sword and whose arrow be point even bitter word so that in secret they may let loose their arrow at the upright suddenly and unseen . they make themselves strong in an evil purpose they make hole for secret net they say who will see it or make discovery of our secret purpose ? the design be frame with care and the inner thought of a man and his heart be deep . but god send out an arrow against them suddenly they be wound . the evil of their tongue be the cause of their fall all those who see them be shake their head at them . and in fear men make public the work of god and give think to his act they get wisdom . the upright will be glad in the lord and have hope in him and all the lover of righteousness will give him glory .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . a song . gt it be right for you o god to have praise in zion to you let the offering be make . to you o hearer of prayer let the word of all flesh come . evil have overcome u but a for our sin you will take them away . happy be the man of your selection to whom you give a rest place in your house we will be full of the good thing out of your holy place . you will give u an answer in righteousness by great act of power o god of our salvation you who be the hope of all the end of the earth and of the far off land of the sea the god by whose strength the mountain be fix who be rob with power who make the loud voice of the sea quiet and put an end to the sound of it wave . those in the farthest part of the earth have fear when they see your sign the outgoings of the morning and evening be glad because of you . you have give your blessing to the earth water it and make it fertile the river of god be full of water and have make it ready you give men grain . you make the ploughed land full of water you make smooth the slope you make the earth soft with shower send your blessing on it growth . the year be crown with the good you give life give rain be drop from your footstep fall on the grass of the waste land and the little hill be glad on every side . the grass land be thick with flock the valley be full of grain they give glad cry and song of joy .lt to the chief music maker . a song . a psalm . gt send up a glad cry to god all the earth make a song in honour of his name give praise and glory to him . say to god how greatly to be fear be your work ! because of your great power your hater be force to put themselves under your foot . let all the earth give you worship and make song to you let them make song to your name . selah . come and see the work of god he be to be fear in all he do to the child of men . the sea be turn into dry land they go through the river on foot there do we have joy in him . he be rule in power for ever his eye be watch the nation may his hater have no strength against him . selah . give blessing to our god o you people let the voice of his praise be loud because he give u life and have not let our foot be move . for you o god have put u to the test test u by fire like silver . you let u be put in prison chain be put on our leg . you let men go drive over our head we go through fire and through water but you take u out into a wide place . i will come into your house with burned offering i will make payment of my debt to you keep the word which come from my lip and which my mouth say when i be in trouble . i will give you burn offering of fat beast and the smoke of sheep i will make offering of ox and goat . selah . come give ear to me all you god fear men so that i may make clear to you what he have do for my soul . my voice go up to him and i be lift up from the underworld . i say in my heart the lord will not give ear to me but truly god 's ear have be open he have give attention to the voice of my prayer . praise be to god who have not take away his good faith and his mercy from me .lt to the chief music maker . with corded instrument . a psalm . a song . gt may god give u mercy and bless and let the light of his face be shin on u selah . so that men may see your way on the earth and your salvation among all nation . let the people give you praise o god let all the people give you praise . o let the nation be glad and make song of joy for you will be the judge of the people in righteousness guide the nation of the earth . selah . let the people give you praise o god let all the people give you praise . the earth have give her increase and god even our god will give u his blessing . god will give u his bless so let all the end of the earth be in fear of him .lt to the chief music maker . of david . a psalm . a song . gt let god be see and let his hater be put to flight let those who be against him be turn back before him . let them be like smoke before the driving wind a wax turn soft before the fire so let them come to an end before the power of god . but let the upright be glad let them have delight before god let them be full of joy . make song to god make song of praise to his name make a way for him who come through the waste land his name be jah be glad before him . a father to those who have no father a judge of the widow be god in his holy place . those who be without friend god put in family he make free those who be in chain but those who be turn away from him be give a dry land . o god when you go out before your people wander through the waste land selah . the earth be shake and the heaven be stream because god be present even sinai itself be move before god the god of israel . you o god do freely send the rain give strength to the weariness of your heritage . those whose rest place be there even the poor be comfort by your good thing o god . the lord give the word great be the number of the woman who make it public . king of army quickly go in flight and the woman in the house make a division of their good . will you take your rest among the flock ? like the wing of a dove cover with silver and it feather with yellow gold . when the most high put the king to flight it be as white a snow in salmon . a hill of god be the hill of bashan a hill with high top be the hill of bashan . why be you look with envy you high hill on the hill desire by god a his rest place ? truly god will make it his house for ever . the war carriage of god be among israel 's thousand the lord have come from sinai to the holy place . you have go up on high take your prisoner with you you have take offering from men the lord god have take his place on the seat of his power . praise be to the lord who be our support day by day even the god of our salvation . selah . our god be for u a god of salvation his be the way out of death . the head of the hater of god will be crush even the head of him who still go on in his evil way . the lord say i will make them come back from bashan and from the deep part of the sea so that your foot may be red with blood and the tongue of your dog with the same . we see your go o god even the go of my god my king into the holy place . the maker of song go before the player of music come after among the young girl play on brass instrument . give praise to god in the great meeting even the lord you who come from the fountain of israel . there be little benjamin rule them the chief of judah and their army the ruler of zebulun and the ruler of naphtali . o god send out your strength the strength o god with which you have do great thing for u out of your temple in jerusalem . say sharp word to the beast among the water plant the band of strong one with the lord of the people put an end to the people whose delight be in war . king will give you offer they will come out of egypt from pathros will come offering of silver ethiopia will be stretch out her hand to god . make song to god you kingdom of the earth o make song of praise to the lord selah . to him who go or the cloud of heaven the heaven which be from early time he send out his voice of power . make clear that strength be god 's he be lift up over israel and his power be in the cloud . o god you be to be fear in your holy place the god of israel give strength and power to his people . praise be to god .lt to the chief music maker put to shoshannim . of david . gt be my saviour o god because the water have come in even to my neck . my foot be deep in the soft earth where there be no support i have come into deep water the wave be flow over me . i be tire with my cry my throat be burn my eye be waste with wait for my god . those who have hate for me without cause be great in number than the hair of my head those who be against me falsely desire my destruction be very strong i give back what i have not take away . o god you see how foolish i be and my wrongdoing be clear to you . let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me o lord god of army let not those who be wait for you be make low because of me o god of israel . i have be wound with sharp word because of you my face have be cover with shame . i have become strange to my brother and like a man from a far country to my mother 's child . i be on fire with passion for your house and the hard thing which be say about you have come on me . my bitter weeping and my go without food be turn to my shame . when i put on the clothing of grief they say evil of me . i be a cause of wonder to those in authority a song to those who be give to strong drink . but a for me let my prayer be make to you o lord at a time when you be pleased o god give me an answer in your great mercy for your salvation be certain . take me from the grip of the sticky earth so that i may not go down into it let me be lift up from the deep water . let me not be cover by the flow water let not the deep water go over my head and let me not be shut up in the underworld . give an answer to my word o lord for your mercy be good be turn to me because of your great pity . let not your face be cover from your servant for i be in trouble quickly give me an answer . come near to my soul for it salvation be my saviour because of those who be against me . you have see my shame how i be laugh at and make low my hater be all before you . my heart be break by bitter word i be full of grief i make a search for some to have pity on me but there be no one i have no comforter . they give me poison for my food and bitter wine for my drink . let their table before them be for their destruction let their feast become a net to take them . let their eye be blind so that they may not see let their body for ever be shake . let your curse come on them let the heat of your wrath overtake them . give their house to destruction and let there be no one in their tent . because they be cruel to him against whom your hand be turn they make bitter the grief of him who be wound by you . let their punishment be increase let them not come into your righteousness . let their name be take from the book of the living let them not be number with the upright . but i be poor and full of sorrow let me be lift up by your salvation o lord . i will give praise to the name of god with a song i will give glory to him for what he have do . this will be more pleasing to the lord than an ox or a young ox of full growth . the poor will see it and be glad you who be lover of god let your heart have life . for the ear of the lord be open to the poor and he take think for his prisoner . let the heaven and the earth give praise to him the sea and everything move in them . for god will be the saviour of zion and the builder of the town of judah so that it may be their resting place and heritage . the seed of his servant will have their part in it and there the lover of his name will have rest .lt to the chief music maker . of david . to keep in memory . gt let your salvation come quickly o god come quickly to my help o lord . let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble let those who have evil design against me be turn back and make foolish . let those who say aha aha ! be turn back a a reward of their shame . let all those who be look for you be glad and have joy in you let the lover of your salvation ever say may god be great . but i be poor and in need come to me quickly o god you be my help and my saviour let there be no wait o lord .in you o lord have i put my hope let me never be sham . keep me safe in your righteousness and come to my help give ear to my voice and be my saviour . be my strong rock the strong place of my salvation for you be my rock and my safe place . o my god take me out of the hand of the sinner out of the hand of the evil and cruel man . for you be my hope o lord god i have have faith in you from the time when i be young . you have be my support from the day of my birth you take me out of my mother 's body my praise will be ever of you . i be a wonder to all but you be my strong tower . my mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day . do not give me up when i be old be my help even when my strength be go . for my hater be wait secretly for me and those who be watch for my soul be band together in their evil design say god have give him up go after him and take him for he have no helper . o god be not far from me o my god come quickly to my help . let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame let my hater be make low and have no honour . but i will go on ever hop and increase in all your praise . my mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day for they be more than may be measure . i will give news of the great act of the lord god my word will be of your righteousness and of yours only . o god you have be my teacher from the time when i be young and i have be talk of your work of wonder even till now . now when i be old and grey head o god give me not up till i have make clear your strength to this generation and your power to all those to come . your righteousness o god be very high you have do great thing o god who be like you ? you who have send great and bitter trouble on me will give me life again lift me up from the deep water of the underworld . you will make me great than before and give me comfort on every side . i will give praise to you with instrument of music o my god for you be true i will make song to you with music o holy one of israel . joy will be on my lip when i make melody to you and in my soul to which you have give salvation . my tongue will be talk of your righteousness all the day for those whose purpose be to do me evil have be crush and put to shame .lt of solomon . gt give the king your authority o god and your righteousness to the king 's son . may he be a judge of your people in righteousness and make true decision for the poor . may the mountain give peace to the people and the hill righteousness . may he be a judge of the poor among the people may he give salvation to the child of those who be in need by him let the violent be crush . may his life go on as long a the sun and moon through all generation . may he come down like rain on the cut grass like shower water the earth . in his day may the upright do well live in peace as long a there be a moon in heaven . let his kingdom be from sea to sea from the river to the end of the earth . let those who be against him go down before him and let his hater be low in the dust . let the king of tarshish and of the island come back with offering let the king of sheba and seba give of their store . yes let all king go down before him let all nation be his servant . for he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry and to him who be in need without a helper . he will have pity on the poor and be the saviour of those who be in need . he will keep their soul free from evil design and violent attack and their blood will be of value in his eye . may he have long life and may gold from sheba be give to him may prayer be make for him at all time may bless be on him every day . may there be wide stretch field of grain in the land shake on the top of the mountain full of fruit like lebanon may it stem be unnumbered like the grass of the earth . may his name go on for ever as long a the sun may men be bless themselves by him may all nation be bless his name . praise be to the lord god the god of israel the only doer of wonder . praise to the glory of his noble name for ever let all the earth be full of his glory . so be it so be it . the prayer of david the son of jesse be end . lt a psalm . of asaph . gttruly god be good to israel even to such a be clean in heart . but a for me my foot have almost go from under me i be near to slip because of my envy of the men of pride when i saw the well be of the wrongdoer . for they have no pain their body be fat and strong . they be not in trouble a others be they have no part in the unhappy fate of men . for this reason pride be round them like a chain they be clothe with violent behaviour a with a robe . their eye be burst with fat they have more than their heart 's desire . their thought be deep with evil design their talk from their seat of power be of cruel act . their mouth go up to heaven their tongue go walk through the earth . for this reason they be full of bread and water be ever flow for them . and they say how will the lord see this ? be there knowledge in the most high ? truly such be the sinner they do well at all time and their wealth be increase . a for me i have make my heart clean to no purpose wash my hand in righteousness for i have be trouble all the day every morning have i undergone punishment . if i would make clear what it be like i would say you be false to the generation of your child . when my thought be turn to see the reason of this it be a weariness in my eye till i go into god 's holy place and saw the end of the evil doer . you put their foot where there be danger of slip so that they go down into destruction . how suddenly be they waste ! fear be the cause of their destruction . a a dream when one be awake they be end they be like an image go out of mind when sleep be over . my heart be make bitter and i be pain by the bite of grief a for me i be foolish and without knowledge i be like a beast before you . but still i be ever with you you have take me by my right hand . your wisdom will be my guide and later you will put me in a place of honour . whom have i in heaven but you ? and have you i have no desire for anything on earth . my flesh and my heart be waste away but god be the rock of my heart and my eternal heritage . for those who be far away from you will come to destruction you will put an end to all those who have not keep faith with you . but it be good for me to come near to god i have put my faith in the lord god so that i may make clear all his work .lt maschil . of asaph . gt of god why have you put u away from you for ever ? why be the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who be your care ? keep in mind your band of worshipper for whom you give payment in the day which be past whom you take for yourself a the people of your heritage even this mountain of zion which have be your rest place . go up and see the unending destruction all the evil which your hater have do in the holy place send out their voice like lion among your worshipper they have put up their sign to be see . they be cut down like a man whose blade be lift up against the thick tree . your door be break down with hammer and iron blade . they have put on fire your holy place they have make the place of your name unclean pull it down to the earth . they have say in their heart let u put an end to them all together they have give over to the fire all god 's place of worship in the land . we do not see our sign there be no longer any prophet or anyone among u to say how long . o god how long will those who be against u say cruel thing ? will the hater go on look down on your name for ever ? why be you keep back your hand and cover your right hand in your robe ? for from the past god be my king work salvation in the earth . the sea be part in two by your strength the head of the great sea beast be break . the head of the great snake be crush by you you give them a food to the fish of the sea . you make valley for fountain and spring you make the ever flow river dry . the day be yours and the night be yours you make the light and the sun . by you all the limit of the earth be fix you have make summer and winter . keep this in mind o lord that your hater have say cruel thing and that your name have be look down on by a people of evil behaviour . o give not the soul of your dove to the hawk let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever . keep in mind your undertaking for the dark place of the earth be full of pride and cruel act . o let not the crush be turn back in shame let the low man and the poor give praise to your name . up ! o god be the judge of your cause keep in mind the bitter thing which the man of evil behaviour say against you every day . keep in mind the voice of your hater the outcry of those who come against you go up every day .lt to the chief music maker put to al tashheth . a psalm . of asaph . a song . gt to you o god we give praise to you we give praise and those who give honour to your name make clear your work of power . when the right time have come i will be the judge in righteousness . when the earth and all it people become feeble i be the support of it pillar . selah . i say to the men of pride let your pride be go and to the sinner let not your horn be lift up . let not your horn be lift up let no more word of pride come from your outstretched neck . for honour do not come from the east or from the west or uplift from the south but god be the judge put down one and lift up another . for in the hand of the lord be a cup and the wine be red it be well mixed overflow from his hand he will make all the sinner of the earth take of it even to the last drop . but i will ever be full of joy make song of praise to the god of jacob . by him will all the horn of the sinner be cut off but the horn of the upright will be lift up .lt to the chief music maker put to neginoth . a psalm . of asaph . a song . gt in judah be the knowledge of god his name be great in israel in salem be his tent his rest place in zion . there be the arrow of the bow broken there he put an end to body cover sword and fight . selah . you be shin and full of glory more than the eternal mountain . go be the wealth of the strong their last sleep have overcome them the men of war have become feeble . at the voice of your wrath o god of jacob deep sleep have overcome carriage and horse . you you be to be fear who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath ? from heaven you give your decision the earth in it fear give no sound when god take his place a judge for the salvation of the poor on the earth . selah . the ... will give you praise the rest of ... give to the lord your god what be his by right let all who be round him give offering to him who be to be fear . he put an end to the wrath of ruler he be fear by the king of the earth .lt to the chief music maker . after jeduthun . of asaph . a psalm . gt i be cry to god with my voice even to god with my voice and he give ear to me . in the day of my trouble my heart be turn to the lord my hand be stretch out in the night without rest my soul would not be comfort . i will keep god in memory with sound of grief my thought be troubled and my spirit be overcome . selah . you keep my eye from sleep i be so troubled that no word come . my thought go back to the day of the past to the year which be go . the memory of my song come back to me in the night my thought be move in my heart my spirit be search with care . will the lord put me away for ever ? will he be kind no longer ? be his mercy quite go for ever ? have his word come to nothing ? have god put away the memory of his pity ? be his mercy shut up by his wrath ? selah . and i say it be a weight on my spirit but i will keep in mind the year of the right hand of the most high . i will keep in mind the work of jah i will keep the memory of your wonder in the past . i will give thought to all your work while my mind go over your act of power . your way o god be holy what god be so great a our god ? you be the god who do work of power you have make your strength clear to the nation . with your arm you have make your people free the son of jacob and joseph . selah . the water saw you o god the water saw you they be in fear even the deep be trouble . the cloud send out water the sky give out a sound truly your arrow go far and wide . the voice of your thunder go roll on the world be flame with the light of the storm the earth be shake . your way be in the sea and your road in the great water there be no knowledge of your footstep . you be guide your people like a flock by the hand of moses and aaron .lt maschil . of asaph . gt give ear o my people to my law let your ear be bend down to the word of my mouth . open my mouth i will give out a story even the dark saying of old time which have come to our hearing and our knowledge a they be give to u by our father . we will not keep them secret from our child we will make clear to the come generation the praise of the lord and his strength and the great work of wonder which he have do . he put up a witness in jacob and make a law in israel which he give to our father so that they might give knowledge of them to their child so that the generation to come might have knowledge of them even the child of the future who would give word of them to their child so that they might put their hope in god and not let god 's work go out of their mind but keep his law and not be like their father a stiff necked and uncontrolled generation a generation whose heart be hard whose spirit be not true to god . the child of ephraim arm with bow be turn back on the day of the fight . they be not rule by god 's word and they would not go in the way of his law they let his work go out of their memory and the wonder which he have make them see . he do great work before the eye of their father in the land of egypt in the field of zoan . the sea be cut in two so that they might go through the water be mass together on this side and on that . in the daytime he be guide them in the cloud and all through the night with a light of fire . the rock of the waste land be break by his power and he give them drink a out of the deep water . he make stream come out of the rock and water come flow down like river . and they go on sin against him even more turn away from the most high in the waste land test god in their heart request meat for their desire . they say bitter word against god say be god able to make ready a table in the waste land ? see the rock be cut open by his power so that the water come rush out and overflow stream be he able to give u bread ? be he able to get meat for his people ? so these thing come to the lord 's ear and he be angry and a fire be light against jacob and wrath come up against israel because they have no faith in god and no hope in his salvation . and he give order to the cloud on high and the door of heaven be open and he send down manna like rain for their food and give them the grain of heaven . man take part in the food of strong one he send them meat in full measure . he send an east wind from heaven drive on the south wind by his power . he send down meat on them like dust and feather bird like the sand of the sea and he let it come down into their resting place round about their tent . so they have food and be full for he give them their desire but they be not turn from their desire and while the food be still in their mouth the wrath of god come on them and put to death the fat of them and put an end to the young men of israel . for all this they go on sin even more and have no faith in his great wonder . so their day be waste like a breath and their year in trouble . when he send death on them then they make search for him turn to him and look for him with care in the memory that god be their rock and the most high god their saviour . but their lip be false to him and their tongue be untrue to him and their heart be not right with him and they do not keep their agreement with him . but he be full of pity have forgiveness for sin and do not put an end to man frequently turn back his wrath and not be violently angry . so he keep in mind that they be only flesh a breath which be quickly go and will not come again . how frequently do they go against him in the waste land and give him cause for grief in the dry place ! again they put god to the test and give pain to the holy one of israel . they do not keep in mind the work of his hand or the day when he take them from the power of their hater how he have do his sign in egypt and his wonder in the field of zoan so that their river be turn to blood and they be not able to get drink from their stream . he send different sort of fly among them poison their flesh and frog for their destruction . he give the increase of their field to worm the fruit of their industry to the locust . he send ice for the destruction of their vine their tree be damage by the bitter cold . ice be rain down on their cattle thunderstorm send destruction among the flock . he send on them the heat of his wrath his bitter disgust let loose evil angel among them . he let his wrath have it way he do not keep back their soul from death but give their life to disease . he give to destruction all the first son of egypt the first fruit of their strength in the tent of ham but he take his people out like sheep guide them in the waste land like a flock . he take them on safely so that they have no fear but their hater be cover by the sea . and he be their guide to his holy land even to the mountain which his right hand have make his drive out nation before them mark out the line of their heritage and give the people of israel their tent for a resting place . but they be bitter against the most high god test him and not keep his law their heart be turn back and untrue like their father they be turn to one side like a twisted bow . they make him angry with their high place move him to wrath with their image . when this come to god 's ear he be very angry and give up israel completely so that he go away from the holy place in shiloh the tent which he have put among men and he let his strength be take prisoner and give his glory into the hand of his hater . he give his people up to the sword and be angry with his heritage . their young men be burn in the fire and their virgin be not praise in the bride song . their priest be put to death by the sword and their widow make no weep for them . then be the lord like one awake from sleep and like a strong man cry out because of wine . his hater be turn back by his blow and sham for ever . and he put the tent of joseph on one side and take not the tribe of ephraim but he take the tribe of judah for himself and the mountain of zion in which he have pleasure . and he make his holy place like the high heaven like the earth which be fix by him for ever . he take david to be his servant take him from the place of the flock from look after the sheep which be give milk he take him to give food to jacob his people and to israel his heritage . so he give them food with an upright heart guide them by the wisdom of his hand .lt a psalm . of asaph . gt o god the nation have come into your heritage they have make your holy temple unclean they have make jerusalem a mass of broken wall . they have give the body of your servant a food to the bird of the air and the flesh of your saint to the beast of the earth . their blood have be flow like water round about jerusalem there be no one to put them in their last resting place . we be look down on by our neighbour we be laugh at and make sport of by those who be round u . how long o lord ? will you be angry for ever ? will your wrath go on burn like fire ? let your wrath be on the nation who have no knowledge of you and on the kingdom who have not make prayer to your name . for they have take jacob for their meat and make waste his house . do not keep in mind against u the sin of our father let your mercy come to u quickly for we have be make very low . give u help o god of our salvation for the glory of your name take u out of danger and give u forgiveness for our sin because of your name . why may the nation say where be their god ? let payment for the blood of your servant be make openly among the nation before our eye . let the cry of the prisoner come before you with your strong arm make free the child of death and give punishment seven time over into the breast of our neighbour for the bitter word which they have say against you o lord . so we your people and the sheep of your flock will give you glory for ever we will go on praising you through all generation .lt to the chief music maker put to shoshannim eduth . of asaph . a psalm . gt give ear o keeper of israel guide joseph like a flock you who have your seat on the winged one let your glory be see . before ephraim and benjamin and manasseh let your strength be awake from sleep and come a our salvation . take u back again o god let u see the shining of your face and let u be safe . o lord god of army how long will your wrath be burn against the rest of your people ? you have give them the bread of weep for food for their drink you have give them sorrow in great measure . you make u a cause of war among our neighbour our hater be laugh at u among themselves . take u back again o god of army let u see the shining of your face and let u be safe . you take a vine out of egypt drive out the nation and plant it in their land . you make ready a place for it so that it might take deep root and it send out it branch over all the land . the mountain be cover with it shade and the great tree with it branch . it send out it arm to the sea and it branch to the river . why be it wall break down by your hand so that all who go by may take it fruit ? it be uproot by the pig from the wood the beast of the field get their food from it . come back o god of army from heaven let your eye be turn to this vine and give your mind to it even to the tree which be plant by your right hand and to the branch which you make strong for yourself . it be burn with fire it be cut down they be make waste by the wrath of your face . let your hand be on the man of your right hand on the son of man whom you make strong for yourself . so will we not be turn back from you keep u in life and we will give praise to your name . take u back o lord god of army let u see the shining of your face and let u be safe .lt to the chief music maker put to the gittith . of asaph . gt make a song to god our strength make a glad cry to the god of jacob . take up the melody play on an instrument of music even on corded instrument . let the horn be sound in the time of the new moon at the full moon on our holy feast day for this be a rule for israel and a law of the god of jacob . he give it to joseph a a witness when he go out over the land of egypt then the word of a strange tongue be sound in my ear . i take the weight from his back his hand be make free from the basket . you give a cry in your trouble and i make you free i give you an answer in the secret place of the thunder i put you to the test at the water of meribah . selah . give ear o my people and i will give you my word o israel if you will only do a i say ! there be to be no strange god among you you be not to give worship to any other god . i be the lord your god who take you up from the land of egypt let your mouth be open wide so that i may give you food . but my people do not give ear to my voice israel would have nothing to do with me . so i give them up to the desire of their heart that they might go after their evil purpose . if only my people would give ear to me walk in my way ! i would quickly overcome their hater my hand would be turn against those who make war on them . the hater of the lord would be break and their destruction would be eternal . i would give them the best grain for food you would be full of honey from the rock .lt a psalm . of asaph . gt god be in the meeting place of god he be judge among the god . how long will you go on judge falsely have respect for the person of evil doer ? selah . give ear to the cause of the poor and the child without father let those who be trouble and in need have their right . be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing take them out of the hand of the evil doer . they have no knowledge or sense they go about in the dark all the base of the earth be move . i say you be gods all of you be the son of the most high but you will come to death like men fall like one of the ruler of the earth . up ! o god come a judge of the earth for all the nation be your heritage .lt a song . a psalm . of asaph . gt o god do not keep quiet let your lip be open and take no rest o god . for see ! those who make war on you be out of control your hater be lift up their head . they have make wise design against your people talk together against those whom you keep in a secret place . they have say come let u put an end to them a a nation so that the name of israel may go out of man 's memory . for they have all come to an agreement they be all join together against you the tent of edom and the ishmaelites moab and the hagarites gebal and ammon and amalek the philistine and the people of tyre assur be join with them they have become the support of the child of lot . selah . do to them what you do to the midianites what you do to sisera and jabin at the stream of kishon who come to destruction at en dor their body become dust and waste . make their chief like oreb and zeeb and all their ruler like zebah and zalmunna who have say let u take for our heritage the rest place of god . o my god make them like the roll dust like dry stem before the wind . a fire burn a wood and a a flame cause fire on the mountain so go after them with your strong wind and let them be full of fear because of your storm . let their face be full of shame so that they may give honour to your name o lord . let them be overcome and trouble for ever let them be put to shame and come to destruction so that men may see that you only whose name be yahweh be most high over all the earth .lt to the chief music maker put to the gittith a psalm . of the son of korah . gt how dear be your tent o lord of army ! the passion of my soul 's desire be for the house of the lord my heart and my flesh be cry out for the living god . the little bird have place for themselves where they may put their young even your altar o lord of army my king and my god . happy be they whose rest place be in your house they will still be praise you . selah . happy be the man whose strength be in you in whose heart be the highway to zion . go through the valley of balsam tree they make it a place of spring it be clothe with blessing by the early rain . they go from strength to strength every one of them come before god in zion . o lord god of army let my prayer come to you give ear o god of jacob . selah . o god let your eye be on him who be our safe cover and let your heart be turn to your king . for a day in your house be good than a thousand . it be well to be a door keeper in the house of my god than to be live in the tent of sin . the lord god be our sun and our strength the lord will give grace and glory he will not keep back any good thing from those whose way be upright . o lord of army happy be the man whose hope be in you .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of the son of korah . gt lord you be good to your land change the fate of jacob . the wrongdoing of your people have forgiveness all their sin have be cover . selah . you be no long angry you be turn from the heat of your wrath . come back to u o god of our salvation and be angry with u no longer . will you go on be angry with u for ever ? will you keep your wrath against u through all the long generation ? will you not give u life again so that your people may be glad in you ? let u see your mercy o lord and give u your salvation . i will give ear to the voice of the lord for he will say word of peace to his people and to his saint but let them not go back to their foolish way . truly his salvation be near to his worshipper so that glory may be in our land . mercy and faith have come together righteousness and peace have give one another a kiss . faith come up from the earth like a plant righteousness be look down from heaven . the lord will give what be good and our land will give it increase . righteousness will go before him make a way for his footstep .lt a prayer . of david . gt let your ear be open to my voice o lord and give me an answer for i be poor and in need . keep my soul for i be true to you o my god give salvation to your servant whose hope be in you . have mercy on me o lord for my cry go up to you all the day . make glad the soul of your servant for it be lift up to you o lord . you be good o lord and full of forgiveness your mercy be great to all who make their cry to you . o lord give ear to my prayer and take note of the sound of my request . in the day of my trouble i send up my cry to you for you will give me an answer . there be no god like you o lord there be no work like your work . let all the nation whom you have make come and give worship to you o lord give glory to your name . for you be great and do great work of wonder you only be god . make your way clear to me o lord i will go on my way in your faith let my heart be glad in the fear of your name . i will give you praise o lord my god with all my heart i will give glory to your name for ever . for your mercy to me be great you have take my soul up from the deep place of the underworld . o god men of pride have come up against me and the army of violent men would take my life they have not put you before them . but you o lord be a god full of pity and forgiveness slow to get angry great in mercy and wisdom . o be turn to me and have mercy on me give your strength to your servant and your salvation to the son of her who be your servant . give me a sign for good so that my hater may see it and be sham because you lord have be my help and comfort .lt of the son of korah . a psalm . a song . gt this house be rest on the holy mountain . the lord have more love for the door of zion than for all the tent of jacob . noble thing be say of you o town of god . selah . rahab and babylon will be name among those who have knowledge of me see philistia and tyre with ethiopia this man have his birth there . and of zion it will be say this or that man have his birth there and the most high will make her strong . the lord will keep in mind when he be write the record of the people that this man have his birth there . selah . the player on instrument will be there and the dancer will say all my spring be in you .lt a song . a psalm . of the son of korah . to the chief music maker put to mahalath leannoth . maschil . of heman the ezrahite . gt o lord god of my salvation i have be cry to you for help by day and by night let my prayer come before you give ear to my cry for my soul be full of evil and my life have come near to the underworld . i be number among those who go down into the earth i have become like a man for whom there be no help my soul be among the dead like those in the underworld to whom you give no more thought for they be cut off from your care . you have put me in the low deep even in dark place . the weight of your wrath be crush me all your wave have overcome me . selah . you have send my friend far away from me you have make me a disgust thing in their eye i be shut up and not able to come out . my eye be waste away because of my trouble lord my cry have go up to you every day my hand be stretch out to you . will you do work of wonder for the dead ? will the shade come back to give you praise ? selah . will the story of your mercy be give in the house of the dead ? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction ? may there be knowledge of your wonder in the dark ? or of your righteousness where memory be dead ? but to you do i send up my cry o lord in the morning my prayer come before you . lord why have you send away my soul ? why be your face cover from me ? i have be trouble and in fear of death from the time when i be young your wrath be hard on me and i have no strength . the heat of your wrath have go over me i be break by your cruel punishment . they be round me all the day like water they have make a circle about me . you have send my friend and lover far from me i be go from the memory of those who be dear to me .lt maschil . of ethan the ezrahite . gt my song will be of the mercy of the lord for ever with my mouth will i make his faith clear to all generation . for you have say mercy will be make strong for ever my faith will be unchanging in the heaven . i have make an agreement with the man of my selection i have make an oath to david my servant i will make your seed go on for ever your kingdom will be strong through all generation . selah . in heaven let them give praise for your wonder o lord and your unchanging faith among the saint . for who be there in the heaven in comparison with the lord ? who be like the lord among the son of the god ? god be greatly to be fear among the saint and to be honour over all those who be about him . o lord god of army who be strong like you o jah ? and your unchanging faith be round about you . you have rule over the sea in storm when it wave be trouble you make them calm . rahab be crush by you like one wound to death with your strong arm you put to flight all your hater . yours be the heaven and the earth be yours you have make the world and everything which be in it . you have make the north and the south tabor and hermon be sound with joy at your name . yours be an arm of power strong be your hand and high your right hand . the seat of your kingdom be rest on righteousness and right judging mercy and good faith come before your face . happy be the people who have knowledge of the holy cry the light of your face o lord will be shin on their way . in your name will they have joy all the day in your righteousness will they be lift up . for you be the glory of their strength in your pleasure will our horn be lift up . for our breastplate be the lord and our king be the holy one of israel 's . then your voice come to your holy one in a vision say i have put the crown on a strong one lift up one take from among the people . i have make discovery of david my servant i have put my holy oil on his head . my hand will be his support my arm will give him strength . the deceit of those who be against him will not overcome him he will not be trouble by the son of evil . i will have those who be against him break before his face and his hater will be crush under my blow . but my faith and my mercy will be with him and in my name will his horn be lift up . i will put his hand in the sea and his right hand in the river . he will say to me you be my father my god and the rock of my salvation . and i will make him the first of my son most high over the king of the earth . i will keep my mercy for him for ever my agreement with him will not be change . his seed will keep their place for ever his kingdom will be eternal like the heaven . if his child give up my law and be not rule by my decision if my rule be break and my order be not kept then i will send punishment on them for their sin my rod will be the reward of their evil do . but i will not take away my mercy from him and will not be false to my faith . i will be true to my agreement the thing which have go out of my lip will not be change . i have make an oath once by my holy name that i will not be false to david . his seed will not come to an end for ever the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me . it will be fix for ever like the moon and the witness in heaven be true . selah . but you have put him away in disgust you have be angry with the king of your selection . you have make your agreement with your servant of no effect you have have no respect for his crown it have come down even to the earth . all his wall be break down you have give his strong tower to destruction . all those who come by take away his good he be laugh at by his neighbour . you have give power to the right hand of his hater you have make glad all those who be against him . his sword be turn back you have not be his support in the fight . you have put an end to his glory the seat of his kingdom have be level to the earth . you have make him old before his time he be cover with shame . selah . how long o lord will you keep yourself for ever from our eye ? how long will your wrath be burn like fire ? see how short my time be why have you make all men for no purpose ? what man now live will not see death ? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld ? selah . lord where be your early mercy ? where be the oath which you make to david in unchanging faith ? keep in mind o lord the shame of your servant and how the bitter word of all the people have come into my heart the bitter word of your hater o lord sham the footstep of your king . let the lord be praise for ever . so be it so be it .lt a prayer of moses the man of god . gt lord you have be our rest place in all generation . before the mountain be make before you have give birth to the earth and the world before time be and for ever you be god . you send man back to his dust and say go back you child of men . for to you a thousand year be no more than yesterday when it be past and like a watch in the night . ... in the morning it be green in the evening it be cut down and become dry . we be burn up by the heat of your passion and trouble by your wrath . you have put our evil doings before you our secret sin in the light of your face . for all our day have go by in your wrath our year come to an end like a breath . the measure of our life be seventy year and if through strength it may be eighty year it pride be only trouble and sorrow for it come to an end and we be quickly go . who have knowledge of the power of your wrath or who take note of the weight of your passion ? so give u knowledge of the number of our day that we may get a heart of wisdom . come back o lord how long ? let your purpose for your servant be change . in the morning give u your mercy in full measure so that we may have joy and delight all our day . make u glad in reward for the day of our sorrow and for the year in which we have see evil . make your work clear to your servant and your glory to their child . let the pleasure of the lord our god be on u o lord give strength to the work of our hand .happy be he whose rest place be in the secret of the lord and under the shade of the wing of the most high who say of the lord he be my safe place and my tower of strength he be my god in whom be my hope . he will take you out of the bird net and keep you safe from waste disease . you will be cover by his feather under his wing you will be safe his good faith will be your salvation . you will have no fear of the evil thing of the night or of the arrow in flight by day or of the disease which take men in the dark or of the destruction which make waste when the sun be high . you will see a thousand fall by your side and ten thousand at your right hand but it will not come near you . only with your eye will you see the reward of the evil doer . because you have say i be in the hand of the lord the most high be my safe rest place no evil will come on you and no disease will come near your tent . for he will give you into the care of his angel to keep you wherever you go . in their hand they will keep you up so that your foot may not be crush against a stone . you will put your foot on the lion and the snake the young lion and the great snake will be crush under your foot . because he have give me his love i will take him out of danger i will put him in a place of honour because he have keep my name in his heart . when his cry come up to me i will give him an answer i will be with him in trouble i will make him free from danger and give him honour . with long life will he be reward and i will let him see my salvation .lt a psalm . a song for the sabbath . gt it be a good thing to give praise to the lord and to make melody to your name o most high to make clear your mercy in the morning and your unchanging faith every night on a ten cord instrument and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound . for you o lord have make me glad through your work i will have joy in the work of your hand . o lord how great be your work ! and your thought be very deep . a man without sense have no knowledge of this and a foolish man may not take it in . when the sinner come up like the grass and all the worker of evil do well for themselves it be so that their end may be eternal destruction . but you o lord be on high for ever . for see ! your hater o lord will be put to death all the worker of evil will be put to flight but my horn be lift up like the horn of the ox the best oil be flow on my head . my eye have see trouble come on my hater my ear have news of the fate of the evil doer who have come up against me . the good man will be like a tall tree in his strength his growth will be a the wide stretching tree of lebanon . those who be plant in the house of the lord will come up tall and strong in his garden . they will give fruit even when they be old they will be fertile and full of growth for a sign that the lord be upright he be my rock there be no deceit in him .the lord be king he be clothe with glory the lord be clothe with strength power be the cord of his robe the world be fix so that it may not be move . the seat of your power have be from the past you be eternal . the river send up o lord the river send up their voice they send them up with a loud cry . the lord in heaven be strong than the noise of great water yes he be strong than the great wave of the sea . your witness be most certain it be right for your house to be holy o lord for ever .o god in whose hand be punishment o god of punishment let your shin face be see . be lift up o judge of the earth let their reward come to the men of pride . how long will sinners o lord how long will sinner have joy over u ? word of pride come from their lip all the worker of evil say great thing of themselves . your people be crush by them o lord your heritage be troubled they put to death the widow and the guest they take the life of child who have no father and they say jah will not see it the god of jacob will not give thought to it . give your mind to my word you who be without wisdom among the people you foolish men when will you be wise ? have he by whom your ear be plant no hearing ? or be he blind by whom your eye be form ? he who be the judge of the nation will he not give men the reward of their act even he who give knowledge to man ? the lord have knowledge of the thought of man for they be only a breath . happy be the man who be guide by you o jah and to whom you give teach out of your law so that you may give him rest from the day of evil till a hole be make ready for the destruction of the sinner . the lord will not give up his people or take away his support from his heritage but decision will again be make in righteousness and they will be keep by all whose heart be true . who will give me help against the sinner ? and who will be my support against the worker of evil ? if the lord have not be my helper my soul would quickly have go down into death . if i say my foot be slip your mercy o lord be my support . among all my troubled thought your comfort be the delight of my soul . what part with you have the seat of sin which make evil into a law ? they be band together against the soul of the upright to give decision against those who have do no wrong . but the lord be my safe rest place my god be the rock where i be safe . and he have make their evil design come back on themselves cut them off in their sin the lord our god will put an end to them .o come let u make song to the lord send up glad voice to the rock of our salvation . let u come before his face with praise and make melody with holy song . for the lord be a great god and a great king over all god . the deep place of the earth be in his hand and the top of the mountain be his . the sea be his and he make it and the dry land be form by his hand . o come let u give worship fall down on our knee before the lord our maker . for he be our god and we be the people to whom he give food and the sheep of his flock . today if you would only give ear to his voice ! let not your heart be hard a at meribah a in the day of massah in the waste land when your father put me to the test and saw my power and my work . for forty year i be angry with this generation and say they be a people whose heart be turn away from me for they have no knowledge of my way and i make an oath in my wrath that they might not come into my place of rest .o make a new song to the lord let all the earth make melody to the lord . make song to the lord bless his name give the good news of his salvation day by day . make clear his glory to the nation and his wonder to all the people . for the lord be great and greatly to be praise he be more to be fear than all other god . for all the god of the nation be false god but the lord make the heaven . honour and glory be before him strong and fair be his holy place . give to the lord o you family of the people give to the lord glory and strength . give to the lord the glory of his name take with you an offering and come into his house . o give worship to the lord in holy robe be in fear before him all the earth . say among the nation the lord be king yes the world be order so that it may not be move he will be an upright judge of the people . let the heaven have joy and the earth be glad let the sea be thunder with all it water let the field be glad and everything which be in it yes let all the tree of the wood be sound with joy before the lord for he be come he be come to be the judge of the earth the earth will be judge in righteousness and the people with unchanging faith .the lord be king let the earth have joy let all the sea land be glad . dark cloud be round him his kingdom be base on righteousness and right judging . fire go before him burn up all those who be against him round about . his bright flame give light to the world the earth saw it with fear . the mountain become like wax at the come of the lord at the come of the lord of all the earth . the heaven give out the news of his righteousness and all the people saw his glory . sham be all those who give worship to image and take pride in false god give him worship all you god . zion give ear and be glad and the daughter of judah be full of joy because of your decision o lord . for you lord be most high over the earth you be lift up over all other god . you who be lover of the lord be hater of evil he keep the soul of his saint he take them out of the hand of sinner . light be shin on the lover of righteousness and for the upright in heart there be joy . be glad in the lord you upright men praise the memory of his holy name .lt a psalm . gt o make a new song to the lord because he have do work of wonder with his right hand and with his holy arm he have overcome . the lord have give to all the knowledge of his salvation he have make clear his righteousness in the eye of the nation . he have keep in mind his mercy and his unchanging faith to the house of israel all the end of the earth have see the salvation of our god . let all the earth send out a glad cry to the lord sound with a loud voice and praise him with song of joy . make melody to the lord with instrument of music with a corded instrument and the voice of song . with wind instrument and the sound of the horn make a glad cry before the lord the king . let the sea be thunder with all it water the world and all who be live in it let the stream make sound of joy with their hand let the mountain be glad together before the lord for he have come a judge of the earth judge the world in righteousness and give true decision for the people .the lord be king let the people be in fear his seat be on the winged one let the earth be move . the lord be great in zion he be high over all the nation . let them give praise to your name for it be great and to be fear holy be he . the king 's power be use for righteousness you give true decision judge rightly in the land of jacob . give high honour to the lord our god worshipping at his foot holy be he . moses and aaron among his priest and samuel among those who give honour to his name they make prayer to the lord and he give answer to them . his voice come to them from the pillar of cloud they keep his witness and the law which he give them . you give them an answer o lord our god you take away their sin though you give them punishment for their wrongdoing . give high honour to the lord our god worship with your face turn to his holy hill for the lord our god be holy .lt a psalm of praise . gt make a glad sound to the lord all the earth . give worship to the lord with joy come before him with a song . be certain that the lord be god it be he who have make u and we be his we be his people and the sheep to whom he give food . come into his door with joy and into his house with praise give him honour bless his name . for the lord be good and his mercy be never end his faith be unchanging through all generation .lt a psalm . of david . gt i will make a song of mercy and righteousness to you o lord will i make melody . i will do wisely in the way of righteousness o when will you come to me ? i will be walk in my house with a true heart . i will not put any evil thing before my eye i be against all turn to one side i will not have it near me . the false heart i will send away from me i will not have an evil doer for a friend . i will put to death anyone who say evil of his neighbour secretly the man with a high look and a heart of pride be disgust to me . my eye will be on those of good faith in the land so that they may be live in my house he who be walk in the right way will be my servant . the worker of deceit will not come into my house the false man will have no place before my eye . morning by morning will i put to death all the sinner in the land so that all evil doer may be cut off from jerusalem .lt a prayer of the man who be in trouble when he be overcome and put his grief before the lord . gt give ear to my prayer o lord and let my cry come to you . let not your face be veil from me in the day of my trouble give ear to me and let my cry be answer quickly . my day be waste like smoke and my bone be burn up a in a fire . my heart be break it have become dry and dead like grass so that i give no thought to food . because of the voice of my sorrow my flesh be waste to the bone . i be like a bird living by itself in the waste place like the night bird in a waste of sand . i keep watch like a bird by itself on the house top . my hater say evil of me all day those who be violent against me make use of my name a a curse . i have have dust for bread and my drink have be mix with weep because of your passion and your wrath for i have be lift up and then make low by you . my day be like a shade which be stretch out i be dry like the grass . but you o lord be eternal and your name will never come to an end . you will again get up and have mercy on zion for the time have come for her to be comfort . for your servant take pleasure in her stone look with love on her dust . so the nation will give honour to the name of the lord and all the king of the earth will be in fear of his glory when the lord have put up the wall of zion and have be be in his glory when he have give ear to the prayer of the poor and have not put his request on one side . this will be put in write for the come generation and the people of the future will give praise to the lord . for from his holy place the lord have see look down on the earth from heaven hear the cry of the prisoner make free those for whom death be order so that they may give out the name of the lord in zion and his praise in jerusalem when the people be come together and the kingdom to give worship to the lord . he have take my strength from me in the way he have make short my day . i will say o my god take me not away before my time your year go on through all generation in the past you put the earth on it base and the heaven be the work of your hand . they will come to an end but you will still go on they all will become old like a coat and like a robe they will be change but you be the unchanging one and your year will have no end . the child of your servant will have a safe resting place and their seed will be ever before you .lt of david . gt give praise to the lord o my soul let everything in me give praise to his holy name . give praise to the lord o my soul let not all his blessing go from your memory . he have forgiveness for all your sin he take away all your disease he keep back your life from destruction crown you with mercy and grace . he make your mouth full of good thing so that your strength be make new again like the eagle 's . the lord give decision in righteousness for all who be in trouble . he give knowledge of his way to moses and make his act clear to the child of israel . the lord be kind and full of pity not quickly make angry but ever ready to have mercy . his feeling will no longer be bitter he will not keep his wrath for ever . he have not give u the punishment for our sin or the reward of our wrongdoing . for a the heaven be high over the earth so great be his mercy to his worshipper . as far a the east be from the west so far have he put our sin from u . a a father have pity on his child so the lord have pity on his worshipper . for he have knowledge of our feeble frame he see that we be only dust . a for man his day be a grass his beautiful growth be like the flower of the field . the wind go over it and it be go and it place see it no longer . but the mercy of the lord be eternal for his worshipper and their child 's child will see his righteousness if they keep his agreement and have his law in mind to do them . the lord have make ready his high seat in the heaven his kingdom be rule over all . give praise to the lord you his angel who be great in strength do his order and wait for his voice . give praise to the lord all you his army and you his servant who do his pleasure . give praise to the lord all his work in all place under his rule give praise to the lord o my soul .give praise to the lord o my soul . o lord my god you be very great you be rob with honour and power . you be clothe with light a with a robe stretch out the heaven like a curtain the arch of your house be base on the water you make the cloud your carriage you go on the wing of the wind he make wind his angel and flame of fire his servant . he have make the earth strong on it base so that it may not be move for ever and ever cover it with the sea a with a robe the water be high over the mountain at the voice of your word they go in flight at the sound of your thunder they go away in fear the mountain come up and the valley go down into the place which you have make ready for them . you make a limit over which they might not go so that the earth would never again be cover by them . you send the spring into the valley they be flow between the hill . they give drink to every beast of the field the mountain asses come to them for water . the bird of the air have their resting place by them and make their song among the branch . he send down rain from his store house on the hill the earth be full of the fruit of his work . he make the grass come up for the cattle and plant for the use of man so that bread may come out of the earth and wine to make glad the heart of man and oil to make his face shin and bread give strength to his heart . the tree of the lord be full of growth the cedar of lebanon of his planting where the bird have their resting place a for the stork the tall tree be her house . the high hill be a safe place for the mountain goat and the rock for the small beast . he make the moon for a sign of the division of the year teach the sun the time of it go down . when you make it dark it be night when all the beast of the wood come quietly out of their secret place . the young lion go thunder after their food search for their meat from god . the sun come up and they come together and go back to their secret place to take their rest . man go out to his work and to his business till the evening . o lord how great be the number of your work ! in wisdom you have make them all the earth be full of the thing you have make . there be the great wide sea where there be live thing great and small more than may be number . there go the ship there be that great beast which you have make a a plaything . all of them be wait for you to give them their food in it time . they take what you give them they be full of the good thing which come from your open hand . if your face be veil they be troubled when you take away their breath they come to an end and go back to the dust . if you send out your spirit they be give life you make new the face of the earth . let the glory of the lord be for ever let the lord have joy in his work at whose look the earth be shake at whose touch the mountain send out smoke . i will make song to the lord all my life i will make melody to my god while i have my be . let my thought be sweet to him i will be glad in the lord . let sinner be cut off from the earth and let all evil doer come to an end . give praise to the lord o my soul . give praise to the lord .o give praise to the lord give honour to his name talk of his doings among the people . let your voice be sound in song and melody let all your thought be of the wonder of his work . have glory in his holy name let the heart of those who be search after the lord be glad . let your search be for the lord and for his strength let your heart ever be turn to him . keep in mind the great work which he have do his wonder and the decision of his mouth o you seed of abraham his servant you child of jacob his loved one . he be the lord our god he be judge of all the earth . he have keep his agreement in mind for ever the word which he give for a thousand generation the agreement which he make with abraham and his oath to isaac and he give it to jacob for a law and to israel for an eternal agreement say to you will i give the land of canaan the measured line of your heritage when they be still small in number and strange in the land when they go about from one nation to another and from one kingdom to another people . he would not let anyone do them wrong he even keep back king because of them say put not your hand on those who have be mark with my holy oil and do my prophet no wrong . and he take away all food from the land so that the people be without bread . he send a man before them even joseph who be give a a servant for a price his foot be fix in chain his neck be put in iron band till the time when his word come true he be test by the word of the lord . the king send men to take off his chain even the ruler of the people who let him go free . he make him lord of his house and ruler over everything he have to give his chief teaching at his pleasure and so that his law giver might get wisdom from him . then israel come into egypt and jacob be live in the land of ham . and his people be greatly increase and become strong than those who be against them . their heart be turn to hate against his people so that they make secret design against them . he send moses his servant and aaron the man of his selection . he let his sign be see among the people and his wonder in the land of ham . he send black night and make it dark and they do not go against his word . at his word their water be turn to blood and he send death on all their fish . their land be full of frog even in the room of the king . he give the word and there come the dog fly and insect over all the land . he give them ice for rain and flame fire in their land . he give their vine and their fig tree to destruction and the tree of their land be break down . at his word the locust come and young locust more than might be number and put an end to all the plant of their land take all the fruit of the earth for food . he put to death the first child of every family in the land the first fruit of their strength . he take his people out with silver and gold there be not one feeble person among them . egypt be glad when they go for the fear of them have come down on them . a cloud be stretch over them for a cover and he send fire to give light in the night . at the people 's request he send bird and give them the bread of heaven for food . his hand make the rock open and the water come stream out they go down through the dry place like a river . for he keep in mind his holy word and abraham his servant . and he take his people out with joy the men of his selection with glad cry and give them the land of the nation and they take the work of the people for a heritage so that they might keep his order and be true to his law . give praise to the lord .let the lord be praise . o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . who be able to give an account of the great act of the lord or to make clear all his praise ? happy be they whose decision be upright and he who do righteousness at all time . keep me in mind o lord when you be good to your people o let your salvation come to me so that i may see the well be of the people of your selection and have a part in the joy of your nation and take pride in your heritage . we be sinner like our father we have do wrong our act be evil . our father do not give thought to your wonder in egypt they do not keep in memory the great number of your mercy but give you cause for wrath at the sea even at the red sea . but he be their saviour because of his name so that men might see his great power . by his word the red sea be make dry and he take them through the deep water a through the waste land . and he take them safely out of the hand of their hater and keep them from the attack of those who be against them . and the water go over their hater all of them come to an end . then they have faith in his word they give him song of praise . but their memory of his work be short not wait to be guide by him they give way to their evil desire in the waste land and put god to the test in the dry place . and he give them their request but send a wasting disease into their soul . they be full of envy against moses among the tent and against aaron the holy one of the lord . the earth open put an end to dathan cover up abiram and his band . and a fire be light among their tent the sinner be burn up by the flame . they make a young ox in horeb and give worship to an image of gold . and their glory be change into the image of an ox whose food be grass . they have no memory of god their saviour who have do great thing in egypt work of wonder in the land of ham and thing of fear by the red sea . and he be purpose to put an end to them if moses his special servant have not go up before him between him and his people turn back his wrath to keep them from destruction . they be disgust with the good land they have no belief in his word talk against him secretly in their tent they do not give ear to the voice of the lord . so he make an oath against them to put an end to them in the waste land that their child might be mixed among the nation and send away into other land . and they be join to baal peor and take part in the offering to the dead . so they make him angry by their behaviour and he send disease on them . then phinehas get up and make prayer for them and the disease go no farther . and all the generation come after him keep the memory of his righteousness for ever . they make god angry again at the water of meribah so that moses be troubled because of them for they make his spirit bitter and he say unwise thing . they do not put an end to the people a the lord have say but they be join to the nation learn their work . and they give worship to image which be a danger to them they even make offering of their son and their daughter to evil spirit and give the blood of their son and their daughter who have do no wrong offer them to the image of canaan and the land be make unclean with blood . so they become unclean through their work go after their evil desire . then the wrath of the lord be burn against his people and he be angry with his heritage . and he give them into the hand of the nation and they be rule by their hater . by them they be crush and make low under their hand . again and again he make them free but their heart be turn against his purpose and they be overcome by their sin . but when their cry come to his ear he have pity on their trouble and keep in mind his agreement with them and in his great mercy give them forgiveness . he put pity into the heart of those who make them prisoner . be our saviour o lord our god and let u come back together from among the nation so that we may give honour to your holy name and have glory in your praise . praise be to the lord god of israel for ever and for ever and let all the people say so be it . give praise to the lord .o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . let those whose cause the lord have take up say so his people whom he have take out of the hand of their hater make them come together out of all the land from the east and from the west from the north and from the south . they be wander in the waste place they saw no way to a resting place . their souls become feeble for need of food and drink . then they send up their cry to the lord in their sorrow and he give them salvation out of all their trouble guide them in the right way so that they might come into the town of their resting place . let men give praise to the lord for his mercy and for the wonder which he do for the child of men ! he give it desire to the unresting soul so that it be full of good thing . those who be in the dark in the black night in chain of sorrow and iron because they go against the word of god and give no thought to the law of the most high so that he make their heart weight down with grief they be fall and have no helper . then they send up their cry to the lord in their sorrow and he give them salvation out of all their trouble . he take them out of the dark and the black night and all their chain be break . let men give praise to the lord for his mercy and for the wonder which he do for the child of men ! the door of brass be break by his arm and the band of iron be cut in two . foolish men because of their sin and because of their wrongdoing be trouble they be disgust by all food and they come near to the door of death . then they send up their cry to the lord in their sorrow and he give them salvation out of all their trouble . he send his word and make them well and keep them safe from the underworld . let men give praise to the lord for his mercy and for the wonder which he do for the child of men ! let them make offering of praise give news of his work with cry of joy . those who go down to the sea in ship who do business in the great water they see the work of the lord and his wonder in the deep . for at his word come up the storm wind lift high the wave . the sailor go up to heaven and down into the deep their soul be waste because of their trouble . they be turn here and there roll like a man who be full of wine and all their wisdom come to nothing . then they send up their cry to the lord in their sorrow and he give them salvation out of all their trouble . he make the storm into a calm so that the wave be at peace . then they be glad because the sea be quiet and he take them to the harbour of their desire . let men give praise to the lord for his mercy and for the wonder which he do for the child of men ! let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people and praise among the chief . he make river into waste place and spring of water into a dry land he make a fertile country into a salt waste because of the sin of those who be live there . he make a waste land into a place of water and a dry land into water spring . and there he give the poor a resting place so that they may make themselves a town and put seed in the field and make vine garden to give them fruit . he give them his bless so that they be increase greatly and their cattle do not become less . and when they be make low and crush by trouble and sorrow he put an end to the pride of king and send them wander in the waste land where there be no way . but he put the poor man on high from his trouble and give him family like a flock . the upright see it and be glad the mouth of the sinner be stop . let the wise give think to these thing and see the mercy of the lord .lt a song . a psalm . of david . gt o god my heart be fix i will make song and melody even with my glory . give out your sound o corded instrument the dawn will be awake with my song . i will give you praise o lord among the people i will make melody to you among the nation . for your mercy be high than the heaven and your unchanging faith than the cloud . be lift up o god high than the heaven let your glory be over all the earth . let your right hand be stretch out for salvation and give me an answer so that your loved one may be safe from danger . this be the word of the holy god i will be glad i will make shechem a heritage measure out the valley of succoth . gilead be mine manasseh be mine ephraim be the strength of my head judah be my law giver moab be my washpot on edom be the rest place of my shoe over philistia will i send out a glad cry . who will take me into the strong town ? who will be my guide into edom ? have you not send u away from you o god ? and you go not out with our army . give u help in our trouble for there be no help in man . with god we will do great thing for by him will our hater be crush underfoot .lt to the chief music maker . of david . a psalm . gt god of my praise let my prayer be answer for the mouth of the sinner be open against me in deceit his tongue have say false thing against me . word of hate be round about me they have make war against me without cause . for my love they give me back hate but i have give myself to prayer . they have put on me evil for good hate in exchange for my love . put an evil man over him and let one be place at his right hand to say evil of him . when he be judge let the decision go against him and may his prayer become sin . let his life be short let another take his position of authority . let his child have no father and his wife be make a widow . let his child be wanderer look to others for their food let them be send away from the company of their friend . let his creditor take all his good and let others have the profit of his work . let no man have pity on him or give help to his child when he be dead . let his seed be cut off in the come generation let their name go out of memory . let the lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his father and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness . let them be ever before the eye of the lord so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth . because he have no mercy but be cruel to the low and the poor design the death of the broken hearted . a he take pleasure in curse so let it come on him and a he have no delight in bless let it be far from him . he put on curse like a robe and it have come into his body like water and into his bone like oil . let it be to him a a robe which he put on let it be like a band which be round him at all time . let this be the reward give to my hater from the lord and to those who say evil of my soul . but o lord god give me your help because of your name take me out of danger because your mercy be good . for i be poor and in need and my heart be wound in me . i be go like the shade when it be stretch out i be force out of my place like a locust . my knee be feeble for need of food there be no fat on my bone . a for me they make sport of me shake their head when they see me . give me help o lord my god in your mercy be my saviour so that they may see that it be the work of your hand that you lord have do it . they may give curse but you give bless when they come up against me put them to shame but let your servant be glad . let my hater be clothe with shame cover themselves with shame a with a robe . i will give the lord great praise with my mouth yes i will give praise to him among all the people . for he be ever at the right hand of the poor to take him out of the hand of those who go after his soul .lt a psalm . of david . gt the lord say to my lord be seat at my right hand till i put all those who be against you under your foot . the lord will send out the rod of your strength from zion be king over your hater . your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains be the army of your young men . the lord have make an oath and will not take it back . you be a priest for ever after the order of melchizedek . in the day of his wrath king will be wound by the lord at your right hand . he will be judge among the nation the valley will be full of dead body the head over a great country will be wound by him . he will take of the stream by the way so his head will be lift up .let the lord be praise . i will give praise to the lord with all my heart among the upright and in the meeting of the people . the work of the lord be great search out by all those who have delight in them . his work be full of honour and glory and his righteousness be unchanging for ever . certain for ever be the memory of his wonder the lord be full of pity and mercy . he have give food to his worshipper he will keep his agreement in mind for ever . he have make clear to his people the power of his work give them the heritage of the nation . the work of his hand be faith and righteousness all his law be unchanging . they be fix for ever and ever they be do in faith and righteousness . he have send salvation to his people he have give his word for ever holy be his name and greatly to be fear . the fear of the lord be the best part of wisdom all those who keep his law be wise his praise be eternal .let the lord be praise . happy be the man who give honour to the lord and have great delight in his law . his seed will be strong on the earth blessing will be on the generation of the upright . a store of wealth will be in his house and his righteousness will be for ever . for the upright there be a light shining in the dark he be full of grace and pity . all be well for the man who be kind and give freely to others he will make good his cause when he be judge . he will not ever be move the memory of the upright will be live for ever . he will have no fear of evil news his heart be fix for his hope be in the lord . his heart be rest safely he will have no fear till he see trouble come on his hater . he have give with open hand to the poor his righteousness be for ever his horn will be lift up with honour . the sinner will see it with grief he will be waste away with envy the desire of the evil doer will come to nothing .let the lord be praise . o you servant of the lord give praise to the name of the lord . let bless be on the name of the lord from this time and for ever . from the come up of the sun to it go down the lord 's name be to be praise . the lord be high over all nation and his glory be high than the heaven . who be like the lord our god who be seat on high look down on the heaven and on the earth ? he take the poor man out of the dust lift him up from his low position to give him a place among the ruler even with the ruler of his people . he give the unfertile woman a family make her a happy mother of child . give praise to the lord .when israel come out of egypt the child of jacob from a people whose language be strange to them judah become his holy place and israel his kingdom . the sea saw it and go in flight jordan be turn back . the mountain be jump like goat and the little hill like lamb . what be wrong with you o sea that you go in flight ? o jordan that you be turn back ? you mountains why be you jump like goat and you little hill like lamb ? be trouble o earth before the lord before the god of jacob who make the rock into a water spring and the hard stone into a fountain .not to u o lord not to u but to your name let glory be give because of your mercy and your unchanging faith . why may the nation say where be now their god ? but our god be in heaven he have do whatever be please to him . their image be silver and gold the work of men 's hand . they have mouth but no voice they have eye but they see not they have ear but no hearing they have nose but no sense of smell they have hand without feeling and foot without power of walking and no sound come from their throat . those who make them be like them and so be everyone who put his faith in them . o israel have faith in the lord he be their help and their breastplate . o house of aaron have faith in the lord he be their help and their breastplate . you worshipper of the lord have faith in the lord he be their help and their breastplate . the lord have keep u in mind and will give u his blessing he will send blessing on the house of israel and on the house of aaron . he will send blessing on the worshipper of the lord on the small and on the great . may the lord give you and your child still great increase . may you have the blessing of the lord who make heaven and earth . the heaven be the lord 's but the earth he have give to the child of men . the dead do not give praise to the lord or those who go down to the underworld . but we will give praise to the lord now and for ever . praise be to the lord .i have give my love to the lord because he have give ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer . he have let my request come before him and i will make my prayer to him all my day . the net of death be round me and the pain of the underworld have me in their grip i be full of trouble and sorrow . then i make my prayer to the lord say o lord take my soul out of trouble . the lord be full of grace and righteousness truly he be a god of mercy . the lord keep the simple i be make low and he be my saviour . come back to your rest o my soul for the lord have give you your reward . you have take my soul from the power of death keep my eye from weep and my foot from fall . i will go before the lord in the land of the living . i still have faith though i say i be in great trouble though i say in my fear all men be false . what may i give to the lord for all the good thing which he have do for me ? i will take the cup of salvation and give praise to the name of the lord . i will make the offering of my oath to the lord even before all his people . dear in the eye of the lord be the death of his saint . o lord truly i be your servant i be your servant the son of her who be your servant by you have my cord be break . i will give an offering of praise to you and make my prayer in the name of the lord . i will make the offering of my oath even before all his people in the lord 's house even in jerusalem . praise be to the lord .let all the nation give praise to the lord let all the people give him praise . for great be his mercy to u and his faith be unchanging for ever . praise be to the lord .o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . let israel now say that his mercy be unchanging for ever . let the house of aaron now say that his mercy be unchanging for ever . let all worshipper of the lord now say that his mercy be unchanging for ever . i make my prayer to the lord in my trouble and the lord give me an answer and put me in a wide place . the lord be on my side i will have no fear what be man able to do to me ? the lord be my great helper i will see my desire against my hater . it be well to have faith in the lord than to put one 's hope in man . it be well to have faith in the lord than to put one 's hope in ruler . all the nation have come round me but in the name of the lord i will have them cut down . they be round me yes they be all about me but in the name of the lord i will have them cut down . they be round me like bee but they be put out like a fire among thorn for in the name of the lord i will have them cut down . i have be hard push by you so that i might have a fall but the lord be my helper . the lord be my strength and my song he have become my salvation . the sound of joy and salvation be in the tent of the upright the right hand of the lord do work of power . the right hand of the lord be lift up the right hand of the lord do work of power . life and not death will be my part and i will give out the story of the work of the lord . the hand of jah have be hard on me but he have not give me up to death . let the door of righteousness be open to me i will go in and give praise to the lord . this be the door of the lord 's house the worker of righteousness will go in through it . i will give you praise for you have give me an answer and have become my salvation . the stone which the builder put on one side have become the chief stone of the building . this be the lord 's do it be a wonder in our eye . this be the day which the lord have make we will be full of joy and delight in it . send salvation now o lord lord send u your blessing . a blessing be on him who come in the name of the lord we give you bless from the house of the lord . the lord be god and he have give u light let the holy dance be order with branch even up to the horn of the altar . you be my god and i will give you praise my god and i will give honour to your name . o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever .lt aleph gt happy be they who be without sin in their way walk in the law of the lord . happy be they who keep his unchanging word searching after him with all their heart . they do no evil they go in his way . you have put your order into our heart so that we might keep them with care . if only my way be order so that i might keep your rule ! then i would not be put to shame as long a i have respect for all your teaching . i will give you praise with an upright heart in learn your right decision . i will keep your rule o give me not up completely . lt beth gt how may a young man make his way clean ? by guide it after your word . i have make search for you with all my heart o let me not go wander far from your teaching . i have keep your saying secretly in my heart so that i might do no sin against you . praise be to you o lord give me knowledge of your rule . with my lip have i make clear all the decision of your mouth . i have take as much delight in the way of your unchanging word a in all wealth . i will give thought to your order and have respect for your way . i will have delight in your rule i will not let your word go out of my mind . lt gimel gt give me your servant the reward of life so that i may keep your word let my eye be open to see the wonder of your law . i be live in a strange land do not let your teaching be keep secret from me . my soul be break with desire for your decision at all time . your hand have be against the men of pride a curse be on those who go wander out of your way . take away from me shame and bitter word for i have keep your unchanging word in my heart . ruler make evil design against me but your servant give think to your rule . your unchanging word be my delight and the guide of my footstep . lt daleth gt my soul be join to the dust o give me life in keep with your word . i put the record of my way before you and you give me an answer o give me knowledge of your rule . make the way of your order clear to me then my thought will be ever on your wonder . my soul be waste with sorrow give me strength again in keep with your word take from me every false way and in mercy give me your law . i have take the way of faith i have keep your decision before me . i have be true to your unchanging word o lord do not put me to shame . i will go quickly in the way of your teaching because you have give me a free heart . lt he gt o lord let me see the way of your rule and i will keep it to the end . give me wisdom so that i may keep your law go after it with all my heart . make me go in the way of your teaching for they be my delight . let my heart be turn to your unchanging word and not to evil desire . let my eye be turn away from what be false give me life in your way . give effect to your word to your servant in whose heart be the fear of you . take away the shame which be my fear for your decision be good . see how great be my desire for your order give me life in your righteousness . lt vau gt let your mercy come to me o lord even your salvation a you have say . so that i may have an answer for the man who would put me to shame for i have faith in your word . take not your true word quite out of my mouth for i have put my hope in your decision . so that i may keep your law for ever and ever so that my way may be in a wide place because my search have be for your order . so that i may give knowledge of your unchanging word before king and not be put to shame . and so that i may take delight in your teaching to which i have give my love . and so that my hand may be stretch out to you and i will give thought to your rule . lt zain gt keep in mind your word to your servant for on it have my hope be fix . this be my comfort in my trouble that your saying have give me life . the men of pride have make great sport of me but i have not be turn from your law . i have keep the memory of your decision from time past o lord and they have be my comfort . i be burn with wrath because of the sinner who have give up your law . your rule have be melody to me while i have be live in strange land . i have give think to your name in the night o lord and have keep your law . this have be true of me that i have keep your order in my heart . lt cheth gt the lord be my heritage i have say that i would be rule by your word . i have give my mind to do your pleasure with all my heart have mercy on me a you have say . i give think to my step and my foot be turn into the way of your unchanging word . i be quick to do your order and let no time be waste . the cord of evil doer be round me but i have keep in mind your law . in the middle of the night i will get up to give you praise because of all your right decision . i keep company with all your worshipper and those who have your order in their memory . the earth o lord be full of your mercy give me knowledge of your rule . lt teth gt you have do good to your servant o lord in keep with your word . give me knowledge and good sense for i have put my faith in your teaching . before i be in trouble i go out of the way but now i keep your word . you be good and your work be good give me knowledge of your rule . the men of pride have say false thing about me but i will keep your order in my heart . their heart be shut up with fat but my delight be in your law . it be good for me to have be through trouble so that i might come to the knowledge of your rule . the law of your mouth be well to me than thousand of gold and silver . lt jod gt your hand have make me and give me form give me wisdom so that i may have knowledge of your teaching . your worshipper will see me and be glad because my hope have be in your word . i have see o lord that your decision be right and that in unchanging faith you have send trouble on me . let your mercy now be my comfort a you have say to your servant . let your gentle mercy come to me so that i may have life for your law be my delight . let the men of pride be sham because they have falsely give decision against me but i will give thought to your order . let your worshipper be turn to me and those who have knowledge of your word . let all my heart be give to your order so that i may not be put to shame . lt caph gt my soul be waste with desire for your salvation but i have hope in your word . my eye be full of weariness with search for your word say when will you give me comfort ? for i have become like a wine skin black with smoke but i still keep the memory of your rule . how short be the life of your servant ! when will you give your decision against those who be attack me ? the men of pride who be turn away from your law have put net for me . all your teaching be certain they go after me with evil design give me your help . they have almost put an end to me on earth but i do not give up your order . give me life in your mercy so that i may be rule by the unchanging word of your mouth . lt lam gt for ever o lord your word be fix in heaven . your faith be unchanging from generation to generation you have put the earth in it place and it be not move . they be rule this day by your decision for all thing be your servant . if your law have not be my delight my trouble would have put an end to me . i will ever keep your order in mind for in them i have life . i be yours o be my saviour for my desire have be for your rule . the sinner have be wait for me to give me up to destruction but i will give all my mind to your unchanging ward . i have see that nothing on earth be complete but your teaching be very wide . lt mem gt o what love i have for your law ! i give think to it all the day . your teaching have make me wise than my hater for it be mine for ever . i have more knowledge than all my teacher because i give think to your unchanging word . i have more wisdom than the old because i have keep your order . i have keep back my foot from all evil way so that i might be true to your word . my heart have not be turn away from your decision for you have be my teacher . how sweet be your saying to my taste ! truly they be sweet than honey in my mouth ! through your order i get wisdom for this reason i be a hater of every false way . lt nun gt your word be a light for my foot ever shin on my way . i have make an oath and keep it to be guide by your upright decision . i be greatly troubled o lord give me life in keep with your word . take o lord the free offering of my mouth and give me knowledge of your decision . my soul be ever in danger but i still keep the memory of your law . sinner have put a net to take me but i be true to your order . i have take your unchanging word a an eternal heritage for it be the joy of my heart . my heart be ever ready to keep your rule even to the end . lt samech gt i be a hater of men of doubt mind but i be a lover of your law . you be my secret place and my breastplate against danger my hope be in your word . go far from me you evil doer so that i may keep the teaching of my god . be my support a you have say and give me life let not my hope be turn to shame . let me not be move and i will be safe and ever take delight in your rule . you have overcome all those who be wander from your rule for all their thought be false . all the sinner of the earth be like waste metal in your eye and for this cause i give my love to your unchanging word . my flesh be move for fear of you i give honour to your decision . lt ain gt i have do what be good and right you will not give me into the hand of those who be work against me . take your servant 's interest into your keep let me not be crush by the men of pride . my eye be waste with desire for your salvation and for the word of your righteousness . be good to your servant in your mercy and give me teach in your rule . i be your servant give me wisdom so that i may have knowledge of your unchanging word . it be time o lord for you to let your work be see for they have make your law without effect . for this reason i have great love far your teaching than for gold even for shin gold . because of it i keep straight in all thing by your order and i be a hater of every false way . lt pe gt your unchanging word be full of wonder for this reason my soul keep it . the opening of your word give light it give good sense to the simple . my mouth be open wide wait with great desire for your teaching . let your eye be turn to me and have mercy on me a it be right for you to do to those who be lover of your name . let my step be guide by your word and let not sin have control over me . make me free from the cruel rule of man then i will keep your order . let your servant see the shining of your face give me knowledge of your rule . river of water be flow from my eye because men do not keep your law . lt tzade gt o lord great be your righteousness and upright be your decision . you have give your unchanging word in righteousness and it be for ever . my passion have overcome me because my hater be turn away from your word . your word be of tested value and it be dear to your servant . i be small and of no account but i keep your order in mind . your righteousness be an unchanging righteousness and your law be certain . pain and trouble have overcome me but your teaching be my delight . the righteousness of your unchanging word be eternal give me wisdom so that i may have life . lt koph gt i have make my prayer with all my heart give answer to me o lord i will keep your rule . my cry have go up to you take me out of trouble and i will be guide by your unchanging word . before the sun be up my cry for help come to your ear my hope be in your word . in the night watch i be awake so that i may give thought to your say . let my voice come to you in your mercy o lord by your decision give me life . those who have evil design against me come near they be far from your law . you be near o lord and all your teaching be true . i have long have knowledge that your unchanging word be for ever . lt resh gt o see my trouble and be my saviour for i keep your law in my mind undertake my cause and come to my help give me life a you have say . salvation be far from evil doer for they have make no search for your rule . great be the number of your mercy o lord give me life in keep with your decision . great be the number of those who be against me but i have not be turn away from your unchanging word . i saw with hate those who be untrue to you for they do not keep your say . see how great be my love for your order give me life o lord in keep with your mercy . your word be true from the first and your upright decision be unchanging for ever . lt shin gt ruler have be cruel to me without cause but i have the fear of your word in my heart . i be delight by your say like a man who make discovery of great wealth . i be full of hate and disgust for false word but i be a lover of your law . seven time a day do i give you praise because of your upright decision . great peace have lover of your law they have no cause for fall . lord my hope have be in your salvation and i have keep your teaching . my soul have keep your unchanging word great be my love for it . i have be rule by your order for all my way be before you . lt tau gt let my cry come before you o lord give me wisdom in keep with your word . let my prayer come before you take me out of trouble a you have say . let my lip be flow with praise because you have give me knowledge of your rule . let my tongue make song in praise of your word for all your teaching be righteousness . let your hand be near for my help for i have give my heart to your order . all my desire have be for your salvation o lord and your law be my delight . give life to my soul so that it may give you praise and let your decision be my support . i have go out of the way like a wandering sheep make search for your servant for i keep your teaching ever in mind .lt a song of the go up . gt in my trouble my cry go up to the lord and he give me an answer . o lord be the saviour of my soul from false lip and from the tongue of deceit . what punishment will he give you ? what more will he do to you you false tongue ? sharp arrow of the strong and burning fire . sorrow be mine because i be strange in meshech and living in the tent of kedar . my soul have long be live with the hater of peace . i be for peace but when i say so they be for war .lt a song of the go up . gt my eye be lift up to the hill o where will my help come from ? your help come from the lord who make heaven and earth . may he not let your foot be move no need of sleep have he who keep you . see the eye of israel 's keeper will not be shut in sleep . the lord be your keeper the lord be your shade on your right hand . you will not be touch by the sun in the day or by the moon at night . the lord will keep you safe from all evil he will take care of your soul . the lord will keep watch over your go out and your come in from this time and for ever .lt a song of the go up . of david . gt i be glad because they say to me we will go into the house of the lord . at last our foot be inside your door o jerusalem . o jerusalem you be like a town which be well join together to which the tribe go up even the tribe of the lord for a witness to israel to give praise to the name of the lord . for there seat for the judge be place even the ruler ' seat of the line of david . o make prayer for the peace of jerusalem may they whose love be give to you do well . may peace be inside your wall and wealth in your noble house . because of my brother and friend i will now say let peace be with you . because of the house of the lord our god i will be work for your good .lt a song of the go up . gt to you my eye be lift up even to you whose seat be in the heaven . see ! a the eye of servant be turn to the hand of their master and the eye of a servant girl to her owner so our eye be wait for the lord our god till he have mercy on u . have mercy on u o lord have mercy on u for all men be look down on u . for long enough have men of pride make sport of our soul .lt a song of the go up . of david . gt if it have not be the lord who be on our side let israel now say if it have not be the lord who be on our side when men come up against u they would have make a meal of u while still live in the heat of their wrath against u we would have be cover by the water the stream would have go over our soul yes the water of pride would have go over our soul . praise be to the lord who have not let u be wound by their teeth . our soul have go free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her the net be break and we be free . our help be in the name of the lord the maker of heaven and earth .lt a song of the go up . gt those whose hope be in the lord be like the mountain of zion which may not be move but keep it place for ever . a the mountain be round about jerusalem so the lord be round about his people from this time and for ever . for the rod of sinner will not be rest on the heritage of the upright so that the upright may not put out their hand to evil . do good o lord to those who be good and to those who be upright in heart . but a for such a be turn out of the straight way the lord will take them away with the worker of evil . let peace be on israel .lt a song of the go up . gt when the lord make a change in zion 's fate we be like men in a dream . then our mouth be full of laugh and our tongue give a glad cry they say among the nation the lord have do great thing for them . the lord have do great thing for u because of which we be glad . let our fate be change o lord like the stream in the south . those who put in seed with weep will get in the grain with cry of joy . though a man may go out weep take his vessel of seed with him he will come again in joy with the corded stem of grain in his arm .lt a song of the go up . of solomon . gt if the lord be not help the builder then the building of a house be to no purpose if the lord do not keep the town the watchman keep his watch for nothing . it be of no use for you to get up early and to go late to your rest with the bread of sorrow for your food for the lord give to his loved one in sleep . see son be a heritage from the lord the fruit of the body be his reward . like arrow in the hand of a man of war be the child of the young . happy be the man who have a good store of them he will not be put to shame but his cause will be support by them against his hater .lt a song of the go up . gt happy be the worshipper of the lord who be walk in his way . you will have the fruit of the work of your hand happy will you be and all will be well for you . your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost part of your house your child will be like olive plant round your table . see ! this be the blessing of the worshipper of the lord . may the lord send you bless out of zion may you see the good of jerusalem all the day of your life . may you see your child 's child . peace be on israel .lt a song of the go up . gt great have be my trouble from the time when i be young let israel now say great have be my trouble from the time when i be young but my trouble have not overcome me . the plowman be plough on my back long be the wound they make . the lord be true the cord of the evil doer be break in two . let all the hater of zion be sham and turn back . let them be like the grass on the house top which be dry before it come to full growth . he who get in the grain have no use for it and they do not make band of it for the grain stem . and those who go by do not say the blessing of the lord be on you we give you bless in the name of the lord .lt a song of the go up . gt out of the deep have i send up my cry to you o lord . lord let my voice come before you let your ear be awake to the voice of my prayer . o jah if you take note of every sin who would go free ? but there be forgiveness with you so that you may be fear . i be wait for the lord my soul be wait for him and my hope be in his word . my soul be watch for the lord more than those who be watch for the morning yes more than the watcher for the morning . o israel have hope in the lord for with the lord be mercy and full salvation . and he will make israel free from all his sin .lt a song of the go up . of david . gt lord there be no pride in my heart and my eye be not lift up and i have not take part in great undertaking or in thing over hard for me . see i have make my soul calm and quiet like a child on it mother 's breast my soul be like a child on it mother 's breast . o israel have hope in the lord from this time and for ever .lt a song of the go up . gt lord give think to david and to all his trouble how he make an oath to the lord and give his word to the great god of jacob say truly i will not come into my house or go to my bed i will not give sleep to my eye or rest to my eyeball till i have get a place for the lord a resting place for the great god of jacob . we have news of it at ephrathah we come to it in the field of the wood . let u go into his tent let u give worship at his foot . come back o lord to your rest place you and the ark of your strength . let your priest be clothe with righteousness and let your saint give cry of joy . because of your servant david do not give up your king . the lord give a true oath to david which he will not take back say i will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body . if your child keep my word and the teaching which i will give them their child will be ruler of your kingdom for ever . for the lord 's heart be on zion desire it for his rest place . this be my rest for ever here will i ever be for this be my desire . my blessing will be on her food and her poor will be full of bread . her priest will be clothe with salvation and her saint will give cry of joy . there i will make the horn of david fertile i have make ready a light for my king . his hater will be clothe with shame but i will make his crown shining .lt a song of the go up . of david . gt see how good and how please it be for brother to be live together in harmony ! it be like oil of great price on the head flow down over the face even aaron 's face come down to the edge of his robe like the dew of hermon which come down on the mountain of zion for there the lord give order for the blessing even life for ever .lt a song of the go up . gt give praise to the lord all you servant of the lord who take your place in the house of the lord by night . give praise to the lord lift up your hand in his holy place . may the lord who make heaven and earth send you bless out of zionlet the lord be praise . o you servant of the lord give praise to the name of the lord . you who be in the house of the lord and in the open space of the house of our god give praise to jah for he be good make melody to his name for it be please . for the lord have take jacob for himself and israel for his property . i know that the lord be great and that our lord be great than all other god . the lord have do whatever be please to him in heaven and on the earth in the sea and in all the deep water . he make the mist go up from the end of the earth he make thunder flame for the rain he send out the wind from his store house . he put to death the first fruit of egypt of man and of beast . he send sign and wonder among you o egypt on pharaoh and on all his servant . he overcome great nation and put strong king to death sihon king of the amorites and og king of bashan and all the kingdom of canaan and give their land for a heritage even for a heritage to israel his people . o lord your name be eternal and the memory of you will have no end . for the lord will be judge of his people 's cause his feeling will be change to his servant . the image of the nation be silver and gold the work of men 's hand . they have mouth but no voice they have eye but they do not see they have ear but no hearing and there be no breath in their mouth . those who make them be like them and so be everyone who put his hope in them . give praise to the lord o child of israel give praise to the lord o son of aaron give praise to the lord o son of levi let all the worshipper of the lord give him praise . praise be to the lord out of zion even to the lord whose house be in jerusalem let the lord be praise .o give praise to the lord for he be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever . o give praise to the god of god for his mercy be unchanging for ever . o give praise to the lord of lord for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who only do great wonder for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who by wisdom make the heaven for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him by whom the earth be stretch out over the water for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who make great light for his mercy be unchanging for ever . the sun to have rule by day for his mercy be unchanging for ever . the moon and the star to have rule by night for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who put to death the first fruit of egypt for his mercy be unchanging for ever and take out israel from among them for his mercy be unchanging for ever with a strong hand and an outstretched arm for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who make a way through the red sea for his mercy be unchanging for ever and let israel go through it for his mercy be unchanging for ever by him pharaoh and his army be overturn in the red sea for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who take his people through the waste land for his mercy be unchanging for ever . to him who overcome great king for his mercy be unchanging for ever and put noble king to death for his mercy be unchanging for ever sihon king of the amorites for his mercy be unchanging for ever and og king of bashan for his mercy be unchanging for ever and give their land to his people for a heritage for his mercy be unchanging for ever . even a heritage for his servant israel for his mercy be unchanging for ever . who keep u in mind when we be in trouble for his mercy be unchanging for ever . and have take u out of the hand of our hater for his mercy be unchanging for ever . who give food to all flesh for his mercy be unchanging for ever . o give praise to the god of heaven for his mercy be unchanging for ever .by the river of babylon we be seat weep at the memory of zion hang our instrument of music on the tree by the waterside . for there those who have take u prisoner make request for a song and those who have take away all we have give u order to be glad say give u one of the song of zion . how may we give the lord 's song in a strange land ? if i keep not your memory o jerusalem let not my right hand keep the memory of it art . if i let you go out of my thought and if i do not put jerusalem before my great joy let my tongue be fix to the roof of my mouth . o lord keep in mind against the child of edom the day of jerusalem how they say let it be uncover uncovered even to it base . o daughter of babylon whose fate be destruction happy be the man who do to you what you have do to u . happy be the man who take your little one crush them against the rock .lt of david . gt i will give you praise with all my heart i will make melody to you before the god . i will give worship before your holy temple praise your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith for you have make your word great than all your name . when my cry come to your ear you give me an answer and make me great with strength in my soul . all the king of the earth will give you praise o lord when the word of your mouth come to their ear . they will make song about the way of the lord for great be the glory of the lord . though the lord be high he see those who be low and he have knowledge from far off of those who be lift up . even when trouble be round me you will give me life your hand will be stretch out against the wrath of my hater and your right hand will be my salvation . the lord will make all thing complete for me o lord your mercy be eternal do not give up the work of your hand .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt o lord you have knowledge of me search out all my secret . you have knowledge when i be seat and when i get up you see my thought from far away . you keep watch over my step and my sleep and have knowledge of all my way . for there be not a word on my tongue which be not clear to you o lord . i be shut in by you on every side and you have put your hand on me . such knowledge be a wonder great than my power it be so high that i may not come near it . where may i go from your spirit ? how may i go in flight from you ? if i go up to heaven you be there or if i make my bed in the underworld you be there . if i take the wing of the morning and go to the farthest part of the sea even there will i be guide by your hand and your right hand will keep me . if i say only let me be cover by the dark and the light about me be night even the dark be not dark to you the night be as bright a the day for dark and light be the same to you . my flesh be make by you and my part join together in my mother 's body . i will give you praise for i be strangely and delicately form your work be great wonder and of this my soul be fully conscious . my frame be not unseen by you when i be make secretly and strangely form in the low part of the earth . your eye saw my unformed substance in your book all my day be record even those which be purpose before they have come into be . how dear be your thought to me o god ! how great be the number of them ! if i make up their number it would be more than the grain of sand when i be awake i be still with you . if only you would put the sinner to death o god go far from me you men of blood . for they go against you with evil design and your hater make sport of your name . be not your hater hat by me o lord ? be not those who be lift up against you a cause of grief to me ? my hate for them be complete my thought of them be a if they be make war on me . o god let the secret of my heart be uncover and let my wander thought be test see if there be any way of sorrow in me and be my guide in the eternal way .lt to the chief music maker . a psalm . of david . gt o lord take me out of the power of the evil man keep me safe from the violent man for their heart be full of evil design and they be ever make ready cause of war . their tongue be sharp like the tongue of a snake the poison of snake be under their lip . selah . o lord take me out of the hand of sinner keep me safe from the violent man for they be design my downfall . the men of pride have put secret cord for my foot stretch net in my way so that they may take me with their trick . selah . i have say to the lord you be my god give ear o lord to the voice of my prayer . o lord god the strength of my salvation you have be a cover over my head in the day of the fight . o lord give not the wrongdoer his desire give him no help in his evil design or he may be uplift in pride . selah . a for those who come round me let their head be cover by the evil of their lip . let burn flame come down on them let them be put into the fire and into deep water so that they may not get up again . let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow . i be certain that the lord will take care of the cause of the poor and of the right of those who be trouble . truly the upright will give praise to your name the holy will have a place in your house .lt a psalm . of david . gt lord i have make my cry to you come to me quickly give ear to my voice when it go up to you . let my prayer be order before you like a sweet smell and let the lift up of my hand be like the evening offering . o lord keep a watch over my mouth keep the door of my lip . keep my heart from desire any evil thing or from take part in the sin of the evil doer with men who do wrong and let me have no part in their good thing . let the upright give me punishment and let the god fear man put me in the right way but i will not let the oil of sinner come on my head when they do evil i will give myself to prayer . when destruction come to their judge by the side of the rock they will give ear to my word for they be sweet . our bone be break up at the mouth of the underworld a the earth be break by the plough . but my eye be turn to you o lord god my hope be in you let not my soul be give up to death . keep me from the net which they have put down for me and from the design of the worker of evil . let the sinner be take in the net which they themselves have put down while i go free .lt maschil . of david . a prayer when he be in the hole of the rock . gt the sound of my cry go up to the lord with my voice i make my prayer for grace to the lord . i put all my sorrow before him and make clear to him all my trouble . when my spirit be overcome your eye be on my going net have be secretly place in the way in which i go . look to my right side i saw no man who be my friend i have no safe place no one have any care for my soul . i have make my cry to you o lord i have say you be my safe place and my heritage in the land of the living . give ear to my cry for i be make very low take me out of the hand of my hater for they be strong than i. take my soul out of prison so that i may give praise to your name the upright will give praise because of me for you have give me a full reward .lt a psalm . of david . gt let my prayer come to you o lord give ear to my request for your grace keep faith with me and give me an answer in your righteousness let not your servant come before you to be judge for no man living be upright in your eye . the evil man have go after my soul my life be crush down to the earth he have put me in the dark like those who have long be dead . because of this my spirit be overcome and my heart be full of fear . i keep in mind the early day of the past give thought to all your act even to the work of your hand . my hand be stretch out to you my soul be turn to you like a land in need of water . selah . be quick in answer me o lord for the strength of my spirit be go let me see your face so that i may not be like those who go down into the underworld . let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning for my hope be in you give me knowledge of the way in which i be to go for my soul be lift up to you . o lord take me out of the hand of my hater my soul be wait for you . give me teach so that i may do your pleasure for you be my god let your good spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness . give me life o lord because of your name in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble . and in your mercy put an end to my hater and send destruction on all those who be against my soul for i be your servant .lt a psalm . of david . gt praise be to the god of my strength teach my hand the use of the sword and my finger the art of fight he be my strength and my rock my high tower and my saviour my keeper and my hope he give me authority over my people . lord what be man that you keep him in mind ? or the son of man that you take him into account ? man be like a breath his life be like a shade which be quickly go . come down o lord from your heaven at your touch let the mountain give out smoke . with your storm flame send them in flight send out your arrow for their destruction . put out your hand from on high make me free take me safely out of the great water and out of the hand of strange men in whose mouth be false word and whose right hand be a right hand of deceit . i will make a new song to you o god i will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cord . it be god who give salvation to king and who keep his servant david from the wounding sword . make me free and take me out of the hand of strange men in whose mouth be false word and whose right hand be a right hand of deceit . our son be like tall young plant and our daughter like the shin stone of a king 's house our store house be full of all good thing and our sheep give birth to thousand and ten thousand in our field . our ox be well weight down our cow give birth safely there be no go out and there be no cry of sorrow in our open place . happy be the nation whose way be so ordered yes happy be the nation whose god be the lord .lt a song of praise . of david . gt let me give glory to you o god my king and bless to your name for ever and ever . every day will i give you bless praise your name for ever and ever . great be the lord and greatly to be praise his power may never be search out . one generation after another will give praise to your great act and make clear the operation of your strength . my thought will be of the honour and glory of your rule and of the wonder of your work . men will be talk of the power and fear of your act i will give word of your glory . their saying will be full of the memory of all your mercy and they will make song of your righteousness . the lord be full of grace and pity not quickly angry but great in mercy . the lord be good to all men and his mercy be over all his work . all the work of your hand give praise to you o lord and your saint give you bless . their word will be of the glory of your kingdom and their talk of your strength so that the son of men may have knowledge of his act of power and of the great glory of his kingdom . your kingdom be an eternal kingdom and your rule be through all generation . the lord be the support of all who be crush and the lifter up of all who be bent down . the eye of all men be wait for you and you give them their food in it time . by the opening of your hand every living thing have it desire in full measure . the lord be upright in all his way and kind in all his work . the lord be near all those who give honour to his name even to all who give honour to him with true heart . to his worshipper he will give their desire their cry come to his ear and he give them salvation . the lord will keep all his worshipper from danger but he will send destruction on all sinner . my mouth will give praise to the lord let all flesh be bless his holy name for ever and ever .let the lord be praise . give praise to the lord o my soul . while i have breath i will give praise to the lord i will make melody to my god while i have my be . put not your faith in ruler or in the son of man in whom there be no salvation . man 's breath go out he be turn back again to dust in that day all his purpose come to an end . happy be the man who have the god of jacob for his help whose hope be in the lord his god who make heaven and earth the sea and all thing in them who keep faith for ever who give their right to those who be crush down and give food to those who be in need of it the lord make the prisoner free the lord make open the eye of the blind the lord be the lifter up of those who be bent down the lord be a lover of the upright the lord take care of those who be in a strange land he give help to the widow and to the child who have no father but he send destruction on the way of sinner . the lord will be king for ever your god o zion will be king through all generation . praise be to the lord .give praise to the lord for it be good to make melody to our god praise be please and beautiful . the lord be build up jerusalem he make all the outlaw of israel come together . he make the broken hearted well and put oil on their wound . he see the number of the star he give them all their name . great be our lord and great his power there be no limit to his wisdom . the lord give help to the poor in spirit but he send sinner down in shame . make song of praise to the lord make melody to our god with instrument of music . by his hand the heaven be cover with cloud and rain be store up for the earth he make the grass tall on the mountain . he give food to every beast and to the young raven in answer to their cry . he have no delight in the strength of a horse he take no pleasure in the leg of a man . the lord take pleasure in his worshipper and in those whose hope be in his mercy . give praise to the lord o jerusalem give praise to your god o zion . he have make strong the iron band of your door he have send blessing on your child inside your wall . he give peace in all your land make your store full of fat grain . he send out his order to the earth his word go out quickly . he give snow like wool he send out ice drop like dust . he send down ice like raindrop water be make hard by his cold . at the outgoing of his word the ice be turn to water when he send out his wind there be a flowing of water . he make his word clear to jacob teach israel his law and his decision . he have not do these thing for any other nation and a for his law they have no knowledge of them . let the lord be praise .give praise to the lord . let the lord be praise from the heaven give him praise in the sky . give praise to him all you his angel give praise to him all his army . give praise to him you sun and moon give praise to him all you star of light . give praise to him you high heaven and you water which be over the heaven . let them give praise to the name of the lord for he give the order and they be make . he have put them in their place for ever he have give them their limit which may not be break . give praise to the lord from the earth you great sea beast and deep place fire and rain of ice snow and mist storm wind do his word mountain and all hill fruit tree and all tree of the mountain beast and all cattle insect and wing bird king of the earth and all people ruler and all judge of the earth young men and virgin old men and child let them give glory to the name of the lord for his name only be to be praise his kingdom be over the earth and the heaven . he have put on high the horn of his people for the praise of all his saint even the child of israel a people which be near to him . let the lord be praise .let the lord be praise . make a new song to the lord let his praise be in the meeting of his saint . let israel have joy in his maker let the child of zion be glad in their king . let them give praise to his name in the dance let them make melody to him with instrument of brass and cord instrument of music . for the lord have pleasure in his people he give the poor in spirit a crown of salvation . let the saint have joy and glory let them give cry of joy on their bed . let the high praise of god be in their mouth and a two edge sword in their hand to give the nation the reward of their sin and the people their punishment to put their king in chain and their ruler in band of iron to give them the punishment which be in the holy writing this honour be give to all his saint . praise be to the lord .let the lord be praise . give praise to god in his holy place give him praise in the heaven of his power . give him praise for his act of power give him praise in the measure of his great strength . give him praise with the sound of the horn give him praise with corded instrument of music . give him praise with instrument of brass and in the dance give him praise with horn and cord instrument . give him praise with the loud brass give him praise with the high sounding brass . let everything which have breath give praise to the lord . let the lord be praise .the wise saying of solomon the son of david king of israel . to have knowledge of wise teaching to be clear about the word of reason to be train in the way of wisdom in righteousness and judging truly and straight behaviour to make the simple mind sharp and to give the young man knowledge and serious purpose the wise man hearing will get great learning and the act of the man of good sense will be wisely guide to get the sense of wise saying and secret and of the word of the wise and their dark saying . the fear of the lord be the start of knowledge but the foolish have no use for wisdom and teaching . my son give ear to the training of your father and do not give up the teaching of your mother for they will be a crown of grace for your head and chain ornament about your neck . my son if sinner would take you out of the right way do not go with them . if they say come with u let u make design against the good waiting secretly for the upright without cause let u overcome them live like the underworld and in their strength a those who go down to death good of great price will be ours our house will be full of wealth take your chance with u and we will all have one money bag my son do not go with them keep your foot from their way for their foot be run after evil and they be quick to take a man 's life . truly to no purpose be the net stretch out before the eye of the bird and they be secretly wait for their blood and make ready destruction for themselves . such be the fate of everyone who go in search of profit it take away the life of it owner . wisdom be cry out in the street her voice be loud in the open place her word be sound in the meeting place and in the doorway of the town how long you simple one will foolish thing be dear to you ? and pride a delight to the hater of authority ? how long will the foolish go on hat knowledge ? be turn again by my sharp word see i will send the flow of my spirit on you and make my word clear to you . because your ear be shut to my voice no one give attention to my out stretched hand you be not control by my guiding and would have nothing to do with my sharp word so in the day of your trouble i will be laugh i will make sport of your fear when your fear come on you like a storm and your trouble like a rushing wind when pain and sorrow come on you . then i will give no answer to their cry search for me early they will not see me for they be hater of knowledge and do not give their heart to the fear of the lord they have no desire for my teaching and my word of protest be a nothing to them . so the fruit of their way will be their food and with the design of their heart they will be make full . for the turn back of the simple from teach will be the cause of their death and the peace of the foolish will be their destruction . but whoever give ear to me will take his rest safely live in peace without fear of evil .my son if you will take my word to your heart store up my law in your mind so that your ear give attention to wisdom and your heart be turn to knowledge truly if you be cry out for good sense and your request be for knowledge if you be look for her a for silver and search for her a for store up wealth then the fear of the lord will be clear to you and knowledge of god will be yours . for the lord give wisdom out of his mouth come knowledge and reason he have salvation store up for the upright he be a breastplate to those in whom there be no evil he keep watch on the way which be right and take care of those who have the fear of him . then you will have knowledge of righteousness and right acting and upright behaviour even of every good way . for wisdom will come into your heart and knowledge will be please to your soul wise purpose will be watch over you and knowledge will keep you give you salvation from the evil man from those whose word be false who give up the way of righteousness to go by dark road who take pleasure in wrongdoing and have joy in the evil design of the sinner whose way be not straight and whose footstep be turn to evil to take you out of the power of the strange woman who say smooth word with her tongue who be false to the husband of her early year and do not keep the agreement of her god in mind for her house be on the way down to death her footstep go down to the shade those who go to her do not come back again their foot do not keep in the way of life so that you may go in the way of good men and keep in the footstep of the upright . for the upright will be live in the land and the good will have it for their heritage . but sinner will be cut off from the land and those whose act be false will be uproot .my son keep my teaching in your memory and my rule in your heart for they will give you increase of day year of life and peace . let not mercy and good faith go from you let them be hang round your neck record on your heart so you will have grace and a good name in the eye of god and men . put all your hope in god not look to your reason for support . in all your way give ear to him and he will make straight your footstep . put no high value on your wisdom let the fear of the lord be before you and keep yourself from evil this will give strength to your flesh and new life to your bone . give honour to the lord with your wealth and with the first fruit of all your increase so your store house will be full of grain and your vessel overflow with new wine . my son do not make your heart hard against the lord 's teaching do not be make angry by his training for to those who be dear to him the lord say sharp word and make the son in whom he have delight undergo pain . happy be the man who make discovery of wisdom and he who get knowledge . for trading in it be well than trading in silver and it profit great than bright gold . she be of more value than jewel and nothing for which you may have a desire be fair in comparison with her . long life be in her right hand and in her left be wealth and honour . her way be way of delight and all her going be peace . she be a tree of life to all who take her in their hand and happy be everyone who keep her . the lord by wisdom put in position the base of the earth by reason he put the heaven in their place . by his knowledge the deep be part and dew come drop from the sky . my son keep good sense and do not let wise purpose go from your eye . so they will be life for your soul and grace for your neck . then you will go safely on your way and your foot will have no cause for slip . when you take your rest you will have no fear and on your bed sleep will be sweet to you . have no fear of sudden danger or of the storm which will come on evil doer for the lord will be your hope and will keep your foot from be take in the net . do not keep back good from those who have a right to it when it be in the power of your hand to do it . say not to your neighbour go and come again and tomorrow i will give when you have it by you at the time . do not make evil design against your neighbour when he be live with you without fear . do not take up a cause at law against a man for nothing if he have do you no wrong . have no envy of the violent man or take any of his way a an example . for the wrong hearted man be hat by the lord but he be a friend to the upright . the curse of the lord be on the house of the evil doer but his blessing be on the tent of the upright . he make sport of the men of pride but he give grace to the gentle hearted . the wise will have glory for their heritage but shame will be the reward of the foolish .give ear my son to the teaching of a father give attention so that you may have knowledge for i give you good teach do not give up the knowledge you be get from me . for i be a son to my father a gentle and an only one to my mother . and he give me teach say to me keep my word in your heart keep my rule so that you may have life get wisdom get true knowledge keep it in memory do not be turn away from the word of my mouth . do not give her up and she will keep you give her your love and she will make you safe . the first sign of wisdom be to get wisdom go give all you have to get true knowledge . put her in a high place and you will be lift up by her she will give you honour when you give her your love . she will put a crown of grace on your head give you a head dress of glory . give ear o my son and let your heart be open to my saying and long life will be yours . i have give you teach in the way of wisdom guide your step in the straight way . when you go your way will not be narrow and in run you will not have a fall . take learning in your hand do not let her go keep her for she be your life . do not go in the road of sinner or be walk in the way of evil men . keep far from it do not go near be turn from it and go on your way . for they take no rest till they have do evil their sleep be take away if they have not be the cause of someone 's fall . the bread of evil do be their food the wine of violent act their drink . but the way of the upright be like the light of early morning get brighter and brighter till the full day . the way of sinner be dark they see not the cause of their fall . my son give attention to my word let your ear be turn to my saying . let them not go from your eye keep them deep in your heart . for they be life to him who get them and strength to all his flesh . and keep watch over your heart with all care so you will have life . put away from you an evil tongue and let false lip be far from you . keep your eye on what be in front of you look straight before you . keep a watch on your behaviour let all your way be rightly order . let there be no turn to the right or to the left keep your foot from evil .my son give attention to my wisdom let your ear be turn to my teach so that you may be rule by a wise purpose and your lip may keep knowledge . for honey be drop from the lip of the strange woman and her mouth be smooth than oil but her end be bitter a wormwood and sharp a a two edged sword her foot go down to death and her step to the underworld she never keep her mind on the road of life her way be uncertain she have no knowledge . give ear to me then my son and do not put away my word from you . go far away from her do not come near the door of her house for fear that you may give your honour to others and your wealth to strange men and strange men may be full of your wealth and the fruit of your work go to the house of others and you will be full of grief at the end of your life when your flesh and your body be waste and you will say how be teach hat by me and my heart put no value on train i do not give attention to the voice of my teacher my ear be not turn to those who be guide me ! i be in almost all evil in the company of the people . let water from your store and not that of others be your drink and run water from your fountain . let not your spring be flow in the street or your stream of water in the open place . let them be for yourself only not for other men with you . let bless be on your fountain have joy in the wife of your early year . a a loving hind and a gentle doe let her breast ever give you rapture let your passion at all time be move by her love . why let yourself my son go out of the way with a strange woman and take another woman in your arm ? for a man 's way be before the eye of the lord and he put all his going in the scale . the evil doer will be take in the net of his crime and prisoned in the cord of his sin . he will come to his end for need of teach he be so foolish that he will go wander from the right way .my son if you have make yourself responsible for your neighbour or give your word for another you be take a in a net by the word of your mouth the saying of your lip have overcome you . do this my son and make yourself free because you have come into the power of your neighbour go without wait and make a strong request to your neighbour . give no sleep to your eye or rest to them make yourself free like the roe from the hand of the archer and the bird from him who put a net for her . go to the ant you hater of work give thought to her way and be wise have no chief overseer or ruler she get her meat in the summer store up food at the time of the grain cutting . how long will you be sleep o hater of work ? when will you get up from your sleep ? a little sleep a little rest a little folding of the hand in sleep then loss will come on you like an outlaw and your need like an arm man a good for nothing man be an evil doer he go on his way cause trouble with false word make sign with his eye rub with his foot and give news with his finger his mind be ever design evil he let loose violent act . for this cause his downfall will be sudden quickly he will be break and there will be no help for him . six thing be hat by the lord seven thing be disgust to him eye of pride a false tongue hand which take life without cause a heart full of evil design foot which be quick in run after sin a false witness breathe out untrue word and one who let loose violent act among brother . my son keep the rule of your father and have in memory the teaching of your mother keep them ever fold in your heart and have them hang round your neck . in your walk it will be your guide when you be sleep it will keep watch over you when you be awake it will have talk with you . for the rule be a light and the teach a shining light and the guiding word of training be the way of life . they will keep you from the evil woman from the smooth tongue of the strange woman . let not your heart 's desire go after her fair body let not her eye take you prisoner . for a loose woman be look for a cake of bread but another man 's wife go after one 's very life . may a man take fire to his breast without burn his clothing ? or may one go on lighted coal and his foot not be burn ? so it be with him who go in to his neighbour 's wife he who have anything to do with her will not go free from punishment . men do not have a low opinion of a thief who take food when he be in need of it but if he be take in the act he will have to give back seven time as much give up all his property which be in his house . he who take another man 's wife be without all sense he who do it be the cause of destruction to his soul . wound will be his and loss of honour and his shame may not be wash away . for bitter be the wrath of an angry husband in the day of punishment he will have no mercy . he will not take any payment and he will not make peace with you though your money offering be increase .my son keep my saying and let my rule be store up with you . keep my rule and you will have life let my teach be to you a the light of your eye let them be fix to your finger and record in your heart . say to wisdom you be my sister let knowledge be name your special friend so that they may keep you from the strange woman even from her whose word be smooth . look out from my house and watch through the window i saw among the young men one without sense walking in the street near the turn of her road go on the way to her house at nightfall in the evening of the day in the black dark of the night . and the woman come out to him in the dress of a loose woman with a design heart she be full of noise and uncontrolled her foot keep not in her house . now she be in the street now in the open space wait at every turning of the road . so she take him by his hand kiss him and without a sign of shame she say to him i have a feast of peace offering for today my oath have be effect . so i come out in the hope of meeting you look for you with care and now i have you . my bed be cover with cushion of needlework with coloured cloth of the cotton thread of egypt i have make my bed sweet with perfume and spice . come let u take our pleasure in love till the morning have joy in love 's delight . for the master of the house be away on a long journey he have take a bag of money with him he be come back at the full moon . with her fair word she overcome him force him with her smooth lip . the simple man go after her like an ox go to it death like a roe pull by a cord like a bird fall into a net with no thought that his life be in danger till an arrow go into his side . so now my son give ear to me give attention to the saying of my mouth let not your heart be turn to her way do not go wander in her footstep . for those wounded and make low by her be great in number and all those who have come to their death through her be a great army . her house be the way to the underworld go down to the room of death .be not wisdom cry out and the voice of knowledge sounding ? at the top of the highway at the meeting of the road she take her place where the road go into the town her cry go out at the doorway her voice be loud i be cry out to you o men my voice come to the son of men . become expert in reason o you simple one you foolish one take training to heart . give ear for my word be true and my lip be open to give out what be upright . for good faith go out of my mouth and false lip be disgust to me . all the word of my mouth be righteousness there be nothing false or twist in them . they be all true to him whose mind be awake and straightforward to those who get knowledge . take my teaching and not silver get knowledge in place of the best gold . for wisdom be good than jewel and all thing which may be desire be nothing in comparison with her . i wisdom have make wise behaviour my near relation i be see to be the special friend of wise purpose . the fear of the lord be see in hat evil pride a high opinion of oneself the evil way and the false tongue be unpleasing to me . wise design and good sense be mine reason and strength be mine . through me king have their power and ruler give right decision . through me chief have authority and the noble one be judge in righteousness . those who have give me their love be love by me and those who make search for me with care will get me . wealth and honour be in my hand even wealth without equal and righteousness . my fruit be good than gold even than the best gold and my increase be more to be desire than silver . i go in the road of righteousness in the way of right judging so that i may give my lover wealth for their heritage make their store house full . the lord make me a the start of his way the first of his work in the past . from eternal day i be give my place from the birth of time before the earth be . when there be no deep i be give birth when there be no fountain flow with water . before the mountain be put in their place before the hill be my birth when he have not make the earth or the field or the dust of the world . when he make ready the heaven i be there when he put an arch over the face of the deep when he make strong the sky overhead when the fountain of the deep be fix when he put a limit to the sea so that the water might not go against his word when he put in position the base of the earth then i be by his side a a master workman and i be his delight from day to day play before him at all time play in his earth and my delight be with the son of men . give ear to me then my son for happy be those who keep my way . take my teaching and be wise do not let it go . happy be the man who give ear to me watch at my door day by day keep his place by the pillar of my house . for whoever get me get life and grace from the lord will come to him . but he who do evil to me do wrong to his soul all my hater be in love with death .wisdom have make her house put up her seven pillar . she have put her fat beast to death her wine be mixed her table be ready . she have send out her woman servants her voice go out to the high place of the town say whoever be simple let him come in here and to him who have no sense she say come take of my bread and of my wine which be mixed . give up the simple one and have life and go in the way of knowledge . he who give teach to a man of pride get shame for himself he who say sharp word to a sinner get a bad name . do not say sharp word to a man of pride or he will have hate for you make them clear to a wise man and you will be dear to him . give teach to a wise man and he will become wiser give training to an upright man and his learning will be increase . the fear of the lord be the start of wisdom and the knowledge of the holy one give a wise mind for by me your day will be increase and the year of your life will be long . if you be wise you be wise for yourself if your heart be full of pride you only will have the pain of it . the foolish woman be full of noise she have no sense at all . seat at the door of her house in the high place of the town cry out to those who go by go straight on their way she say whoever be simple let him come in here and to him who be without sense she say drink take without right be sweet and food in secret be please . but he do not see that the dead be there that her guest be in the deep place of the underworld .a wise son make a glad father but a foolish son be a sorrow to his mother . wealth which come from sin be of no profit but righteousness give salvation from death . the lord will not let the upright be in need of food but he put far from him the desire of the evil doer . he who be slow in his work become poor but the hand of the ready worker get in wealth . he who in summer get together his store be a son who do wisely but he who take his rest when the grain be be cut be a son cause shame . blessing be on the head of the upright but the face of sinner will be cover with sorrow . the memory of the upright be a blessing but the name of the evil doer will be turn to dust . the wise hearted man will let himself be rule but the man whose talk be foolish will have a fall . he whose way be upright will go safely but he whose way be twist will be make low . he who make sign with his eye be a cause of trouble but he who make a man see his error be a cause of peace . the mouth of the upright man be a fountain of life but the mouth of the evil doer be a bitter cup . hate be a cause of violent act but all error be cover up by love . in the lip of him who have knowledge wisdom be see but a rod be ready for the back of him who be without sense . knowledge be store up by the wise but the mouth of the foolish man be a destruction which be near . the property of the man of wealth be his strong town the poor man 's need be his destruction . the work of the upright give life the increase of the evil doer be a cause of sin . he who take note of teaching be a way of life but he who give up training be a cause of error . hate be cover up by the lip of the upright man but he who let out evil about another be foolish . where there be much talk there will be no end to sin but he who keep his mouth shut do wisely . the tongue of the upright man be like test silver the heart of the evil doer be of little value . the lip of the upright man give food to men but the foolish come to death for need of sense . the blessing of the lord give wealth hard work make it no great . it be sport to the foolish man to do evil but the man of good sense take delight in wisdom . the thing fear by the evil doer will come to him but the upright man will get his desire . when the storm wind be past the sinner be see no longer but the upright man be safe for ever . like acid drink to the teeth and a smoke to the eye so be the hater of work to those who send him . the fear of the lord give long life but the year of the evil doer will be cut short . the hope of the upright man will give joy but the waiting of the evil doer will have it end in sorrow . the way of the lord be a strong tower for the upright man but destruction to the worker of evil . the upright man will never be move but evil doer will not have a safe resting place in the land . the mouth of the upright man be bud with wisdom but the twisted tongue will be cut off . the lip of the upright man have knowledge of what be please but twist be the mouth of evil doer .scale of deceit be hat by the lord but a true weight be his delight . when pride come there come shame but wisdom be with the quiet in spirit . the righteousness of the upright will be their guide but the twisted way of the false will be their destruction . wealth be of no profit in the day of wrath but righteousness keep a man safe from death . the righteousness of the good man will make his way straight but the sin of the evil doer will be the cause of his fall . the righteousness of the upright will be their salvation but the false will themselves be take in their evil design . at the death of an upright man his hope do not come to an end but the hope of the evil doer come to destruction . the upright man be take out of trouble and in his place come the sinner . with his mouth the evil man send destruction on his neighbour but through knowledge the upright be take out of trouble . when thing go well for the upright man all the town be glad at the death of sinner there be cry of joy . by the blessing of the upright man the town be make great but it be overturn by the mouth of the evil doer . he who have a poor opinion of his neighbour have no sense but a wise man keep quiet . he who go about talk of others make secret public but the true hearted man keep thing cover . when there be no help suggestion the people will have a fall but with a number of wise guide they will be safe . he who make himself responsible for a strange man will undergo much loss but the hater of such undertaking will be safe . a woman who be full of grace be honour but a woman hat righteousness be a seat of shame those hat work will undergo loss but the strong keep their wealth . the man who have mercy will be reward but the cruel man be the cause of trouble to himself . the sinner get the payment of deceit but his reward be certain who put in the seed of righteousness . so righteousness give life but he who go after evil get death for himself . the uncontrolled be hat by the lord but those whose way be without error be his delight certainly the evil doer will not go free from punishment but the seed of the upright man will be safe . like a ring of gold in the nose of a pig be a beautiful woman who have no sense . the desire of the upright man be only for good but wrath be wait for the evil doer . a man may give freely and still his wealth will be increase and another may keep back more than be right but only come to be in need . he who give blessing will be make fat but the curser will himself be curse . he who keep back grain will be curse by the people but a blessing will be on the head of him who let them have it for a price . he who with all his heart go after what be good be search for grace but he who be look for trouble will get it . he who put his faith in wealth will come to nothing but the upright man will be full of growth like the green leaf . the troubler of his house will have the wind for his heritage and the foolish will be servant to the wise hearted . the fruit of righteousness be a tree of life but violent behaviour take away souls . if the upright man be reward on earth how much more the evil doer and the sinner !a lover of training be a lover of knowledge but a hater of teaching be like a beast . a good man have grace in the eye of the lord but the man of evil design get punishment from him . no man will make himself safe through evil do but the root of upright men will never be move . a woman of virtue be a crown to her husband but she whose behaviour be a cause of shame be like a waste disease in his bone . the purpose of upright men be right but the design of evil doer be deceit . the word of sinner be destruction for the upright but the mouth of upright men be their salvation . evil doer be overturn and never see again but the house of upright men will keep it place . a man will be praise in the measure of his wisdom but a wrong minded man will be look down on . he who be of low position and have a servant be good than one who have a high opinion of himself and be in need of bread . an upright man have think for the life of his beast but the heart of evil doer be cruel . he who do work on his land will not be short of bread but he who go after foolish men be without sense . the rest place of the sinner will come to destruction but the root of upright men be for ever . in the sin of the lip be a net which take the sinner but the upright man will come out of trouble . from the fruit of his mouth will a man have good food in full measure and the work of a man 's hand will be reward . the way of the foolish man seem right to him ? but the wise man give ear to suggestion . a foolish man let his trouble be openly see but a sharp man keep shame secret . the breathe out of true word give knowledge of righteousness but a false witness give out deceit . there be some whose uncontrolled talk be like the wound of a sword but the tongue of the wise make one well again . true lip be certain for ever but a false tongue be only for a minute . deceit be in the heart of those whose design be evil but for those purpose peace there be joy . no trouble will come to upright men but sinner will be full of evil . false lip be hat by the lord but those whose act be true be his delight . a sharp man keep back his knowledge but the heart of foolish men make clear their foolish thought . the hand of the ready worker will have authority but he who be slow in his work will be put to force work . care in the heart of a man make it weight down but a good word make it glad . the upright man be a guide to his neighbour but the way of evil doer be a cause of error to them . he who be slow in his work do not go in search of food but the ready worker get much wealth . in the road of righteousness be life but the way of the evil doer go to death .a wise son be a lover of teach but the ear of the hater of authority be shut to sharp word . a man will get good from the fruit of his lip but the desire of the false be for violent act . he who keep a watch on his mouth keep his life but he whose lip be open wide will have destruction . the hater of work do not get his desire but the soul of the hard worker will be make fat . the upright man be a hater of false word the evil doer get a bad name and be put to shame . righteousness keep safe him whose way be without error but evil doer be overturn by sin . a man may be act a if he have wealth but have nothing another may seem poor but have great wealth . a man will give his wealth in exchange for his life but the poor will not give ear to sharp word . there be a glad dawn for the upright man but the light of the sinner will be put out . the only effect of pride be fight but wisdom be with the quiet in spirit . wealth quickly get will become less but he who get a store by the work of his hand will have it increase . hope put off be a weariness to the heart but when what be desire come it be a tree of life . he who make sport of the word will come to destruction but the respecter of the law will be reward . the teaching of the wise be a fountain of life turn men away from the net of death . wise behaviour get approval but the way of the false be their destruction . a sharp man do everything with knowledge but a foolish man make clear his foolish thought . a man take false news be a cause of trouble but he who give news rightly make thing well . need and shame will be the fate of him who be uncontrolled by train but he who take note of teaching will be honour . to get one 's desire be sweet to the soul but to give up evil be disgust to the foolish . go with wise men and be wise but he who keep company with the foolish will be break . evil will overtake sinner but the upright will be reward with good . the heritage of the good man be hand down to his child 's child and the wealth of the sinner be store up for the upright man . there be much food in the ploughed land of the poor but it be take away by wrongdoing . he who keep back his rod be unkind to his son the love father give punishment with care . the upright man have food to the full measure of his desire but there will be no food for the stomach of evil doer .wisdom be build her house but the foolish woman be pull it down with her hand . he who go on his way in righteousness have before him the fear of the lord but he whose way be twist give him no honour . in the mouth of the foolish man be a rod for his back but the lip of the wise will keep them safe . where there be no oxen their food place be clean but much increase come through the strength of the ox . a true witness do not say what be false but a false witness be breathe out deceit . the hater of authority search for wisdom do not get it but knowledge come readily to the open mind man . go away from the foolish man for you will not see the lip of knowledge . the wisdom of the man of good sense make his way clear but the unwise behaviour of the foolish be deceit . in the tent of those hat authority there be error but in the house of the upright man there be grace . no one have knowledge of a man 's grief but himself and a strange person have no part in his joy . the house of the sinner will be overturn but the tent of the upright man will do well . there be a way which seem straight before a man but it end be the way of death . even while laugh the heart may be sad and after joy come sorrow . he whose heart be turn away will have the reward of his way in full measure but a good man will have the reward of his doings . the simple man have faith in every word but the man of good sense give think to his footstep . the wise man fear keep himself from evil but the foolish man go on in his pride with no thought of danger . he who be quickly angry will do what be foolish but the man of good sense will have quiet . foolish behaviour be the heritage of the simple but men of good sense be crown with knowledge . the knee of the evil be bent before the good and sinner go down in the dust at the door of the upright . the poor man be hat even by his neighbour but the man of wealth have number of friend . he who have no respect for his neighbour be a sinner but he who have pity for the poor be happy . will not the designer of evil come into error ? but mercy and good faith be for the designer of good . in all hard work there be profit but talk only make a man poor . their wisdom be a crown to the wise but their foolish behaviour be round the head of the unwise . a true witness be the saviour of life but he who say false thing be a cause of deceit . for him in whose heart be the fear of the lord there be strong hope and his child will have a safe place . the fear of the lord be a fountain of life by which one may be turn from the net of death . a king 's glory be in the number of his people and for need of people a ruler may come to destruction . he who be slow to be angry have great good sense but he whose spirit be over quick give support to what be foolish . a quiet mind be the life of the body but envy be a disease in the bone . he who be hard on the poor put shame on his maker but he who have mercy on those who be in need give him honour . the sinner be overturn in his evil do but the upright man have hope in his righteousness . wisdom have her resting place in the mind of the wise but she be not see among the foolish . by righteousness a nation be lift up but sin be a cause of shame to the people . the king have pleasure in a servant who do wisely but his wrath be against him who be a cause of shame .by a soft answer wrath be turn away but a bitter word be a cause of angry feeling . knowledge be drop from the tongue of the wise but from the mouth of the foolish come a stream of foolish word . the eye of the lord be in every place keep watch on the evil and the good . a comfort tongue be a tree of life but a twisted tongue be a crushing of the spirit . a foolish man put no value on his father 's training but he who have respect for teaching have good sense . in the house of the upright man there be a great store of wealth but in the profit of the sinner there be trouble . the lip of the wise keep knowledge but the heart of the foolish man be not right . the offering of the evil doer be disgust to the lord but the prayer of the upright man be his delight . the way of the evil doer be disgust to the lord but he who go after righteousness be dear to him . there be bitter punishment for him who be turn from the way and death will be the fate of the hater of teach . before the lord be the underworld and destruction how much more then the heart of the child of men ! the hater of authority have no love for teach he will not go to the wise . a glad heart make a shining face but by the sorrow of the heart the spirit be break . the heart of the man of good sense go in search of knowledge but foolish thing be the food of the unwise . all the day of the troubled be evil but he whose heart be glad have an unending feast . better be a little with the fear of the lord than great wealth together with trouble . better be a simple meal where love be than a fat ox and hate with it . an angry man make men come to blow but he who be slow to get angry put an end to fight . thorn be round the way of the hater of work but the road of the hard worker become a highway . a wise son make a glad father but a foolish man have no respect for his mother . foolish behaviour be joy to the unwise but a man of good sense make his way straight . where there be no wise suggestion purpose come to nothing but by a number of wise guide they be make certain . a man have joy in the answer of his mouth and a word at the right time how good it be ! act wisely be the way of life guide a man away from the underworld . the house of the man of pride will be uproot by the lord but he will make safe the heritage of the widow . evil design be disgust to the lord but the word of the clean hearted be please . he whose desire be fix on profit be a cause of trouble to his family but he who have no desire for offering will have life . the heart of the upright give think to his answer but from the mouth of the evil doer come a stream of evil thing . the lord be far from sinner but his ear be open to the prayer of the upright . the light of the eye be a joy to the heart and good news make the bone fat . the man whose ear be open to the teaching of life will have his place among the wise . he who will not be control by training have no respect for his soul but he who give ear to teach will get wisdom . the fear of the lord be the teaching of wisdom and a low opinion of oneself go before honour .the design of the heart be man 's but the answer of the tongue come from the lord . all a man 's way be clean to himself but the lord put men 's spirit into his scale . put your work into the hand of the lord and your purpose will be make certain . the lord have make everything for his purpose even the sinner for the day of evil . everyone who have pride in his heart be disgust to the lord he will certainly not go free from punishment . by mercy and good faith evil do be take away and by the fear of the lord men be turn away from evil . when a man 's way be please to the lord he make even his hater be at peace with him . well be a little with righteousness than great wealth with wrongdoing . a man may make design for his way but the lord be the guide of his step . decision be in the lip of the king his mouth will not go wrong in judge . true measure and scale be the lord 's all the weight of the bag be his work . evil do be disgust to king for the seat of the ruler be base on righteousness . lip of righteousness be the delight of king and he who say what be upright be dear to him . the wrath of the king be like those who give news of death but a wise man will put peace in place of it . in the light of the king 's face there be life and his approval be like a cloud of spring rain . how much good it be to get wisdom than gold ! and to get knowledge be more to be desire than silver . the highway of the upright be to be turn away from evil he who take care of his way will keep his soul . pride go before destruction and a stiff spirit before a fall . good it be to have a gentle spirit with the poor than to take part in the reward of war with men of pride . he who give attention to the law of right will get good and whoever put his faith in the lord be happy . the wise hearted will be name men of good sense and by please word learn be increase . wisdom be a fountain of life to him who have it but the punishment of the foolish be their foolish behaviour . the heart of the wise man be the teacher of his mouth and give increase learn to his lip . pleasing word be like honey sweet to the soul and new life to the bone . there be a way which seem straight before a man but it end be the way of death . the desire of the work man be work for him for his need of food be drive him on . a good for nothing man be a designer of evil and in his lip there be a burn fire . a man of twisted purpose be a cause of fight everywhere and he who say evil secretly make trouble between friend . a violent man put desire of evil into his neighbour 's mind and make him go in a way which be not good . he whose eye be shut be a man of twisted purpose and he who keep his lip shut tight make evil come about . the grey head be a crown of glory if it be see in the way of righteousness . he who be slow to be angry be good than a man of war and he who have control over his spirit than he who take a town . a thing may be put to the decision of chance but it come about through the lord .well a bit of dry bread in peace than a house full of feast and violent behaviour . a servant who do wisely will have rule over a son cause shame and will have his part in the heritage among brother . the heating pot be for silver and the oven fire for gold but the lord be the tester of heart . a wrongdoer give attention to evil lip and a man of deceit give ear to a damaging tongue . whoever make sport of the poor put shame on his maker and he who be glad because of trouble will not go free from punishment . child 's child be the crown of old men and the glory of child be their father . fair word be not to be look for from a foolish man much less be false lip in a ruler . an offering of money be like a stone of great price in the eye of him who have it wherever he go he do well . he who keep a sin cover be look for love but he who keep on talk of a thing make division between friend . a word of protest go deep into one who have sense than a hundred blow into a foolish man . an uncontrolled man be only look for trouble so a cruel servant will be send against him . it be well to come face to face with a bear whose young one have be take away than with a foolish man act foolishly . if anyone give back evil for good evil will never go away from his house . the start of fighting be like the let out of water so give up before it come to blow . he who give a decision for the evil doer and he who give a decision against the upright be equally disgust to the lord . how will money in the hand of the foolish get him wisdom see that he have no sense ? a friend be love at all time and become a brother in time of trouble . a man without sense give his hand in an agreement and make himself responsible before his neighbour . the lover of fighting be a lover of sin he who make high his doorway be look for destruction . nothing good come to him whose heart be fix on evil purpose and he who have an evil tongue will come to trouble . he who have an unwise son get sorrow for himself and the father of a foolish son have no joy . a glad heart make a healthy body but a crushed spirit make the bone dry . a sinner take an offer out of his robe to get a decision for himself in a cause . wisdom be before the face of him who have sense but the eye of the foolish be on the end of the earth . a foolish son be a grief to his father and bitter pain to her who give him birth . to give punishment to the upright be not good or to give blow to the noble for their righteousness . he who have knowledge say little and he who have a calm spirit be a man of good sense . even the foolish man when he keep quiet be take to be wise when his lip be shut he be credit with good sense .he who keep himself separate for his private purpose go against all good sense . a foolish man have no pleasure in good sense but only to let what be in his heart come to light . when the evil doer come a low opinion come with him and with the loss of honour come shame . the word of a man 's mouth be like deep water the fountain of wisdom be like a flowing stream . to have respect for the person of the evil doer be not good or to give a wrong decision against the upright . a foolish man 's lip be a cause of fight and his mouth make him open to blow . the mouth of a foolish man be his destruction and his lip be a net for his soul . the word of one who say evil of his neighbour secretly be like sweet food and go down into the inner part of the stomach . he who do not give his mind to his work be brother to him who make destruction . the name of the lord be a strong tower the upright man run into it be safe . the property of a man of wealth be his strong town and it be a a high wall in the thought of his heart . before destruction the heart of man be full of pride and before honour go a gentle spirit . to give an answer before hearing be a foolish thing and a cause of shame . the spirit of a man will be his support when he be ill but how may a broken spirit be lift up ? the heart of the man of good sense get knowledge the ear of the wise be search for knowledge . a man 's offering make room for him let him come before great men . the man who first put his cause before the judge seem to be in the right but then his neighbour come and put his cause in it true light . the decision of chance put an end to argument part the strong . a brother wound be like a strong town and violent act be like a locked tower . with the fruit of a man 's mouth his stomach will be full the produce of his lip will be his in full measure . death and life be in the power of the tongue and those to whom it be dear will have it fruit for their food . whoever get a wife get a good thing and have the approval of the lord . the poor man make request for grace but the man of wealth give a rough answer . there be friend who may be a man 's destruction but there be a lover who keep near than a brother .well be the poor man whose way be upright than the man of wealth whose way be twist . far without knowledge desire be not good and he who be over quick in act go out of the right way . by his foolish behaviour a man 's way be turn upside down and his heart be bitter against the lord . wealth make a great number of friend but the poor man be part from his friend . a false witness will not go without punishment and the breather out of deceit will not go free . great number will make attempt to get the approval of a ruler and every man be the special friend of him who have something to give . all the brother of the poor man be against him how much more do his friend go far from him ! ... he who get wisdom have love for his soul he who keep good sense will get what be truly good . a false witness will not go without punishment and the breather out of deceit will be cut off . material comfort be not good for the foolish much less for a servant to be put over ruler . a man 's good sense make him slow to wrath and the overlooking of wrongdoing be his glory . the king 's wrath be like the loud cry of a lion but his approval be like dew on the grass . a foolish son be the destruction of his father and the bitter argument of a wife be like drop of rain fall without end . house and wealth be a heritage from father but a wife with good sense be from the lord . hate of work sends deep sleep on a man and he who have no industry will go without food . he who keep the law keep his soul but death will be the fate of him who take no note of the word . he who have pity on the poor give to the lord and the lord will give him his reward . give your son training while there be hope let not your heart be purpose his death . a man of great wrath will have to take his punishment for if you get him out of trouble you will have to do it again . let your ear be open to suggestion and take teaching so that at the end you may be wise . a man 's heart may be full of design but the purpose of the lord be unchanging . the ornament of a man be his mercy and a poor man be good than one who be false . the fear of the lord give life and he who have it will have need of nothing no evil will come his way . the hater of work put his hand deep into the basin and will not even take it to his mouth again . when blow overtake the man of pride the simple will get sense say sharp word to the wise and knowledge will be make clear to him . he who be violent to his father drive away his mother be a son cause shame and a bad name . a son who no long give attention to teaching be turn away from the word of knowledge . a good for nothing witness make sport of the judge 's decision and the mouth of evil doer send out evil like a stream . rod be be make ready for the man of pride and blow for the back of the foolish .wine make men foolish and strong drink make men come to blow and whoever come into error through these be not wise . the wrath of a king be like the loud cry of a lion he who make him angry do wrong against himself . it be an honour for a man to keep from fight but the foolish be ever at war . the hater of work will not do his ploughing because of the winter so at the time of grain cutting he will be request food and will get nothing . the purpose in the heart of a man be like deep water but a man of good sense will get it out . most men make no secret of their kind act but where be a man of good faith to be see ? an upright man go on in his righteousness happy be his child after him ! a king on the seat of judge put to flight all evil with his eye . who be able to say i have make my heart clean i be free from my sin ? unequal weight and unequal measure they be all disgust to the lord . even a child may be judge by his doings if his work be free from sin and if it be right . the hearing ear and the seeing eye be equally the lord 's work . do not be a lover of sleep or you will become poor keep your eye open and you will have bread enough . a poor thing a poor thing say he who be give money for good but when he have go on his way then he make clear his pride in what he have get . there be gold and a store of coral but the lip of knowledge be a jewel of great price . take a man 's clothing if he make himself responsible for a strange man and get an undertaking from him who give his word for strange men . bread of deceit be sweet to a man but after his mouth will be full of sand . every purpose be put into effect by wise help and by wise guide make war . he who go about talk of the business of others give away secret so have nothing to do with him whose lip be open wide . if anyone put a curse on his father or his mother his light will be put out in the black night . a heritage may be get quickly at first but the end of it will not be a blessing . do not say i will give punishment for evil go on wait for the lord and he will be your saviour . unequal weight be disgust to the lord and false scale be not good . a man 's step be of the lord how then may a man have knowledge of his way ? it be a danger to a man to say without thought it be holy and after take his oath to be question if it be necessary to keep them . a wise king put evil doer to flight and make their evil do come back on them . the lord keep watch over the spirit of man search all the deep part of the body . mercy and good faith keep the king safe and the seat of his power be base on upright act . the glory of young men be their strength and the honour of old men be their grey hair . by the wound of the rod evil be take away and blow make clean the deep part of the body .the king 's heart in the hand of the lord be like the water stream and by him it be turn in any direction at his pleasure . every way of a man seem right to himself but the lord be the tester of heart . to do what be right and true be more please to the lord than an offering . a high look and a heart of pride of the evil doer be sin . the purpose of the man of industry have their outcome only in wealth but one who be over quick in act will only come to be in need . he who get store of wealth by a false tongue be go after what be only breath and search for death . by their violent act the evil doer will be pull away because they have no desire to do what be right . twist be the way of him who be full of crime but a for him whose heart be clean his work be upright . it be well to be live in an angle of the house top than with a bitter tongue woman in a wide house . the desire of the evil doer be fix on evil he have no kind feeling for his neighbour . when the man of pride undergoes punishment the simple man get wisdom and by watch the wise he get knowledge . the upright one look on the house of the evil doer let sinner be overturn to their destruction . he whose ear be stop at the cry of the poor will himself get no answer to his cry for help . by a secret offering wrath be turn away and the heat of angry feeling by money in the fold of the robe . it be a joy to the good man to do right but it be destruction to the worker of evil . the wanderer from the way of knowledge will have his rest place among the shade . the lover of pleasure will be a poor man the lover of wine and oil will not get wealth . the evil doer will be give a a price for the life of the good man and the worker of deceit in the place of the upright . it be well to be live in a waste land than with a bitter tongued and angry woman . there be a store of great value in the house of the wise but it be waste by the foolish man . he who go after righteousness and mercy will get life righteousness and honour . a wise man go up into the town of the strong one and overcome it strength in which they put their faith . he who keep watch over his mouth and his tongue keep his soul from trouble . the man of pride lift up in soul be name high hearted he be act in an outburst of pride . the desire of the hater of work be death to him for his hand will do no work . all the day the sinner go after his desire but the upright man give freely keep nothing back . the offering of evil doer be disgust how much more when they give it with an evil purpose ! a false witness will be cut off ... the evil doer make his face hard but a for the upright he give think to his way . wisdom and knowledge and wise suggestion be of no use against the lord . the horse be make ready for the day of war but power to overcome be from the lord .a good name be more to be desire than great wealth and to be respect be well than silver and gold . the man of wealth and the poor man come face to face the lord be the maker of them all . the sharp man see the evil and take cover the simple go straight on and get into trouble . the reward of a gentle spirit and the fear of the lord be wealth and honour and life . thorn and net be in the way of the twisted he who keep watch over his soul will be far from them . if a child be train up in the right way even when he be old he will not be turn away from it . the man of wealth have rule over the poor and he who get into debt be a servant to his creditor . by plant the seed of evil a man will get in the grain of sorrow and the rod of his wrath will be break . he who be kind will have a blessing for he give of his bread to the poor . send away the man of pride and argument will go out truly fight and shame will come to an end . he whose heart be clean be dear to the lord for the grace of his lip the king will be his friend . the eye of the lord keep knowledge but by him the act of the false man will be overturn . the hater of work say there be a lion outside i will be put to death in the street . the mouth of strange woman be a deep hole he with whom the lord be angry will go down into it . foolish way be deep seat in the heart of a child but the rod of punishment will send them far from him . he who be cruel to the poor for the purpose of increase his profit and he who give to the man of wealth will only come to be in need . let your ear be bent down for hear my word and let your heart give think to knowledge . for it be a delight to keep them in your heart to have them ready on your lip . so that your faith may be in the lord i have make them clear to you this day even to you . have i not put in write for you thirty saying with wise suggestion and knowledge to make you see how certain be true word so that you may give a true answer to those who put question to you ? do not take away the property of the poor man because he be poor or be cruel to the crush one when they come before the judge for the lord will give support to their cause and take the life of those who take their good . do not be friend with a man who be give to wrath do not go in the company of an angry man for fear of learn his way and make a net ready for your soul . be not one of those who give their hand in an agreement or of those who make themselves responsible for debt if you have nothing with which to make payment he will take away your bed from under you . let not the old landmark be move which your father have put in place . have you see a man who be expert in his business ? he will take his place before king his place will not be among low person .when you take your seat at the feast with a ruler give thought with care to what be before you and put a knife to your throat if you have a strong desire for food . have no desire for his delicate food for it be the bread of deceit . take no care to get wealth let there be an end to your desire for money . be your eye lift up to it ? it be go for wealth take to itself wing like an eagle in flight up to heaven . do not take the food of him who have an evil eye or have any desire for his delicate meat for a the thought of his heart be so be he take food and drink he say to you but his heart be not with you . the food which you have take will come up again and your pleasing word will be waste . say nothing in the hearing of a foolish man for he will put no value on the wisdom of your word . do not let the landmark of the widow be move and do not go into the field of those who have no father for their saviour be strong and he will take up their cause against you . give your heart to teach and your ear to the word of knowledge . do not keep back training from the child for even if you give him blow with the rod it will not be death to him . give him blow with the rod and keep his soul safe from the underworld . my son if your heart become wise i even i will be glad in heart and my thought in me will be full of joy when your lip say right thing . have no envy of sinner in your heart but keep in the fear of the lord all through the day for without doubt there be a future and your hope will not be cut off . give ear my son and be wise guide your heart in the right way . do not be among those who give themselves to wine drinking or among those who make themselves full with meat for those who take delight in drink and feasting will come to be in need and through love of sleep a man will be poorly clothe . give ear to your father whose child you be and do not keep honour from your mother when she be old . get for yourself that which be true and do not let it go for money get wisdom and teaching and good sense . the father of the upright man will be glad and he who have a wise child will have joy because of him . let your father and your mother be glad let her who give you birth have joy . my son give me your heart and let your eye take delight in my way . for a loose woman be a deep hollow and a strange woman be a narrow water hole . yes she be wait secretly like a beast for it food and deceit by her be increase among men . who say oh ! who say ah ! who have violent argument who have grief who have wound without cause whose eye be dark ? those who be seat late over the wine those who go look for mixed wine . keep your eye from look on the wine when it be red when it colour be bright in the cup when it go smoothly down in the end it bite be like that of a snake it wound like the wound of a poison snake . your eye will see strange thing and you will say twisted thing . yes you will be like him who take his rest on the sea or on the top of a sail support . they have overcome me you will say and i have no pain they give me blow without my feel them when will i be awake from my wine ? i will go after it again .have no envy for evil men or any desire to be with them for the purpose of their heart be destruction and their lip be talk of trouble . the building of a house be by wisdom and by reason it be make strong and by knowledge it room be full of all dear and pleasing thing . a wise man be strong and a man of knowledge make strength great . for by wise guiding you will overcome in war and in a number of wise guide there be salvation . wisdom be outside the power of the foolish he keep his mouth shut in the public place . he whose purpose be bad will be name a man of evil design . the purpose of the foolish be sin and the hater of authority be disgust to others . if you give way in the day of trouble your strength be small . be the saviour of those who be give up to death and do not keep back help from those who be slip to destruction . if you say see we have no knowledge of this do not the tester of heart give think to it ? and he who keep your soul have he no knowledge of it ? and will he not give to every man the reward of his work ? my son take honey for it be good and the flow honey which be sweet to your taste so let your desire be for wisdom if you have it there will be a future and your hope will not be cut off . do not keep a secret watch o evil doer against the field of the upright man or send destruction on his rest place for an upright man after fall seven time will get up again but trouble be the downfall of the evil . do not be glad at the fall of your hater and let not your heart have joy at his downfall for fear that the lord may see it and it may be evil in his eye and his wrath may be turn away from him . do not be trouble because of evil doer or have envy of sinner for there will be no future for the evil man the light of sinner will be put out . my son go in fear of the lord and the king have nothing to do with those who be in high position for their downfall will come suddenly and who have knowledge of the destruction of those in high position ? these be more saying of the wise to have respect for a person 's position when judging be not good . he who say to the evil doer you be upright will be curse by people and hat by nation . but those who say sharp word to him will have delight and a blessing of good will come on them . he give a kiss with his lip who give a right answer . put your work in order outside and make it ready in the field and after that see to the building of your house . do not be a violent witness against your neighbour or let your lip say what be false . say not i will do to him a he have do to me i will give the man the reward of his work . i go by the field of the hater of work and by the vine garden of the man without sense and it be all full of thorn and cover with waste plant and it stone wall be break down . then look at it i give think i saw and i get teach from it . a little sleep a little rest a little folding of the hand in sleep so loss will come on you like an outlaw and your need like an armed man .these be more wise saying of solomon copy out by the men of hezekiah king of judah . it be the glory of god to keep a thing secret but the glory of king be to have it search out . the heaven be high and the earth be deep and the heart of king may not be search out . take away the waste from silver and a vessel will come out for the silver worker . take away evil doer from before the king and the seat of his power will be make strong in righteousness . do not take glory for yourself before the king and do not put yourself in the place of the great for it be well to have it say to you come up here than for you to be put down in a low place before the ruler . do not be quick to go to law about what you have see for what will you do in the end when your neighbour have put you to shame ? have a talk with your neighbour himself about your cause but do not give away the secret of another or your hearer may say evil of you and your shame will not be turn away . a word at the right time be like apple of gold in a network of silver . like a nose ring of gold and an ornament of the best gold be a wise man who say sharp word to an ear ready to give attention . a the cold of snow in the time of grain cutting so be a true servant to those who send him for he give new life to the soul of his master . a cloud and wind without rain so be one who take credit for an offering he have not give . a judge be move by one who for a long time undergoes wrong without protest and by a soft tongue even bone be break . if you have honey take only as much a be enough for you for fear that be full of it you may not be able to keep it down . let not your foot be frequently in your neighbour 's house or he may get tire of you and his feeling be turn to hate . one who give false witness against his neighbour be a hammer and a sword and a sharp arrow . put one 's faith in a false man in time of trouble be like a broken tooth and a shaking foot . like one who take off clothe in cold weather and like acid on a wound be he who make melody to a sad heart . if your hater be in need of food give him bread and if he be in need of drink give him water for so you will put coal of fire on his head and the lord will give you your reward . a the north wind give birth to rain so be an angry face cause by a tongue say evil secretly . it be well to be live in an angle of the house top than with a bitter tongue woman in a wide house . a cold water to a tired soul so be good news from a far country . like a troubled fountain and a dirty spring be an upright man who have to give way before evil doer . it be not good to take much honey so he who be not look for honour will be honour . he whose spirit be uncontrolled be like an unwalled town which have be break into .like snow in summer and rain when the grain be be cut so honour be not natural for the foolish . a the sparrow in her wandering and the swallow in her flight so the curse do not come without a cause . a whip for the horse a mouth bit for the as and a rod for the back of the foolish . do not give to the foolish man a foolish answer or you will be like him . give a foolish man a foolish answer or he will seem wise to himself . he who send news by the hand of a foolish man be cut off his foot and drinking in damage . the leg of one who have no power of walk be hang loose so be a wise say in the mouth of the foolish . give honour to a foolish man be like attempt to keep a stone fix in a cord . like a thorn which go up into the hand of a man overcome by drink so be a wise say in the mouth of a foolish man . like an archer wound all who go by be a foolish man overcome by drink . like a dog go back to the food which he have not be able to keep down be the foolish man do his foolish act over again . have you see a man who seem to himself to be wise ? there be more hope for the foolish than for him . the hater of work say there be a lion in the way a lion be in the street . a door be turn on it pillar and the hater of work on his bed . the hater of work put his hand deep into the basin lift it again to his mouth be a weariness to him . the hater of work seem to himself wise than seven men who be able to give an answer with good sense . he who get mix up in a fight which be not his business be like one who take a dog by the ear while it be go by . a one who be off his head send about flame stick and arrow of death so be the man who get the good of his neighbour by deceit and say be i not do so in sport ? without wood the fire go out and where there be no secret talk argument be end . like breath on coal and wood on fire so a man give to argument get a fight start . the word of one who say evil of his neighbour secretly be like sweet food they go down into the inner part of the stomach . smooth lip and an evil heart be like a vessel of earth plat with silver waste . with his lip the hater make thing seem what they be not but deceit be store up inside him when he say fair word have no belief in him for in his heart be seven evil though his hate be cover with deceit his sin will be see openly before the meeting of the people . he who make a hole in the earth will himself go fall into it and on him by whom a stone be roll the stone will come back again . a false tongue have hate for those who have clean heart and a smooth mouth be a cause of fall .do not make a noise about tomorrow for you be not certain what a day 's outcome may be . let another man give you praise and not your mouth one who be strange to you and not your lip . a stone have great weight and sand be crush but the wrath of the foolish be of great weight than these . wrath be cruel and angry feel an overflow stream but who do not give way before envy ? well be open protest than love keep secret . the wound of a friend be give in good faith but the kiss of a hater be false . the full man have no use for honey but to the man in need of food every bitter thing be sweet . like a bird wander from the place of her egg be a man wander from his station . oil and perfume make glad the heart and the wise suggestion of a friend be sweet to the soul . do not give up your friend and your father 's friend and do not go into your brother 's house in the day of your trouble well be a neighbour who be near than a brother far off . my son be wise and make my heart glad so that i may give back an answer to him who put me to shame . the sharp man see the evil and take cover the simple go straight on and get into trouble . take a man 's clothing if he make himself responsible for a strange man and get an undertaking from him who give his word for strange men . he who give a blessing to his friend with a loud voice get up early in the morning will have it put to his account a a curse . like an unending dropping on a day of rain be a bitter tongue woman . he who keep secret the secret of his friend will get himself a name for good faith . iron make iron sharp so a man make sharp his friend . whoever keep a fig tree will have it fruit and the servant waiting on his master will be honour . like face look at face in water so be the heart of men to one another . the underworld and abaddon be never full and the eye of man have never enough . the heating pot be for silver and the oven fire for gold and a man be measure by what he be praise for . even if a foolish man be crush with a hammer in a vessel among crushed grain still his foolish way will not go from him . take care to have knowledge about the condition of your flock look well after your herd for wealth be not for ever and money do not go on for all generation . the grass come up and the young grass be see and the mountain plant be get in . the lamb be for your clothing and the he goats make the value of a field there will be goat ' milk enough for your food and for the support of your servant girl .the evil man go run away when no man be after him but the upright be without fear like the lion . because of the sin of the land it trouble be increase but by a man of wisdom and knowledge they will be put out like a fire . a man of wealth who be cruel to the poor be like a violent rain cause destruction of food . those who have no respect for the law give praise to the evil doer but such a keep the law be against him . evil men have no knowledge of what be right but those who go after the lord have knowledge of all thing . well be the poor man whose way be upright than the man of wealth whose way be not straight . he who keep the law be a wise son but he who keep company with feasters put shame on his father . he who make his wealth great by take interest only get it together for him who have pity on the poor . a for the man whose ear be turn away from hear the law even his prayer be disgust . anyone cause the upright to go wander in an evil way will himself go down into the hole he have make but the upright will have good thing for their heritage . the man of wealth seem to himself to be wise but the poor man who have sense have a low opinion of him . when the upright do well there be great glory but when evil doer be lift up men do not let themselves be see . he who keep his sin secret will not do well but one who be open about them and give them up will get mercy . happy be the man in whom be the fear of the lord at all time but he whose heart be hard will come into trouble . like a loud voice lion and a wandering bear be an evil ruler over a poor people . the prince who have no sense be a cruel ruler but he who have no desire to get profit for himself will have long life . one who have be the cause of a man 's death will go in flight to the underworld let no man give him help . he whose way be upright will be safe but sudden will be the fall of him whose way be twist . by plough his land a man will have bread in full measure but he who go after good for nothing person will be poor enough . a man of good faith will have great blessing but one attempting to get wealth quickly will not go free from punishment . it be not good to have respect for a man 's position for a man will do wrong for a bit of bread . he who be ever desire wealth go run after money and do not see that need will come on him . he who say word of protest to a man will later have more approval than one who say smooth word with his tongue . he who take from his father or his mother what be theirs by right and say it be no sin be the same a a taker of life . he who be ever desiring profit be a cause of fight but he who put his faith in the lord will be make fat . he whose faith be in himself be foolish but everyone walking wisely will be keep safe . he who give to the poor will never be in need but great curse will be on him who give no attention to them . when evil doer be lift up men take cover but when destruction overtake them the upright be increase .a man hat sharp word and make his heart hard will suddenly be break and will not be make well again . when the upright have power the people be glad when an evil man be ruler grief come on the people . a man who be a lover of wisdom be a joy to his father but he who go in the company of loose woman be a waster of wealth . a king by right rule make the land safe but one full of desire make it a waste . a man who say smooth thing to his neighbour be stretch out a net for his step . in the step of an evil man there be a net for him but the upright man get away quickly and be glad . the upright man give attention to the cause of the poor the evil doer give no thought to it . men of pride be the cause of violent act in a town but by wise men wrath be turn away . if a wise man go to law with a foolish man he may be angry or laugh but there will be no rest . men of blood be hater of the good man and evil doer go after his soul . a foolish man let out all his wrath but a wise man keep it back quietly . if a ruler give attention to false word all his servant be evil doer . the poor man and his creditor come face to face the lord give light to their eye equally . the king who be a true judge in the cause of the poor will be safe for ever on the seat of his power . the rod and sharp word give wisdom but a child who be not guide be a cause of shame to his mother . when evil men be in power wrongdoing be increase but the upright will have pleasure when they see their downfall . give your son training and he will give you rest he will give delight to your soul . where there be no vision the people be uncontrolled but he who keep the law will be happy . a servant will not be train by word for though the sense of the word be clear to him he will not give attention . have you see a man who be quick with his tongue ? there be more hope for a foolish man than for him . if a servant be gently care for from his early year he will become a cause of sorrow in the end . an angry man be the cause of fight and a man give to wrath do much wrong . a man 's pride will be the cause of his fall but he who have a gentle spirit will get honour . a man who take part with a thief have hate for his soul he be put under oath but say nothing . the fear of man be a cause of danger but whoever put his faith in the lord will have a safe place on high . the approval of a ruler be desire by great number but the decision in a man 's cause come from the lord . an evil man be disgust to the upright and he who be upright be disgust to evil doer .the word of agur the son of jakeh from massa . the man say i be full of weariness o god i be full of weariness o god i have come to an end for i be more like a beast than any man i have no power of reason like a man i have not get wisdom by teach so that i might have the knowledge of the holy one . who have go up to heaven and come down ? who have take the wind in his hand prisoning the water in his robe ? by whom have all the end of the earth be fix ? what be his name and what be his son 's name if you be able to say ? every word of god be test he be a breastplate to those who put their faith in him . make no addition to his word or he will make clear your error and you will be see to be false . i have make request to you for two thing do not keep them from me before my death put far from me all false and foolish thing do not give me great wealth or let me be in need but give me only enough food for fear that if i be full i may be false to you and say who be the lord ? or if i be poor i may become a thief use the name of my god wrongly . do not say evil of a servant to his master or he will put a curse on you and you will get into trouble . there be a generation who put a curse on their father and do not give a blessing to their mother . there be a generation who seem to themselves to be free from sin but be not wash from their unclean way . there be a generation o how full of pride be their eye ! o how their brow be lift up ! there be a generation whose teeth be like sword their strong teeth like knife for the destruction of the poor from the earth and of those who be in need from among men . the night spirit have two daughter give give . there be three thing which be never full even four which never say enough the underworld and the woman without a child the earth which never have enough water and the fire which never say enough . the eye which make sport of a father and see no value in a mother when she be old will be root out by the raven of the valley and be food for the young eagle . there be three thing the wonder of which overcome me even four thing outside my knowledge the way of an eagle in the air the way of a snake on a rock the way of a ship in the heart of the sea and the way of a man with a girl . this be the way of a false wife she take food and cleaning her mouth say i have do no wrong . for three thing the earth be move and there be four which it will not put up with a servant when he become a king a man without sense when his wealth be increase a hated woman when she be married and a servant girl who take the place of her master 's wife . there be four thing which be little on the earth but they be very wise the ant be a people not strong but they put by a store of food in the summer the cony be only a feeble people but they make their house in the rock the locust have no king but they all go out in band you may take the lizard in your hand but it be in king ' house . there be three thing whose step be good to see even four whose going be fair the lion which be strong among beast not turn from his way for any the war horse and the he goat and the king when his army be with him . if you have do foolishly in lift yourself up or if you have have evil design put your hand over your mouth . the shaking of milk make butter and the twisting of the nose make blood come so the forcing of wrath be a cause of fighting .the word of lemuel king of massa the teaching which he have from his mother . what be i to say to you o lemuel my old son ? and what o son of my body ? and what o son of my oath ? do not give your strength to woman or your way to that which be the destruction of king . it be not for king o lemuel it be not for king to take wine or for ruler to say where be strong drink ? for fear that through drinking they may come to have no respect for the law wrongly judge the cause of those who be in trouble . give strong drink to him who be near to destruction and wine to him whose soul be bitter let him have drink and his need will go from his mind and the memory of his trouble will be go . let your mouth be open for those who have no voice in the cause of those who be ready for death . let your mouth be open judge rightly and give right decision in the cause of the poor and those in need . who may make discovery of a woman of virtue ? for her price be much high than jewel . the heart of her husband have faith in her and he will have profit in full measure . she do him good and not evil all the day of her life . she get wool and linen working at the business of her hand . she be like the trading ship get food from far away . she get up while it be still night and give meat to her family and their food to her servant girl . after look at a field with care she get it for a price plant a vine garden with the profit of her work . she put a band of strength round her and make her arm strong . she see that her marketing be of profit to her her light do not go out by night . she put her hand to the cloth work rod and her finger take the wheel . her hand be stretch out to the poor yes she be open hand to those who be in need . she have no fear of the snow for her family for all those in her house be clothe in red . she make for herself cushion of needlework her clothing be fair linen and purple . her husband be a man of note in the public place when he take his seat among the responsible men of the land . she make linen robe and get a price for them and trader take her cloth band for a price . strength and self respect be her clothing she be face the future with a smile . her mouth be open to give out wisdom and the law of mercy be on her tongue . she give attention to the way of her family she do not take her food without work for it . her child get up and give her honour and her husband give her praise say unnumbered woman have do well but you be good than all of them . fair look be a deceit and a beautiful form be of no value but a woman who have the fear of the lord be to be praise . give her credit for what her hand have make let her be praise by her work in the public place .the word of the preacher the son of david king in jerusalem . all be to no purpose say the preacher all the way of man be to no purpose . what be a man profit by all his work which he do under the sun ? one generation go and another come but the earth be for ever . the sun come up and the sun go down and go quickly back to the place where he come up . the wind go to the south turn back again to the north circling round for ever . all the river go down to the sea but the sea be not full to the place where the river go there they go again . all thing be full of weariness man may not give their story the eye have never enough of it seeing or the ear of it hearing . that which have be be that which be to be and that which have be do be that which will be do and there be no new thing under the sun . be there anything of which men say see this be new ? it have be in the old time which be before u . there be no memory of those who have go before and of those who come after there will be no memory for those who be still to come after them . i the preacher be king over israel in jerusalem . and i give my heart to search out in wisdom all thing which be do under heaven it be a hard thing which god have put on the son of men to do . i have see all the work which be do under the sun all be to no purpose and desire for wind . that which be bent may not be make straight and that which be not there may not be number . i say to my heart see i have become great and be increase in wisdom more than any who be before me in jerusalem yes my heart have see much wisdom and knowledge . and i give my heart to get knowledge of wisdom and of the way of the foolish . and i saw that this again be desire for wind . because in much wisdom be much grief and increase of knowledge be increase of sorrow .i say in my heart i will give you joy for a test so take your pleasure but it be to no purpose . of laugh i say it be foolish and of joy what use be it ? i make a search with my heart to give pleasure to my flesh with wine still guide my heart with wisdom and to go after foolish thing so that i might see what be good for the son of men to do under the heaven all the day of their life . i undertook great work build myself house and plant vine garden . i make myself garden and fruit garden plant in them fruit tree of all sort . i make pool to give water for the wood with their young tree . i get men servant and woman servant and they give birth to son and daughter in my house . i have great wealth of herd and flock more than all who be in jerusalem before me . i get together silver and gold and the wealth of king and of country . i get maker of song male and female and the delight of the son of men girl of all sort to be my bride . and i become great increase more than all who have be before me in jerusalem and my wisdom be still with me . and nothing which be desire by my eye do i keep from them i do not keep any joy from my heart because my heart take pleasure in all my work and this be my reward . then i saw all the work which my hand have make and everything i have be work to do and i saw that all be to no purpose and desire for wind and there be no profit under the sun . and i go again in search of wisdom and of foolish way . what may the man do who come after the king ? the thing which he have do before . then i saw that wisdom be good than foolish way a the light be well than the dark . the wise man 's eye be in his head but the foolish man go walk in the dark but still i saw that the same event come to them all . then say i in my heart a it come to the foolish man so will it come to me so why have i be wise overmuch ? then i say in my heart this again be to no purpose . of the wise man a of the foolish man there be no memory for ever see that those who now be will have go from memory in the day to come . see how death come to the wise a to the foolish ! so i be hat life because everything under the sun be evil to me all be to no purpose and desire for wind . hate have i for all my work which i have do because the man who come after me will have it fruit . and who be to say if that man will be wise or foolish ? but he will have power over all my work which i have do and in which i have be wise under the sun . this again be to no purpose . so my mind be turn to grief for all the trouble i have take and all my wisdom under the sun . because there be a man whose work have be do with wisdom with knowledge and with an expert hand but one who have do nothing for it will have it for his heritage . this again be to no purpose and a great evil . what do a man get for all his work and for the weight of care with which he have do his work under the sun ? all his day be sorrow and his work be full of grief . even in the night his heart have no rest . this again be to no purpose . there be nothing well for a man than take meat and drink and have delight in his work . this again i saw be from the hand of god . who may take food or have pleasure without him ? to the man with whom he be pleased god give wisdom and knowledge and joy but to the sinner he give the work of get good together and store up wealth to give to him in whom god have pleasure . this again be to no purpose and desire for wind .for everything there be a fixed time and a time for every business under the sun . a time for birth and a time for death a time for plant and a time for uproot a time to put to death and a time to make well a time for pull down and a time for build up a time for weep and a time for laugh a time for sorrow and a time for dance a time to take stone away and a time to get stone together a time for kiss and a time to keep from kiss a time for search and a time for loss a time to keep and a time to give away a time for undo and a time for stitch a time for keep quiet and a time for talk a time for love and a time for hate a time for war and a time for peace . what profit have the worker in the work which he do ? i saw the work which god have put on the son of man . he have make everything right in it time but he have make their heart without knowledge so that man be unable to see the work of god from the first to the last . i be certain that there be nothing well for a man than to be glad and to do good while life be in him . and for every man to take food and drink and have joy in all his work be a reward from god . i be certain that whatever god do will be for ever . no addition may be make to it nothing may be take from it and god have do it so that man may be in fear before him . whatever be have be before and what be to be be now because god make search for the thing which be past . and again i saw under the sun in the place of the judge that evil be there and in the place of righteousness that evil be there . i say in my heart god will be judge of the good and of the bad because a time for every purpose and for every work have be fix by him . i say in my heart it be because of the son of men so that god may put them to the test and that they may see themselves a beast . because the fate of the son of men and the fate of the beast be the same . a be the death of one so be the death of the other and all have one spirit . man be not high than the beast because all be to no purpose . all go to one place all be of the dust and all will be turn to dust again . who be certain that the spirit of the son of men go up to heaven or that the spirit of the beast go down to the earth ? so i saw that there be nothing well than for a man to have joy in his work because that be his reward . who will make him see what will come after him ?and again i saw all the cruel thing which be do under the sun there be the weeping of those who have evil do to them and they have no comforter and from the hand of the evil doer there go out power but they have no comforter . so my praise be for the dead who have go to their death more than for the living who still have life . yes happy than the dead or the living seem he who have not ever be who have not see the evil which be do under the sun . and i saw that the cause of all the work and of everything which be do well be man 's envy of his neighbour . this again be to no purpose and a desire for wind . the foolish man fold his hand take the flesh of his body for food . one hand full of rest be good than two hand full of trouble and desire for wind . then i come back and i saw an example of what be to no purpose under the sun . it be one who be by himself without a second and without son or brother but there be no end to all his work and he have never enough of wealth . for whom then be i working and keep myself from pleasure ? this again be to no purpose and a bitter work . two be good than one because they have a good reward for their work . and if one have a fall the other will give him a hand but unhappy be the man who be by himself because he have no helper . so again if two be sleep together they be warm but how may one be warm by himself ? and two attack by one would be safe and three cord twist together be not quickly break . a young man who be poor and wise be good than a king who be old and foolish and will not be guide by the wisdom of others . because out of a prison the young man come to be king though by birth he be only a poor man in the kingdom . i saw all the living under the sun round the young man who be to be ruler in place of the king . there be no end of all the people of all those whose head he be but they who come later will have no delight in him . this again be to no purpose and desire for wind .put your foot down with care when you go to the house of god for it be well to give ear than to make the burned offering of the foolish whose knowledge be only of do evil . be not unwise with your mouth and let not your heart be quick to say anything before god because god be in heaven and you be on the earth so let not the number of your word be great . a a dream come from much business so the voice of a foolish man come with word in great number . when you take an oath before god put it quickly into effect because he have no pleasure in the foolish keep the oath you have take . it be well not to take an oath than to take an oath and not keep it . let not your mouth make your flesh do evil . and say not before the angel it be an error . so that god may not be angry with your word and put an end to the work of your hand . because much talk come from dream and thing of no purpose . but let the fear of god be in you . if you see the poor under a cruel yoke and law and right be violently overturn in a country be not surprised because one authority be keep watch on another and there be high than they . it be good generally for a country where the land be work to have a king . he who have a love for silver never have enough silver or he who have love for wealth enough profit . this again be to no purpose . when good be increase the number of those who take of them be increase and what profit have the owner but to see them ? the sleep of a working man be sweet if he have little food or much but to him who be full sleep will not come . there be a great evil which i have see under the sun wealth kept by the owner to be his downfall . and i saw the destruction of his wealth by an evil chance and when he become the father of a son he have nothing in his hand . a he come from his mother at birth so do he go again he get from his work no reward which he may take away in his hand . and this again be a great evil that in all point a he come so will he go and what profit have he in work for the wind ? all his day be in the dark and he have much sorrow pain disease and trouble . this be what i have see it be good and fair for a man to take meat and drink and to have joy in all his work under the sun all the day of his life which god have give him that be his reward . every man to whom god have give money and wealth and the power to have pleasure in it and to do his part and have joy in his work this be give by god . he will not give much think to the day of his life because god let him be take up with the joy of his heart .there be an evil which i have see under the sun and it be hard on men a man to whom god give money wealth and honour so that he have all his desire but god do not give him the power to have joy of it and a strange man take it . this be to no purpose and an evil disease . if a man have a hundred child and his life be long so that the day of his year be great in number but his soul take no pleasure in good and he be not honour at his death i say that a birth before it time be well than he . in wind it come and to the dark it will go and with the dark will it name be cover . yes it saw not the sun and it have no knowledge it be well with this than with the other . and though he go on live a thousand year twice over and do not see good be not the two go to the same place ? all the work of man be for his mouth and still he have a desire for food . what have the wise more than the foolish ? and what have the poor man by walk wisely before the living ? what the eye see be well than the wandering of desire . this be to no purpose and a desire for wind . that which be have be name before and of what man be there be knowledge . he have no power against one strong than he . there be word without number for increase what be to no purpose but what be man profit by them ? who be able to say what be good for man in life all the day of his foolish life which he go through like a shade ? who will say what be to be after him under the sun ?a good name be good than oil of great price and the day of death than the day of birth . it be well to go to the house of weep than to go to the house of feasting because that be the end of every man and the living will take it to their heart . sorrow be good than joy when the face be sad the mind get well . the heart of the wise be in the house of weep but the heart of the foolish be in the house of joy . it be well to take note of the protest of the wise than for a man to give ear to the song of the foolish . like the cracking of thorn under a pot so be the laugh of a foolish man and this again be to no purpose . the wise be trouble by the way of the cruel and the give of money be the destruction of the heart . the end of a thing be good than it start and a gentle spirit be good than pride . be not quick to let your spirit be angry because wrath be in the heart of the foolish . say not why be the day which have go by good than these ? such a question come not from wisdom . wisdom together with a heritage be good and a profit to those who see the sun . wisdom keep a man from danger even a money do but the value of knowledge be that wisdom give life to it owner . give thought to the work of god . who will make straight what he have make bent ? in the day of wealth have joy but in the day of evil take thought god have put the one against the other so that man may not be certain what will be after him . these two have i see in my life which be to no purpose a good man come to his end in his righteousness and an evil man whose day be long in his evil do . be not give overmuch to righteousness and be not over wise . why let destruction come on you ? be not evil overmuch and be not foolish . why come to your end before your time ? it be good to take this in your hand and not to keep your hand from that he who have the fear of god will be free of the two . wisdom make a wise man strong than ten ruler in a town . there be no man on earth of such righteousness that he do good and be free from sin all his day . do not give ear to all the word which men say for fear of hear the curse of your servant . your heart have knowledge how frequently others have be curse by you . all this i have put to the test by wisdom i say i will be wise but it be far from me . far off be true existence and very deep who may have knowledge of it ? i give my mind to knowledge and to search for wisdom and the reason of thing and to the discovery that sin be foolish and that to be foolish be to be without one 's sens . and i saw a thing more bitter than death even the woman whose heart be full of trick and net and whose hand be a band . he with whom god be please will get free from her but the sinner will be take by her . look ! this i have see say the preacher take one thing after another to get the true account for which my soul be still search but i have it not one man among a thousand have i see but a woman among all these i have not see . this only have i see that god make men upright but they have be search out all sort of invention .who be like the wise man ? and to whom be the sense of anything clear ? a man 's wisdom make his face shin and his hard face will be change . i say to you keep the king 's law from respect for the oath of god . be not quick to go from before him . be not fix in an evil design because he do whatever be please to him . the word of a king have authority and who may say to him what be this you be do ? whoever keep the law will come to no evil and a wise man 's heart have knowledge of time and of decision . for every purpose there be a time and a decision because the sorrow of man be great in him . no one be certain what be to be and who be able to say to him when it will be ? no man have authority over the wind to keep the wind or be ruler over the day of his death . in war no man 's time be free and evil will not keep the sinner safe . all this have i see and have give my heart to all the work which be do under the sun there be a time when man have power over man for his destruction . and then i saw evil men put to rest take even from the holy place and they go about and be praise in the town because of what they have do . this again be to no purpose . because punishment for an evil work come not quickly the mind of the son of men be fully give to do evil . though a sinner do evil a hundred time and his life be long i be certain that it will be well for those who go in fear of god and be in fear before him . but it will not be well for the evil doer he will not make his day long like a shade because he have no fear before god . there be a thing which be to no purpose do on the earth that there be good men to whom be give the same punishment a those who be evil and there be evil men who get the reward of the good . i say that this again be to no purpose . so i give praise to joy because there be nothing well for a man to do under the sun than to take meat and drink and be happy for that will be with him in his work all the day of his life which god give him under the sun . when i give my mind to the knowledge of wisdom and to see the business which be do on the earth and there be those whose eye see not sleep by day or by night then i saw all the work of god and that man may not get knowledge of the work which be do under the sun because if a man give hard work to the search he will not get knowledge and even if the wise man seem to be come to the end of his search still he will be without knowledge .all this i take to heart and my heart saw it all that the upright and the wise and their work be in the hand of god and men may not be certain if it will be love or hate all be to no purpose before them . because to all there be one event to the upright man and to the evil to the clean and to the unclean to him who make an offering and to him who make no offering as be the good so be the sinner he who take an oath be a he who have fear of it . this be evil in all thing which be do under the sun that there be one fate for all and the heart of the son of men be full of evil while they have life their heart be foolish and after that to the dead . for him who be join to all the living there be hope a living dog be good than a dead lion . the living be conscious that death will come to them but the dead be not conscious of anything and they no longer have a reward because there be no memory of them . their love and their hate and their envy be now end and they have no long a part for ever in anything which be do under the sun . come take your bread with joy and your wine with a glad heart . god have take pleasure in your work . let your clothing be white at all time and let not your head be without oil . have joy with the woman of your love all the day of your foolish life which he give you under the sun . because that be your part in life and in your work which you do under the sun . whatever come to your hand to do with all your power do it because there be no work or think or knowledge or wisdom in the place of the dead to which you be go . and again i saw under the sun that the reward go not to him who be quick or the fruit of war to the strong and there be no bread for the wise or wealth for men of learning or respect for those who have knowledge but time and chance come to all . even man have no knowledge of his time like fish take in an evil net or like bird take by deceit be the son of men take in an evil time when it come suddenly on them . this again i have see under the sun a wisdom and it seem great to me . there be a little town and the number of it men be small and there come a great king against it and make an attack on it build work of war round about it . now there be in the town a poor wise man and he by his wisdom keep the town safe . but no one have any memory of that same poor man . then i say wisdom be good than strength but the poor man 's wisdom be not respect and his word be not give a hearing . the word of the wise which come quietly to the ear be note more than the cry of a ruler among the foolish . wisdom be good than instrument of war but one sinner be the destruction of much good .dead fly make the oil of the perfumer give out an evil smell more value be a little wisdom than the great glory of the foolish . the heart of the wise man go in the right direction but the heart of a foolish man in the wrong . and when the foolish man be walk in the way he have no sense and let everyone see that he be foolish . if the wrath of the ruler be against you keep in your place in him who keep quiet even great sin may be overlook . there be an evil which i have see under the sun like an error which come by chance from a ruler the foolish be place in high position but men of wealth be keep low . i have see servant on horse and ruler walk on the earth a servant . he who make a hole for others will himself go into it and for him who make a hole through a wall the bite of a snake will be a punishment . he who get out stone from the earth will be damage by them and in the cutting of wood there be danger . if the iron have no edge and he do not make it sharp then he have to put out more strength but wisdom make thing go well . if a snake give a bite before the word of power be say then there be no longer any use in the word of power . the word of a wise man 's mouth be sweet to all but the lip of a foolish man be his destruction . the first word of his mouth be foolish and the end of his talk be evil crime . the foolish be full of word man have no knowledge of what will be and who be able to say what will be after him ? the work of the foolish will be a weariness to him because he have no knowledge of the way to the town . unhappy be the land whose king be a boy and whose ruler be feast in the morning . happy be the land whose ruler be of noble birth and whose chief take food at the right time for strength and not for feast . when no work be do the roof go in and when the hand do nothing water come into the house . a feast be for laugh and wine make glad the heart but by the one and the other money be waste . say not a curse against the king even in your thought and even secretly say not a curse against the man of wealth because a bird of the air will take the voice and that which have wing will give news of it .put out your bread on the face of the water for after a long time it will come back to you again . give a part to seven or even to eight because you have no knowledge of the evil which will be on the earth . if the cloud be full of rain they send it down on the earth and if a tree come down to the south or the north in whatever place it come down there it will be . he who be watch the wind will not get the seed plant and he who be look at the cloud will not get in the grain . a you have no knowledge of the way of the wind or of the growth of the bone in the body of her who be with child even so you have no knowledge of the work of god who have make all . in the morning put your seed into the earth and till the evening let not your hand be at rest because you be not certain which will do well this or that or if the two will be equally good . truly the light be sweet and it be good for the eye to see the sun . but even if a man 's life be long and he have joy in all his year let him keep in mind the dark day because they will be great in number . whatever may come be to no purpose . have joy o young man while you be young and let your heart be glad in the day of your strength and go in the way of your heart and in the desire of your eye but be certain that for all these thing god will be your judge . so put away trouble from your heart and sorrow from your flesh because the early year and the best year be to no purpose .let your mind be turn to your maker in the day of your strength while the evil day come not and the year be far away when you will say i have no pleasure in them while the sun or the light or the moon or the star be not dark and the cloud come not back after the rain in the day when the keeper of the house be shake for fear and the strong men be bent down and the woman who be crush the grain be at rest because their number be small and those look out of the window be unable to see when the door be shut in the street and the sound of the crushing be low and the voice of the bird be soft and the daughter of music will be make low and he be in fear of that which be high and danger be in the road and the tree be white with flower and the least thing be a weight and desire be at an end because man go to his last resting place and those who be sorrow be in the street before ever the silver cord be cut or the vessel of gold be break or the pot be break at the fountain or the wheel break at the water hole and the dust go back to the earth a it be and the spirit go back to god who give it . all thing be to no purpose say the preacher all be to no purpose . and because the preacher be wise he still give the people knowledge search out test and put in order a great number of wise saying . the preacher make search for word which be please but his writing be in word upright and true . the word of the wise be point and saying group together be like nail fix with a hammer they be give by one guide . and further my son take note of this of the making of book there be no end and much learning be a weariness to the flesh . this be the last word . all have be say . have fear of god and keep his law because this be right for every man . god will be judge of every work with every secret thing good or evil .the song of song which be solomon 's . let him give me the kiss of his mouth for his love be good than wine . sweet be the smell of your perfume your name be a perfume run out so the young girl give you their love . take me to you and we will go after you the king have take me into his house . we will be glad and full of joy in you we will give more thought to your love than to wine rightly be they your lover . i be dark but fair of form o daughter of jerusalem a the tent of kedar a the curtain of solomon . let not your eye be turn on me because i be dark because i be look on by the sun my mother 's child be angry with me they make me the keeper of the vine garden but my vine garden i have not keep . say o love of my soul where you give food to your flock and where you make them take their rest in the heat of the day why have i to be a one wandering by the flock of your friend ? if you have not knowledge o most beautiful among woman go on your way in the footstep of the flock and give your young goat food by the tent of the keeper . i have make a comparison of you o my love to a horse in pharaoh 's carriage . your face be a delight with ring of hair your neck with chain of jewel . we will make you chain of gold with ornament of silver . while the king be seat at his table my spice send out their perfume . a a bag of myrrh be my well love one to me when he be at rest all night between my breast . my love be to me a a branch of the cypress tree in the vine garden of en gedi . see you be fair my love you be fair you have the eye of a dove . see you be fair my loved one and a pleasure our bed be green . cedar tree be the pillar of our house and our board be make of fir tree .i be a rise of sharon a flower of the valley . a the lily flower among the thorn of the waste so be my love among the daughter . a the apple tree among the tree of the wood so be my loved one among the son . i take my rest under his shade with great delight and his fruit be sweet to my taste . he take me to the house of wine and his flag over me be love . make me strong with wine cake let me be comfort with apple i be overcome with love . his left hand be under my head and his right hand be round about me . i say to you o daughter of jerusalem by the roe of the field do not let love be move till it be ready . the voice of my loved one ! see he come dance on the mountain step quickly on the hill . my loved one be like a roe see he be on the other side of our wall he be look in at the window let himself be see through the space . my love one say to me get up my love my fair one and come away . for see the winter be past the rain be over and go the flower be come on the earth the time of cut the vine be come and the voice of the dove be sound in our land the fig tree put out her green fruit and the vine with their young fruit give a good smell . get up from your bed my beautiful one and come away . o my dove you be in the hole of the mountain side in the crack of the high hill let me see your face let your voice come to my ear for sweet be your voice and your face be fair . take for u the fox the little fox which do damage to the vine our vine have young grape . my loved one be mine and i be his he take his food among the flower . till the evening come and the sky slowly become dark come my loved one and be like a roe on the mountain of bether .by night on my bed i be look for him who be the love of my soul i be look for him but i do not see him . i will get up now and go about the town in the street and in the wide way i will go after him who be the love of my soul i go after him but i do not see him . the watchman who go about the town come by me to them i say have you see him who be my heart 's desire ? i be but a little way from them when i come face to face with him who be the love of my soul . i take him by the hand and do not let him go till i have take him into my mother 's house and into the room of her who give me birth . i say to you o daughter of jerusalem by the roe of the field let not love be move till it be ready . who be this come out of the waste place like pillar of smoke perfume with sweet spice with all the spice of the trader ? see it be the bed of solomon sixty men of war be about it of the army of israel all of them arm with sword train in war every man have his sword at his side because of fear in the night . king solomon make himself a bed of the wood of lebanon . he make it pillar of silver it base of gold it seat of purple the middle of it of ebony . go out o daughter of jerusalem and see king solomon with the crown which his mother put on his head on the day when he be marry and on the day of the joy of his heart .see you be fair my love you be fair you have the eye of a dove your hair be a a flock of goat which take their rest on the side of gilead . your teeth be like a flock of sheep whose wool be newly cut which come up from the wash every one have two lamb and there be not one without young . your red lip be like a bright thread and your mouth be fair of form the side of your head be like pomegranate fruit under your veil . your neck be like the tower of david make for a store house of arm in which a thousand breastplate be hang breastplate for fight men . your two breast be like two young roe of the same birth which take their food among the lily . till the evening come and the sky slowly become dark i will go to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense . you be all fair my love there be no mark on you . come with me from lebanon my bride with me from lebanon see from the top of amana from the top of senir and hermon from the place of the lion from the mountain of the leopard . you have take away my heart my sister my bride you have take away my heart with one look you have take it with one chain of your neck ! how fair be your love my sister ! how much good be your love than wine and the smell of your oil than any perfume ! your lip be drop honey honey and milk be under your tongue and the smell of your clothing be like the smell of lebanon . a garden wall in be my sister my bride a garden shut up a spring of water stop . the produce of the garden be pomegranates with all the best fruit henna and spikenard spikenard and safron calamus and cinnamon with all tree of frankincense myrrh and aloe with all the chief spice . you be a fountain of garden a spring of living water and flow water from lebanon . be awake o north wind and come o south blowing on my garden so that it spice may come out . let my loved one come into his garden and take of his good fruit .i have come into my garden my sister my bride to take my myrrh with my spice my wax with my honey my wine with my milk . take meat o friend take wine yes be overcome with love . i be sleep but my heart be awake it be the sound of my loved one at the door say be open to me my sister my love my dove my very beautiful one my head be wet with dew and my hair with the drop of the night . i have put off my coat how may i put it on ? my foot be wash how may i make them unclean ? my love one put his hand on the door and my heart be move for him . i get up to let my loved one in and my hand be drop with myrrh and my finger with liquid myrrh on the lock of the door . i make the door open to my loved one but my loved one have take himself away and be go my soul be feeble when his back be turn on me i go after him but i do not come near him i say his name but he give me no answer . the keeper who go about the town overtook me they give me blow and wound the keeper of the wall take away my veil from me . i say to you o daughter of jerusalem if you see my love one what will you say to him ? that i be overcome with love . what be your loved one more than another o fairest among woman ? what be your loved one more than another that you say this to u ? my loved one be white and red the chief among ten thousand . his head be a the most delicate gold his hair be thick and black a a raven . his eye be a the eye of dove by the water stream wash with milk and rightly place . his face be a bed of spice give out perfume of every sort his lip like lily drop liquid myrrh . his hand be a ring of gold ornament with beryl stone his body be a a smooth plate of ivory cover with sapphire . his leg be a pillar of stone on a base of delicate gold his look be a lebanon beautiful a the cedar tree . his mouth be most sweet yes he be all beautiful . this be my loved one and this be my friend o daughter of jerusalem .where be your loved one go o most fair among woman ? where be your loved one turn away that we may go look for him with you ? my loved one be go down into his garden to the bed of spice to take food in the garden and to get lily . i be for my loved one and my loved one be for me he take food among the lily . you be beautiful o my love as tirzah a fair a jerusalem you be to be fear like an army with flag . let your eye be turn away from me see they have overcome me your hair be a a flock of goat which take their rest on the side of gilead . your teeth be like a flock of sheep which come up from the wash every one have two lamb and there be not one without young . like pomegranate fruit be the side of your head under your veil . there be sixty queen and eighty servant wife and young girl without number . my dove my very beautiful one be but one she be the only one of her mother she be the dear one of her who give her birth . the daughter saw her and give her a bless yes the queen and the servant wife and they give her praise . who be she look down a the morning light fair a the moon clear a the sun who be to be fear like an army with flag ? i go down into the garden of nut to see the green plant of the valley and to see if the vine be in bud and the pomegranate tree be in flower . before i be conscious of it ... come back come back o shulammite come back come back so that our eye may see you . what will you see in the shulammite ? a sword dance .how beautiful be your foot in their shoe o king 's daughter ! the curve of your leg be like jewel the work of the hand of a good workman your stomach be a store of grain with lily round it and in the middle a round cup full of wine . your two breast be like two young roe of the same birth . your neck be a a tower of ivory your eye like the water in heshbon by the doorway of bath rabbim your nose be a the tower on lebanon look over damascus your head be like carmel and the hair of your head be like purple in whose net the king be prisoner . how beautiful and how sweet you be o love for delight . you be tall like a palm tree and your breast be like the fruit of the vine . i say let me go up the palm tree and let me take it branch in my hand your breast will be a the fruit of the vine and the smell of your breath like apple and the roof of your mouth like good wine flow down smoothly for my loved one move gently over my lip and my teeth . i be for my loved one and his desire be for me . come my loved one let u go out into the field let u take rest among the cypress tree . let u go out early to the vine garden let u see if the vine be in bud if it have put out it young fruit and the pomegranate be in flower . there i will give you my love . the mandrake give out a sweet smell and at our door be all sort of good fruit new and old which i have keep for my loved one .oh that you be my brother who take milk from my mother 's breast ! when i come to you in the street i would give you kiss yes i would not be look down on . i would take you by the hand into my mother 's house and she would be my teacher . i would give you drink of spiced wine drink of the pomegranate . his left hand would be under my head and his right hand about me . i say to you o daughter of jerusalem do not let love be move till it be ready . who be this who come up from the waste place rest on her loved one ? it be i who make you awake under the apple tree where your mother give you birth there she be in pain at your birth . put me a a sign on your heart a a sign on your arm love be strong a death and wrath bitter a the underworld it coal be coal of fire violent be it flame . much water may not put out love or the deep water overcome it if a man would give all the substance of his house for love it would be judge a price not great enough . we have a young sister and she have no breast what be we to do for our sister in the day when she be give to a man ? if she be a wall we will make on her a strong base of silver and if she be a door we will let her be shut up with cedar wood . i be a wall and my breast be like tower then be i in his eye a one to whom good chance have come . solomon have a vine garden at baal hamon he let out the vine garden to keepers every one have to give a thousand bit of silver for it fruit . my vine garden which be mine be before me you o solomon will have the thousand and those who keep the fruit of them two hundred . you who have your rest place in the garden the friend give ear to your voice make me give ear to it . come quickly my loved one and be like a roe on the mountain of spice .the vision of isaiah the son of amoz which he saw about judah and jerusalem in the day of uzziah jotham ahaz and hezekiah king of judah . give ear o heaven and you o earth to the word which the lord have say i have take care of my child till they become men but their heart have be turn away from me . even the ox have knowledge of it owner and the as of the place where it master put it food but israel have no knowledge my people give no thought to me . o nation full of sin a people weight down with crime a generation of evil doer false hearted child they have go away from the lord they have no respect for the holy one of israel their heart be turn back from him . why will you have more and more punishment ? why keep on in your evil way ? every head be tire and every heart be feeble . the body from head to foot be all diseased it be a mass of open wound mark of blow and broken flesh the flow of blood have not be stop and no oil have be put on the wound . your country have become waste your town be burn with fire a for your land it be overturn before your eye make waste and overcome by men from strange land . and the daughter of zion have become like a tent in a vine garden like a watchman 's house in a field of fruit like a town shut in by army . if the lord of army have not keep some at least of u safe we would have be like sodom and the fate of gomorrah would have be ours . give ear to the word of the lord you ruler of sodom let your heart be turn to the law of our god you people of gomorrah . what use to me be the number of the offering which you give me ? say the lord your burned offering of sheep and the best part of fat cattle be a weariness to me i take no pleasure in the blood of ox or of lambs or of he goats . at whose request do you come before me make my house unclean with your foot ? give me no more false offering the smoke of burn flesh be disgust to me so be your new moon and sabbath and your holy meeting . your new moon and your regular feast be a grief to my soul they be a weight in my spirit i be crush under them . and when your hand be stretch out to me my eye will be turn away from you even though you go on make prayer i will not give ear your hand be full of blood . be wash make yourselves clean put away the evil of your doings from before my eye let there be an end of sin take pleasure in well do let your way be upright keep down the cruel give a right decision for the child who have no father see to the cause of the widow . come now and let u have an argument together say the lord how may your sin which be red like blood be white a snow ? how may their dark purple seem like wool ? if you will give ear to my word and do it the good thing of the land will be yours but if your heart be turn against me i will send destruction on you by the sword so the lord have say . the upright town have become untrue there be a time when her judge give right decision when righteousness have a resting place in her but now she be full of those who take men 's life . your silver be no longer true metal your wine be mixed with water . your chief have go against the lord they have become friend of thief every one of them be look for profit and go after reward they do not give right decision for the child who have no father and they do not let the cause of the widow come before them . for this reason the lord the lord of army the strong one of israel have say i will put an end to my hater and send punishment on those who be against me and my hand will again be on you wash away what be unclean a with soap and take away all your false metal and i will give you judge again a at the first and wise guide a in the past then you will be name the town of righteousness the true town . upright act will be the price of zion 's forgiveness and by righteousness will men be live there . but a common destruction will overtake sinner and evil doer together and those who have go away from the lord will be cut off . for you will be put to shame because of the tree of your desire and because of the garden of your pleasure . for you will be like a tree whose leaf have become dry and like a garden without water . and the strong will be a food for the fire and his work a a flame and they will be burn together with no one to put out the fire .the word which isaiah the son of amoz saw about judah and jerusalem . and it will come about in the last day that the mountain of the lord will be place on the top of the mountain and be lift up over the hill and all nation will come to it . and the people will say come and let u go up to the mountain of the lord to the house of the god of jacob and he will give u knowledge of his way and we will be guide by his word for out of zion the law will go out and the word of the lord from jerusalem . and he will be the judge between the nation and the people will be rule by his decision and their sword will be turn into plough blade and their spear into vine knives no longer will the nation be turn their sword against one another and the knowledge of war will be go for ever . o family of jacob come and let u go in the light of the lord . for you o lord have give up your people the family of jacob because they be full of the evil way of the east and make use of secret art like the philistine and be friend with the child of strange country . and their land be full of silver and gold and there be no end to their store their land be full of horse and there be no end to their carriage . their land be full of image they give worship to the work of their hand even to that which their finger have make . and the poor man 's head be bent and the great man go down on his face for this cause there will be no forgiveness for their sin . go into a hole in the rock cover yourselves with dust in fear of the lord before the glory of his power . the high look of man will be put to shame and the pride of men will be make low and only the lord will be lift up in that day . for the day of the lord of army be come on all the pride of men and on all who be high and lift up and on all the high tree of lebanon and on all the strong tree of bashan and on all the high mountain and on all the hill which be lift up and on every high tower and on every strong wall and on all the ship of tarshish and on all the fair boat . and the high look of man will be put to shame and the pride of men will be make low and only the lord will be lift up in that day . and the image will never be see again . and men will go into crack of the rock and into hole of the earth for fear of the lord and before the glory of his power when he come out of his place shake the earth with his strength . in that day men will put their image of silver and of gold which they make for worship in the keep of the beast of the dark place to take cover in the crack of the rock and in the hole of the hill for fear of the lord and before the glory of his power when he come out of his place shake the earth with his strength . have no more to do with man whose life be only a breath for he be of no value .for the lord the lord of army be about to take away from jerusalem and from judah all their support their store of bread and of water the strong man and the man of war the judge and the prophet the man who have knowledge of secret art and the man who be wise because of his year the captain of fifty and the man of high position and the wise guide and the wonder worker and he who make use of secret power . and i will make child their chief and foolish one will have rule over them . and the people will be crush every one by his neighbour the young will be full of pride against the old and those of low position will be lift up against the noble . when one man put his hand on another in his father 's house and say you have clothe be our ruler and be responsible for u in our sad condition then he will say with an oath i will not be a helper for in my house there be no bread or clothing i will not let you make me a ruler of the people . for jerusalem have become feeble and destruction have come on judah because their word and their act be against the lord move the eye of his glory to wrath . their respect for a man 's position be a witness against them and their sin be open to the view of all like that of sodom it be not cover . a curse on their soul ! for the measure of their sin be full . happy be the upright man ! for he will have joy of the fruit of his way . unhappy be the sinner ! for the reward of his evil doings will come on him . a for my people their ruler be act like a child and those who have authority over them be woman . o my people your guide be the cause of your wander turn your footstep out of the right way . the lord be ready to take up his cause against his people and be about to come forward a their judge . the lord come to be the judge of their responsible men and of their ruler it be you who have make waste the vine garden and in your house be the property of the poor which you have take by force . by what right be you crush my people and put a bitter yoke on the neck of the poor ? this be the word of the lord the lord of army . again the lord have say because the daughter of zion be full of pride and go with outstretched neck and wander eye with their foot chain sound when they go the lord will send disease on the head of the daughter of zion and the lord will let their secret part be see . in that day the lord will take away the glory of their foot ring and their sun jewel and their moon ornament the ear ring and the chain and the delicate clothing the head band and the arm chain and the worked band and the perfume box and the jewel with secret power the ring and the nose jewel the feast day dress and the robe and the wide skirt and the handbag the look glass and the fair linen and the high head dress and the veil . and in the place of sweet spice will be an evil smell and for a fair band a thick cord for a well dress head there will be the cut off of the hair and for a beautiful robe there will be the clothing of sorrow the mark of the prisoner in place of the ornament of the free . your men will be put to the sword and your men of war will come to destruction in the fight . and in the public place of her town will be sorrow and weeping and she will be seat on the earth waste and uncovered .and in that day seven woman will put their hand on one man say there will be no need for you to give u food or clothing only let u go under your name so that our shame may be take away . in that day will the young growth of the lord be beautiful in glory and the fruit of the earth will be the pride of those who be still live in israel . and it will come about that the rest of the living in zion and of those who have be keep from destruction in jerusalem will be name holy even everyone who have be record for life in jerusalem when zion have be wash from her sin by the lord and jerusalem make clean from her blood by a judging and a burning wind . and over every living place on mount zion all over all her meeting the lord will make a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night for over all the glory of the lord will be a cover and a tent and a shade in the daytime from the heat and a safe cover from storm and from rain .let me make a song about my loved one a song of love for his vine garden . my love one have a vine garden on a fertile hill and after work the earth of it with a spade he take away it stone and put in it a very special vine and he put up a watchtower in the middle of it hollow out in the rock a place for the grape crushing and he be hop that it would give the best grape but it give common grape . and now you people of jerusalem and you men of judah be the judge between me and my vine garden . be there anything which might have be do for my vine garden which i have not do ? why then when i be hop for the best grape do it give me common grape ? and now this be what i will do to my vine garden i will take away the circle of thorn round it and it will be burn up it wall will be break down and the beast of the field will go through it and i will make it waste it branch will not be touch with the knife or the earth work with the spade but blackberry and thorn will come up in it and i will give order to the cloud not to send rain on it . for the vine garden of the lord of army be the people of israel and the men of judah be the plant of his delight and he be look for upright judging and there be blood for righteousness and there be a cry for help . curse be those who be join house to house and put field to field till there be no more living space for any but themselves in all the land ! the lord of army have say to me secretly truly number of great and fair house will be waste with no one living in them . for ten field of vine will only give one measure of wine and a great amount of seed will only give a small measure of grain . curse be those who get up early in the morning to give themselves up to strong drink who keep on drinking far into the night till they be heat with wine ! and cord instrument and wind instrument and wine be in their feast but they give no thought to the work of the lord and they be not interested in what his hand be do . for this cause my people be take away a prisoner into strange country for need of knowledge and their ruler be waste for need of food and their loud voice feasters be dry for need of water . for this cause the underworld have make wide it throat open it mouth without limit and her glory and the noise of her mass and her loud voice feasters will go down into it . and the poor man 's head be bent and the great man go down on his face and the eye of pride be put to shame but the lord of army be lift up a judge and the holy god be see to be holy in righteousness . then the lamb will get food a in their grass land and the fat cattle will be feast in the waste place . curse be those who make use of ox cord for pull the evil thing and the band of a young ox for their sin ! who say let him do his work quickly let him make it sudden so that we may see it let the design of the holy one of israel come near so that it may be clear to u . curse be those who give the name of good to evil and of evil to what be good who make light dark and dark light who make bitter sweet and sweet bitter ! curse be those who seem wise to themselves and who take pride in their knowledge ! curse be those who be strong to take wine and great in make mixed drink ! who for a reward give support to the cause of the sinner and who take away the righteousness of the upright from him . for this cause a the waste of the grain be burn up by tongue of fire and a the dry grass go down before the flame so their root will be like the dry stem of grain and their flower will go up in dust because they have go against the law of the lord of army and have give no honour to the word of the holy one of israel . for this reason the wrath of the lord have be burn against his people and his hand have be stretch out against them in punishment and the hill be shake and their dead body be like waste in the open place of the town . and he will let a flag be lift up a a sign to a far off nation whistle to them from the end of the earth and they will come quickly and suddenly . there be no weariness among them and no man be feeble foot they come without rest or sleep and the cord of their shoe be not break . their arrow be sharp and every bow be bent the foot of their horse be like rock and their wheel be like a rushing storm . the sound of their army will be like the voice of a lion and their war cry like the noise of young lion with loud cry they will come down on their food and will take it away safely and there will be no one to take it out of their hand . and his voice will be loud over him in that day like the sounding of the sea and if a man 's eye be turn to the earth it be all dark and full of trouble and the light be make dark by thick cloud .in the year of king uzziah 's death i saw the lord seat in his place high and lift up and the temple be full of the wide skirt of his robe . over him be the winged one every one have six wing two for cover his face two for cover his feed and two for flight . and one say in a loud voice to another holy holy holy be the lord of army all the earth be full of his glory . and the base of the door pillar be shake at the sound of his cry and the house be full of smoke . then i say the curse be on me and my fate be destruction for i be a man of unclean lip live among a people of unclean lip for my eye have see the king the lord of army . then a winged one come to me with a burn coal in his hand which he have take from off the altar with the fire spoon . and after touch my mouth with it he say see your lip have be touch with this and your evil be take away and you be make clean from sin . and the voice of the lord come to my ear say whom be i to send and who will go for u ? then i say here be i send me . and he say go and say to this people you will go on hear but learn nothing you will go on see but without get wiser . make the heart of this people fat and let their ear be stop and their eye shut for fear that they may see with their eye and be hear with their ear and their heart may become wise and they may be turn to me and make well . then i say lord how long ? and he say in answer till the town be waste and unpeopled and the house have no men and the land become completely waste and the lord have take men far away and there be wide waste place in the land . and even if there be still a tenth part in it it will again be burn like a tree of the wood whose broken end be still in the earth after the tree have be cut down the holy seed be the broken end .now it come about in the day of ahaz the son of jotham the son of uzziah king of judah that rezin the king of aram and pekah the son of remaliah the king of israel come up to jerusalem to make war against it but be not able to overcome it . and word come to the family of david that aram have put up it tent in ephraim . and the king 's heart and the heart of his people be move like the tree of the wood shaking in the wind . then the lord say to isaiah go out now you and shear jashub your son and you will come across ahaz at the end of the stream flow from the high pool in the highway of the washerman 's field and say to him take care and be quiet have no fear and do not let your heart be feeble because of these two end of smoke fire wood because of the bitter wrath of rezin and aram and of the son of remaliah . because aram have make evil design against you say let u go up against judah trouble her and force our way into her and let u put up a king in her even the son of tabeel this be the word of the lord god this design will not come about or be effect . for the head of aram be damascus and the head of damascus be rezin and in sixty five year from now ephraim will be break and will no longer be a people and the head of ephraim be samaria and the head of samaria be remaliah 's son . if you will not have faith your kingdom will be break . and isaiah say again to ahaz make a request to the lord your god for a sign a sign in the deep place of the underworld or in the high heaven . but ahaz say i will not put the lord to the test by make such a request . and he say give ear now o family of david be it not enough that you be drive men to disgust ? will you do the same to my god ? for this cause the lord himself will give you a sign a young woman be now with child and she will give birth to a son and she will give him the name immanuel . butter and honey will be his food when he be old enough to make a decision between evil and good . for before the child be old enough to make a decision between evil and good the land whose two king you be now fear will have become waste . the lord be about to send on you and on your people and on your father 's house such a time of trouble a there have not be from the day of the separating of ephraim from judah even the come of the king of assyria . and it will be in that day that the lord will make a piping sound for the fly which be in the end of the river of egypt and for the bee which be in the land of assyria . and they will come cover all the waste valley and the hole of the rock and the thorn and all the watering place . in that day will the lord take away the hair of the head and of the foot as well a the hair of the face with a blade get for a price from the other side of the river even with the king of assyria . and it will be in that day that a man will give food to a young cow and two sheep and they will give so much milk that he will be able to have butter for his food for butter and honey will be the food of all who be still live in the land . and it will be in that day that in every place where before there be a thousand vine value at a thousand shekel of silver there will be nothing but blackberry and thorn . men will come there with bow and arrow because all the land will be full of blackberry and thorn . and they will send out the ox and the sheep on all the hill which before be work with the spade ... fear of blackberry and thorn .and the lord say to me take a great write board and on it put down in common letter maher shalal hash baz and take true witness to the write uriah the priest and zechariah the son of jeberechiah . and i go in to my wife and she become with child and give birth to a son . then the lord say to me give him the name maher shalal hash baz for before the child be able to say father or mother the wealth of damascus and the good of samaria will be take away by the king of assyria . and the lord say again to me because this people will have nothing to do with the softly flow water of shiloah and have fear of rezin and remaliah 's son for this cause the lord be send on them the water of the river deep and strong even the king of assyria and all his glory and it will come up through all it stream overflow all it edge and it will come on into judah rush on and overflow till the water be up to the neck and his outstretched wing will be cover the land from side to side for god be with u . have knowledge o people and be in fear give ear all you far off part of the earth let your design be form and they will come to nothing give your order and they will not be effect for god be with u . for the lord control me with a strong hand give me order not to go in the way of this people say do not say it be holy about everything of which this people say it be holy and do not be in fear of what they go in fear of . but let the lord of army be holy to you and go in fear of him give honour to him . and he will be for a holy place but for a stone of fall and a rock of trouble to the two house of israel and to the men of jerusalem for a net in which they may be take . and number of them fall on the stone will be break and will be take in the net . let my teach be keep secret and my word be give to my disciple only . and i will be wait for the lord whose face be veil from the house of jacob and i will be look for him . see i and the child whom the lord have give me be for sign and for wonder in israel from the lord of army whose rest place be in mount zion . and when they say to you make request for u to those who have control of spirit and to those wise in secret art who make hollow bird like sound be it not right for a people to make request to their god to make request for the living to the dead ? then say to them put your faith in the teaching and the witness . ... if they do not say such thing . ... for him there be no dawn . ... and he will go through the land in bitter trouble and in need of food and when he be unable to get food he will become angry curse his king and his god and his eye will be turn to heaven on high and he will be look down on the earth and there will be trouble and dark cloud black night where there be no seeing .in early time he make the land of zebulun and the land of naphtali of small value but after that he give it glory by the way of the sea on the other side of jordan galilee of the nation . the people who go in the dark have see a great light and for those who be live in the land of the deep night the light be shin . you have make them very glad increase their joy . they be glad before you a men be glad in the time of get in the grain or when they make division of the good take in war . for by your hand the yoke on his neck and the rod on his back even the rod of his cruel master have be break a in the day of midian . for every boot of the man of war with his sound step and the clothing roll in blood will be for burn food for the fire . for to u a child have come to u a son be give and the government have be place in his hand and he have be name wise guide strong god father for ever prince of peace . of the increase of his rule and of peace there will be no end on the seat of david and in his kingdom to make it strong support it with wise decision and righteousness now and for ever . by the fixed purpose of the lord of army this will be do . the lord have send a word to jacob and it have come on israel and all the people will have experience of it even ephraim and the men of samaria who say in the pride of their uplifted heart the brick have come down but we will put up building of cut stone in their place the sycamore be cut down but they will be change to cedar . for this cause the lord have make strong the hater of israel drive them on to make war against him aram on the east and the philistine on the west who have come against israel with open mouth . for all this his wrath be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . but the heart of the people be not turn to him who send punishment on them and they make no prayer to the lord of army . for this cause the lord take away from israel head and tail high and low in one day . the man who be honour and responsible be the head and the prophet who give false teaching be the tail . for the guide of this people be the cause of their wandering from the right way and those who be guide by them come to destruction . for this cause the lord will have no pleasure in their young men and no pity on their widow and the child without father for they be all hater of god and evil doer and foolish word come from every mouth . for all this his wrath be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . for evil be burn like a fire the blackberry and thorn be burn up the thick wood take fire roll up in dark cloud of smoke . the land be dark with the wrath of the lord of army the people be like those who take men 's flesh for food . on the right a man be cut off bit and be still in need on the left a man take a meal but have not enough no man have pity on his brother every man be make a meal of the flesh of his neighbour . manasseh be make a meal of ephraim and ephraim of manasseh and together they be attack judah . for all this his wrath be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still .curse be those who make evil decision and the writer who make the record of their cruel act who do wrong to the poor in their cause and take away the right of the crush among my people so that they may have the property of widow and get under their power those who have no father . and what will you do in the day of punishment and in the destruction which be come from far ? to whom will you go for help and what will become of your glory ? ... for all this his wrath be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . ho ! assyrian the rod of my wrath the instrument of my punishment ! i will send him against a nation of wrongdoer and against the people of my wrath i will give him order to take their wealth in war crush them down like the dust in the street . but this be not what be in his mind and this be not his design but his purpose be destruction and the cut off of more and more nation . for he say be not all my captain king ? will not the fate of calno be like that of carchemish ? be not hamath a arpad ? be not samaria a damascus ? a my hand have come on the kingdom of the image whose pictured image be more in number than those of jerusalem and samaria so a i have do to samaria and her image i will do to jerusalem and her image . for this cause it will be that when the purpose of the lord against mount zion and jerusalem be complete i will send punishment on the pride of the heart of the king of assyria and on the glory of his uplifted eye . for he have say by the strength of my hand i have do it and by my knowledge for i be wise and i have take away the limit of the people ' land and the store of their wealth have become mine and i have make town low in the dust send destruction on those live in them and i have put my hand on the wealth of the people a on the place where a bird have put her egg and a a man may take the egg from which a bird have go so i have take all the earth for myself and not a wing be move and not a mouth give out a sound . will the axe say high sounding word against him who be use it or the blade be full of pride against him who be cut with it ? a if a rod have the power of shake him who be use it or a if a stick might take up him who be not wood . for this cause the lord the lord of army will make his fat become waste and in his inner part a fire will be light like a burning flame . and the light of israel will be for a fire and his holy one for a flame wasting and burn up his thorn in one day . and he will put an end to the glory of his wood and of his planted field soul and body together and it will be a when a man be waste by disease . and the rest of the tree of his wood will be small in number so that a child may put them down in writing . and it will be in that day that the rest of israel and those of jacob who have come safely through these trouble will no longer go for help to him whose rod be on their back but their faith will be in the lord the holy one of israel . the rest even the rest of jacob will come back to the strong god . for though your people o israel be a the sand of the sea only a small number will come back for the destruction be fix overflow in righteousness . for the lord the lord of army be about to make destruction complete in all the land . for this cause the lord the lord of army say o my people live in zion have no fear of the assyrian even if his rod come on your back and his stick be lift up a in egypt . for in a very short time my passion will be over and my wrath will be turn to their destruction . and the lord of army will be shake a whip against him a when he overcome midian at the rock of oreb and his rod will be lift up against them a it be against the egyptian . and in that day the weight which he put on your back will be take away and his yoke break from off your neck . he have go up from pene rimmon he have come to aiath he have go past migron at michmash he put his force in order . they have go across the mountain geba will be our rest place tonight they say ramah be shake with fear gibeah of saul have go in flight . give a loud cry daughter of gallim let laishah give ear let anathoth give answer to her . madmenah have go the men of gebim be put their good in a safe place . this very day he be stop at nob he be shake his hand against the mountain of the daughter of zion the hill of jerusalem . see the lord the lord of army be cut off his branch with a great noise and his strong one be fall and his high one be come down . and he be cut down the thick place of the wood with an axe and lebanon with it tall tree be come down .and there will come a rod out of the broken tree of jesse and a branch out of his root will give fruit . and the spirit of the lord will be rest on him the spirit of wisdom and good sense the spirit of wise guiding and strength the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the lord and he will not be guide in his judging by what he see or give decision by the hearing of his ear but he will do right in the cause of the poor and give wise decision for those in the land who be in need and the rod of his mouth will come down on the cruel and with the breath of his lip he will put an end to the evil doer . and righteousness will be the cord of his robe and good faith the band round his breast . and the wolf will be live with the lamb and the leopard will take his rest with the young goat and the lion will take grass for food like the ox and the young lion will go with the young one of the herd and a little child will be their guide . and the cow and the bear will be friend while their young one be sleep together . and the child at the breast will be play by the hole of the snake and the old child will put his hand on the bright eye of the poison snake . there will be no cause of pain or destruction in all my holy mountain for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the lord a the sea be cover by the water . and in that day the eye of the nation will be turn to the root of jesse which will be lift up a the flag of the people and his rest place will be glory . and in that day the hand of the lord will be stretch out the second time to get back the rest of his people from assyria and from egypt and from pathros and from cush and from elam and from shinar and from hamath and from the sea land . and he will put up a flag a a sign to the nation and he will get together those of israel who have be send away and the wandering one of judah from the four end of the earth . and the envy of ephraim will be go and those who make trouble for judah will come to an end ephraim will have no more envy of judah and there will be an end of judah 's hate for ephraim . and they will be unite in attack the philistine on the west and together they will take the good of the child of the east their hand will be on edom and moab and the child of ammon will be under their rule . and the lord will make the tongue of the egyptian sea completely dry and with his burn wind his hand will be stretch out over the river and it will be part into seven stream so that men may go over it with dry foot . and there will be a highway for the rest of his people from assyria a there be for israel in the day when he come up out of the land of egypt .and in that day you will say i will give praise to you o lord for though you be angry with me your wrath be turn away and i be comfort . see god be my salvation i will have faith in the lord without fear for the lord jah be my strength and song and he have become my salvation . so with joy will you get water out of the spring of salvation . and in that day you will say give praise to the lord let his name be honour give word of his doings among the people say that his name be lift up . make a song to the lord for he have do noble thing give news of them through all the earth . let your voice be sound in a cry of joy o daughter of zion for great be the holy one of israel among you .the word of the lord about babylon which isaiah the son of amoz saw . put up a flag on a clear mountain top make a loud outcry to them give direction with the hand so that they may go into the door of the great one . i have give order to my holy one i have send out my men of war those of mine who take pride in their power to give effect to my wrath . the noise of great number in the mountain like the noise of a strong people ! the noise of the kingdom of the nation meeting together ! the lord of army be number his force for war . they come from a far country from the farthest part of heaven even the lord and the instrument of his wrath with destruction for all the land . send out a cry of grief for the day of the lord be near it come a destruction from the most high . for this cause all hand will be feeble and every heart of man be turn to water their heart will be full of fear pain and sorrow will overcome them they will be in pain like a woman in childbirth they will be shock at one another their face will be like flame . see the day of the lord be come cruel with wrath and burn passion to make the land a waste drive the sinner in it to destruction . for the star of heaven and it bright army will not give their light the sun will be make dark in his journey through the heaven and the moon will keep back her light . and i will send punishment on the world for it evil and on the sinner for their wrongdoing and i will put an end to all pride and will make low the power of the cruel . i will make men so small in number that a man will be hard to get than gold even the best gold of ophir . for this cause the heaven will be shake and the earth will be move out of it place in the wrath of the lord of army and in the day of his burn passion . and it will be that like a roe in flight and like wander sheep they will go every man to his people and to his land . everyone who be overtake will have a spear put through him and everyone who go in flight will be put to the sword . their young child will be break up before their eye their good will be take away and their wife make the property of others . see i be drive the medes against them who put no value on silver and have no pleasure in gold . in their hand be bow and spear they be cruel violently put the young men to death and crush the young woman they have no pity for child and no mercy for the fruit of the body . and babylon the glory of kingdom the beautiful town which be the pride of the chaldaean will be like god 's destruction of sodom and gomorrah . people will never be live in it again and it will have no more men from generation to generation the arab will not put up his tent there and those who keep sheep will not make it a rest place for their flock . but the beast of the waste land will have their hole there and the house will be full of cry jackal and ostrich will have their place there and evil spirit will be dance there . and wolf will be answer one another in their tower and jackal in their house of pleasure her time be near and her day of power will quickly be end .for the lord will have mercy on jacob and will again make israel his special people and will put them in their land and the man from a strange country will take his place among them and be join to the family of jacob . and the people will take them with them to their place and the child of israel will give them a heritage in the lord 's land a men servant and woman servant make them prisoner whose prisoner they be and they will be ruler over their master . and it will be in the day when the lord give you rest from your sorrow and from your trouble and from the hard yoke which they have put on you that you will take up this bitter song against the king of babylon and say how have the cruel overseer come to an end ! he who be lift up in pride be cut off the stick of the evil doers the rod of the ruler be break by the lord he whose rod be on the people with an unending wrath rule the nation in passion with an uncontrolled rule . all the earth be at rest and be quiet they be burst into song . even the tree of the wood be glad over you the tree of lebanon say from the time of your fall no wood cutter have come up against u with an axe . the underworld be move at your come the shade of the dead be awake before you even the strong one of the earth all the king of the world have get up from their seat . they all make answer and say to you have you become feeble like u ? have you be make even a we be ? your pride have go down into the underworld and the noise of your instrument of music the worm be under you and your body be cover with them . how great be your fall from heaven o shin one son of the morning ! how be you cut down to the earth low among the dead body ! for you say in your heart i will go up to heaven i will make my seat high than the star of god i will take my place on the mountain of the meeting place of the god in the inmost part of the north . i will go higher than the cloud i will be like the most high . but you will come down to the underworld even to it inmost part . those who see you will be look on you with care they will be in deep thought say be this the troubler of the earth the shaker of kingdom ? who make the world a waste overturn it town who do not let his prisoner loose from the prison house . all the king of the earth be at rest in glory every man in his house but you like a birth before it time be stretch out with no rest place in the earth clothe with the body of the dead who have be put to the sword who go down to the low part of the underworld a dead body crush under foot . a for your father you will not be unite with them in their resting place because you have be the cause of destruction to your land and of death to your people the seed of the evil doer will have no place in the memory of man . make ready a place of death for his child because of the evil do of their father so that they may not come up and take the earth for their heritage cover the face of the world with waste place . for i will come up against them say the lord of army cut off from babylon name and offspring son and son 's son say the lord . and i will make you a heritage for the hedgehog and pool of water and i will go through it with the brush of destruction say the lord of army . the lord have take an oath say my design will certainly come about and my purpose will be effect to let the assyrian be break in my land and crush under foot on my mountain there will his yoke be take away from them and his rule over them come to an end . this be the purpose for all the earth and this be the hand stretch out over all nation . for it be the purpose of the lord of army and who will make it of no effect ? when his hand be stretch out by whom may it be turn back ? in the year of the death of king ahaz this word come to the prophet be not glad o philistia all of you because the rod which be on you be break for out of the snake 's root will come a poison snake and it fruit will be a winged poison snake . and the poor of the land will have food and those in need will be give a safe resting place but your seed will come to an end for need of food and the rest of you will be put to the sword . send out a cry o door ! make sound of sorrow o town ! all your land have come to nothing o philistia for there come a smoke out of the north and everyone keep his place in the line . what answer then will my people give to the representative of the nation ? that the lord be the builder of zion and she will be a safe place for the poor of his people .the word about moab . for in a night ar of moab have become waste and be see no longer for in a night kir of moab have become waste and be see no longer . the daughter of dibon have go up to the high place weep moab be sound her cry of sorrow over nebo and over medeba everywhere the hair of the head and of the face be cut off . in their street they be cover themselves with haircloth on the top of their house and in their public place there be cry and bitter weeping . heshbon be cry out and elealeh their voice be sound even to jahaz for this cause the heart of moab be shake his soul be shake with fear . my heart be cry out for moab her people go in flight to zoar and to eglath shelishiyah for they go up with weeping by the slope of luhith on the way to horonaim they send up a cry of destruction . the water of nimrim will become dry for the grass be burn up the young grass be come to an end every green thing be dead . for this cause they will take away their wealth and the store they have get together over the stream of the water plant . for the cry have go round the limit of moab as far a to eglaim and beer elim . for the water of dimon be full of blood and i 'm send even more on moab a lion on those of moab who go in flight and on the rest of the land .and they will send ... to the mountain of the daughter of zion . for the daughter of moab will be like wander bird like a place from which the young bird have go in flight at the way across the arnon . give wise direction make a decision let your shade be a night in full day keep safe those who be in flight do not give up the wandering one . let those who have be force out of moab have a resting place with you be a cover to them from him who be make waste their land till the cruel one be cut off and waste have come to an end and those who take pleasure in crush the poor be go from the land . then a king 's seat will be base on mercy and one will be seat on it in the tent of david for ever judge uprightly and quick to do righteousness . we have have word of the pride of moab how great it be how he be lift up in pride and passion his high word about himself be false . for this cause everyone in moab will give cry of grief for moab crush to the earth they will be weep for the men of kir hareseth . for the field of heshbon be waste the vine of sibmah be dead the lord of nation be overcome by the produce of her vine her vine plant go as far a jazer and come even to the waste land her branch be stretch out to the sea . for this cause my sorrow for the vine of sibmah will be like the weeping for jazer my eye be drop water on you o heshbon and elealeh ! for they be sound the war cry over your summer fruit and the get in of your grain and all joy be go no longer be they glad for the fertile field and in the vine garden there be no song or sound of joy the crushing of grape have come to an end and it glad cry have be stop . for this cause the cord of my heart be sound for moab and i be full of sorrow for kir here . and when moab go up to the high place and make prayer in the house of his god it will have no effect . this be the word which the lord say about moab in the past . but now the lord have say in three year the year of a servant working for payment the glory of moab all that great people will be turn to shame and the rest of moab will be very small and without honour .the word about damascus . see they have make damascus a town no longer it have become a waste place . her town be unpeopled for ever there the flock take their rest in peace without fear . the strong tower have go from ephraim and the kingdom from damascus the rest of aram will come to destruction and be make like the glory of the child of israel say the lord of army . and it will be in that day that the glory of jacob will be make small and the strength of his body will become feeble . and it will be like a man cut the growth of his grain pull together the head of the grain with his arm even a when they get in the grain in the valley of rephaim . but it will be like a man shake an olive tree something will still be there two or three berry on the top of the high branch four or five on the outside branch of a fertile tree say the lord the god of israel . in that day a man 's heart will be turn to his maker and his eye to the holy one of israel . he will not be look to the altar the work of his hand or to the wood pillar or to the sun image which his finger have make . in that day your town will be like the waste place of the hivites and the amorites which the child of israel take for a heritage and they will come to destruction . for you have not give honour to the god of your salvation and have not keep in mind the rock of your strength for this cause you make a garden of adonis and put in it the vine cutting of a strange god in the day of your plant you be watch it growth and in the morning your seed be flower but it fruit be waste away in the day of grief and bitter sorrow . ah ! the voice of people like the loud sounding of the sea and the thundering of great nation rush on like the burst out of water ! but he will put a stop to them and make them go in flight far away drive them like the waste of the grain on the top of the mountain before the wind and like the circle dust before the storm . in the evening there be fear and in the morning they be go . this be the fate of those who take our good and the reward of those who violently take our property for themselves .ho ! land of the sounding of wing on the other side of the river of ethiopia which send it representative by the sea even in ship of papyrus on the water . go back quickly o representative to a nation tall and smooth to a people cause fear through all their history a strong nation crush down it hater whose land be cut through by river . all you people of the world and you who be live on the earth when a flag be lift up on the mountain give attention and when the horn be sound give ear . for this be what the lord have say to me i will be quiet watch from my place like the clear heat when the sun be shin like a mist of dew in the heat of summer . for before the time of get in the grape after the opening of the bud when the flower have become a grape ready for crush he will take away the small branch with knife cut down and take away the wide stretching branch . they will be for the bird of the mountain and for the beast of the earth the bird will come down on them in the summer and the beast of the earth in the winter . in that time an offering will be make to the lord of army from a people tall and smooth causing fear through all their history a strong nation crush down it hater whose land be cut through by river an offering take to the place of the name of the lord of army even mount zion .the word about egypt . see the lord be seat on a quick moving cloud and be come to egypt and the false god of egypt will be trouble at his come and the heart of egypt will be turn to water . and i will send the egyptian against the egyptian and they will be fight every one against his brother and every one against his neighbour town against town and kingdom against kingdom . and the spirit of egypt will be trouble in her and i will make her decision without effect and they will be turn to the false god and to those who make hollow sound and to those who have control of spirit and to those who be wise in secret art . and i will give the egyptian into the hand of a cruel lord and a hard king will be their ruler say the lord the lord of army . and the water of the sea will be cut off and the river will become dry and waste and the river will have an evil smell the stream of egypt will become small and dry all the water plant will come to nothing . the grass land by the nile and everything plant by the nile will become dry or take away by the wind and will come to an end . the fisherman will be sad and all those who put fish line into the nile will be full of grief and those whose net be stretch out on the water will have sorrow in their heart . and all the worker in linen thread and those who make cotton cloth will be put to shame . and the maker of twist thread will be crush and those who ... will be sad in heart . the chief of zoan be completely foolish the wise guide of pharaoh have become like beast how do you say to pharaoh i be the son of the wise the offspring of early king ? where then be your wise men ? let them make clear to you let them give you knowledge of the purpose of the lord of army for egypt . the chief of zoan have become foolish the chief of noph be trick the head of her tribe be the cause of egypt 's wander out of the way . the lord have send among them a spirit of error and by them egypt be turn out of the right way in all her doings a a man overcome by wine be uncertain in his step . and in egypt there will be no work for any man head or tail high or low to do . in that day the egyptian will be like woman and the land will be shake with fear because of the waving of the lord 's hand stretch out over it . and the land of judah will become a cause of great fear to egypt whenever it name come to mind egypt will be in fear before the lord of army because of his purpose against it . in that day there will be five town in the land of egypt use the language of canaan and make oath to the lord of army and one of them will be name the town of the sun . in that day there will be an altar to the lord in the middle of the land of egypt and a pillar to the lord at the edge of the land . and it will be a sign and a witness to the lord of army in the land of egypt when they be cry out to the lord because of their cruel master then he will send them a saviour and a strong one to make them free . and the lord will give the knowledge of himself to egypt and the egyptian will give honour to the lord in that day they will give him worship with offering and meal offering and will take an oath to the lord and give effect to it . and the lord will send punishment on egypt and will make them well again and when they come back to the lord he will give ear to their prayer and take away their disease . in that day there will be a highway out of egypt to assyria and assyria will come into egypt and egypt will come into assyria and the egyptian will give worship to the lord together with the assyrian . in that day israel will be the third together with egypt and assyria a blessing in the earth because of the blessing of the lord of army which he have give them say a blessing on egypt my people and on assyria the work of my hand and on israel my heritage .in the year when the tartan come to ashdod send by sargon king of assyria and make war against it and take it at that time the word of the lord come to isaiah the son of amoz say go and take off your robe and your shoe from your foot and he do so walk unclothed and without shoe on his foot . and the lord say a my servant isaiah have go unclothed and without shoe for three year a a sign and a wonder to egypt and ethiopia so will the king of assyria take away the prisoner of egypt and those force out of ethiopia young and old unclothed and without shoe and with back uncover to the shame of egypt . and they will be full of fear and will no longer have faith in ethiopia which be their hope or in egypt which be their glory . and those living by the sea will say in that day see the fate of our hope to whom we go for help and salvation from the king of assyria what hope have we then of salvation ?the word about the waste land . a storm wind in the south go rush through it come from the waste land from the land greatly to be fear . a vision of fear come before my eye the worker of deceit go on in his false way and the waster go on make waste . up ! elam to the attack ! medium i have put an end to her sorrow . for this cause i be full of bitter grief pain like the pain of a woman in childbirth have come on me i be bent down with sorrow at what come to my ear i be shock by what i see . my mind be wander fear have overcome me the evening of my desire have be turn into shake for me . they make ready the table they put down the cover they take food and drink . up ! you captain put oil on your breastplate . for so have the lord say to me go let a watchman be place let him give word of what he see and when he see war carriage horseman by twos war carriage with ass war carriage with camel let him give special attention . and the watchman give a loud cry o my lord i be on the watchtower all day and be place in my watch every night see here come war carriage with men horseman by two and in answer he say babylon be make low be make low and all her image be break on the earth . o my crushed one the grain of my floor ! i have give you the word which come to me from the lord of army the god of israel . the word about edom . a voice come to me from seir watchman how far go be the night ? how far go be the night ? the watchman say the morning have come but night be still to come if you have question to put put them and come back again . the word about arabia . in the thick wood of arabia will be your night 's rest place o travel band of dedanites ! give water to him who be in need of water give bread o men of the land of tema to those in flight . for they be in flight from the sharp sword and the bent bow and from the trouble of war . for so have the lord say to me in a year by the year of a servant working for payment all the glory of kedar will come to an end and the rest of the bowman the men of war of the child of kedar will be small in number for the lord the god of israel have say it .the word about the valley of vision . why have all your people go up to the house top ? you who be full of loud voice a town of outcry give up to joy your dead men have not be put to the sword or come to their death in war . all your ruler ... have go in flight all your strong one have go far away . for this cause i have say let your eye be turn away from me in my bitter weep i will not be comfort for the wasting of the daughter of my people . for it be a day of trouble and of crush down and of destruction from the lord the lord of army in the valley of vision ... and elam be arm with arrow and aram come on horseback and the breastplate of kir be uncover . and your most fertile valley be full of war carriage and the horseman take up their position in front of the town . he take away the cover of judah and in that day you be look with care at the store of arm in the house of the wood . and you saw all the broken place in the wall of the town of david and you get together the water of the low pool . and you have the house of jerusalem number pull down the house to make the wall stronger . and you make a place between the two wall for store the water of the old pool but you give no thought to him who have do this and be not look to him by whom it have be purpose long before . and in that day the lord the lord of army be look for weep and cry of sorrow cut off of the hair and put on the clothing of grief but in place of these there be joy and delight ox and sheep be be make ready for food there be feasting and drinking men say now be the time for food and wine for tomorrow death come . and the lord of army say to me secretly truly this sin will not be take from you till your death say the lord the lord of army . the lord the lord of army say go to this person in authority this shebna who be over the house who have make himself a rest place on high cut out a place for himself in the rock and say who be you and by what right have you make for yourself a rest place here ? see o strong man the lord will send you violently away grip you with force twist you round and round like a ball he will send you out into a wide country there you will come to your end and there will be the carriage of your pride o shame of your lord 's house ! and i will have you force out of your place of authority and pull down from your position . and in that day i will send for my servant eliakim the son of hilkiah and i will put your robe on him and put your band about him and i will give your authority into his hand and he will be a father to the men of jerusalem and to the family of judah . and i will give the key of the family of david into his care and what he keep open will be shut by no one and what he keep shut no one will make open . and i will put him like a nail in a safe place and he will be for a seat of glory to his father 's family . and all the glory of his father 's family will be hang on him all their offspring every small vessel even the cup and the basin . in that day say the lord of army will the nail fix in a safe place give way and it will be cut down and in it fall the weight hang on it will be cut off for the lord have say it .the word about tyre . let a cry of sorrow go up o ship of tarshish because your strong place be make waste on the way back from the land of kittim the news be give to them . send out a cry of grief you men of the sea land trader of zidon who go over the sea whose representative be on great water who get in the seed of shihor whose wealth be the trade of the nation . be sham o zidon for the sea the strong place of the sea have say i have not be with child or give birth i have not take care of young men or keep watch over the growth of virgin . when the news come to egypt they will be bitterly pain at the fate of tyre . go over to tarshish give cry of sorrow o men of the sea land . be this the town which be full of joy whose start go back to time long past whose wandering take her into far off country ? by whom be this purpose against tyre the crown town whose trader be chiefs whose business men be honour in the land ? it be the purpose of the lord of army to put pride to shame to make sport of the glory of those who be honour in the earth . let your land be work with the plough o daughter of tarshish there be no longer any harbour . his hand be stretch out over the sea the kingdom be shake the lord have give order about canaan to make waste it strong place . and he say there be no more joy for you o crush virgin daughter of zidon up ! go over to kittim even there you will have no rest . ... let a cry of sorrow go up o ship of tarshish because your strong place be make waste . and it will be in that day that tyre will go out of mind for seventy year that be the day of one king after the end of seventy year it will be for tyre a in the song of the loose woman . take an instrument of music go about the town o loose woman who have go out from the memory of man make sweet melody with song so that you may come back to men 's mind . and it will be after the end of seventy year that the lord will have mercy on tyre and she will go back to her trade acting a a loose woman with all the kingdom of the world on the face of the earth . and her good and her trade will be holy to the lord they will not be keep back or store up for her produce will be for those living in the lord 's land to give them food for their need and fair clothing .see the lord be make the earth waste and unpeopled he be turn it upside down and send the people in all direction . and it will be the same for the people a for the priest for the servant a for his master and for the woman servant a for her owner the same for the one offering good for a price a for him who take them the same for him who give money at interest and for him who take it the same for him who let others have the use of his property a for those who make use of it . the earth will be completely waste and without men for this be the word of the lord . the earth be sorrow and waste away the world be full of grief and waste away the high one of the earth come to nothing . the earth have be make unclean by those live in it because the law have not be keep by them the order have be change and the eternal agreement have be break . for this cause the earth be give up to the curse and those in it be judge a sinner for this cause those live on the earth be burn up and the rest be small in number . the new wine be thin the vine be feeble and all the glad hearted make sound of grief . the please sound of all instrument of music have come to an end and the voice of those who be glad . there be no more drinking of wine with a song strong drink will be bitter to those who take it . the town be waste and break down every house be shut up so that no man may come in . there be a cry in the street because of the wine there be an end of all delight the joy of the land be go . in the town all be waste and in the public place be destruction . for it will be in the heart of the earth among the people like the shaking of an olive tree a the last of the grape after the get in be do . but those will be make sound of joy they will be cry loudly from the sea for the glory of the lord . give praise to the lord in the east to the name of the lord the god of israel in the sea land . from the farthest part of the earth come the sound of song glory to the upright . but i say i be waste away waste away the curse be on me ! the false one go on in their false way yes they go on act falsely . fear and death and the net be come on you o people of the earth . and it will be that he who go in flight from the sound of fear will be overtake by death and he who get free from death will be take in the net for the window on high be open and the base of the earth be shake . the earth be completely broken it be part in two it be violently move . the earth will be move uncertainly like a man overcome by drink it will be shake like a tent and the weight of it sin will be on it crush it down so that it will not get up again . and in that day the lord will send punishment on the army of the high one on high and on the king of the earth on the earth . and they will be get together like prisoner in the prison house and after a long time they will have their punishment . then the moon will be veil and the sun put to shame for the lord of army will be rule in mount zion and in jerusalem and before his judge he will let his glory be see .o lord you be my god i will give praise to you i will give honour to your name for you have do great act of power your purpose in the past have be make true and certain in effect . for you have make a town a waste place a strong town a mass of broken wall the tower of the men of pride have come to an end it will never be put up again . for this cause will the strong people give glory to you the town of the cruel one will be in fear of you . for you have be a strong place for the poor and the crush in their trouble a safe place from the storm a shade from the heat when the wrath of the cruel one be like a winter storm . a heat by the shade of a cloud the noise of the men of pride have be make quiet by you a heat by the shade of a cloud the song of the cruel one have be stop . and in this mountain will the lord of army make for all people a feast of good thing a feast of wine long store of good thing sweet to the taste of wine long kept and test . and in this mountain he will put an end to the shade cover the face of all people and the veil which be stretch over all nation . he have put an end to death for ever and the lord god will take away all weeping and he will put an end to the shame of his people in all the earth for the lord have say it . and in that day it will be say see this be our god we have be wait for him and he will be our saviour this be the lord in whom be our hope we will be glad and have delight in his salvation . for in this mountain will the hand of the lord come to rest and moab will be crush down in his place even a the dry stem of the grain be crush under foot in the waste place . and if he put out his hand like a man stretch out his hand in swim the lord will make low his pride however expert his design . and the strong tower of your wall have be break by him make low and crush even to the dust .in that day will this song be make in the land of judah we have a strong town he will make salvation our wall and tower . let the door be open so that the upright nation which keep faith may come in . the man whose heart be unmoved you will keep in peace because his hope be in you . let your hope be in the lord for ever for the lord jah be an unchanging rock . for he have make low those who be lift up all the people of the town of pride he make it low crush it down to the earth he make it low in the dust . it will be crush under the foot of the poor and the step of those who be in need . the way of the good man be straight the road of the upright be make smooth by you . we have be wait for you o lord the desire of our soul be for the memory of your name . in the night the desire of my soul have be for you early will my spirit be search for you for when your punishment come on the earth the people of the world will get the knowledge of righteousness . even if you be kind to the evil doer he will not go after righteousness even in the land of the upright he will still go on in his wrongdoing and will not see the glory of the lord . lord your hand be lift up but they do not see let them see ... yes your hater will be burn up in the fire . lord you will give u peace for all our work be the outcome of your purpose . o lord our god other lord than you have have rule over u but in you only be our salvation and no other name will we take on our lip . the dead will not come back to life their spirit will not come back to earth for this cause you have send destruction on them so that the memory of them be dead . you have make the nation great o lord you have make it great glory be yours you have make wide the limit of the land . lord in trouble our eye have be turn to you we send up a prayer when your punishment be on u . a a woman with child whose time be near be troubled cry out in her pain so have we be before you o lord . we have be with child we have be in pain we have give birth to wind no salvation have come to the earth through u and no child have come into the world . your dead will come back their dead body will come to life again . those in the dust awake from their sleep will send out a song for your dew be a dew of light and the earth will give birth to the shade . come my people into your secret place and let your door be shut keep yourself safe for a short time till his wrath be over . for the lord be come out of his place to send punishment on the people of the earth for their evil do the earth will let the blood drain out on her be see and will keep her dead covered no longer .in that day the lord with his great and strong and cruel sword will send punishment on leviathan the quick move snake and on leviathan the twisted snake and he will put to death the dragon which be in the sea . in that day it will be say a vine garden of delight make a song about it . i the lord be watch it i will give it water at all time i will keep it night and day for fear that any damage come to it . my passion be over if the thorn be fight against me i would make an attack on them and they would be burn up together . or let him put himself under my power and make peace with me . in day to come jacob will take root israel will put out bud and flower and the face of the world will be full of fruit . be his punishment like the punishment of those who overcome him ? or be his dead a great in number a those he put to the sword ? your anger against her have be make clear by drive her away he have take her away with his storm wind in the day of his east wind . so by this will the sin of jacob be cover and this be all the fruit of take away his punishment when all the stone of the altar be crush together so that the wood pillar and the sun image will not be put up again . for the strong town be without men an unpeopled living place and she have become a waste land there the young ox will take his rest and it branch will be food for him . when it branch be dry they will be break off the woman will come and put fire to them for it be a foolish people for this cause he who make them will have no mercy on them and he whose work they be will not have pity on them . and it will be in that day that the lord will get together his grain from the river to the stream of egypt and you will be get together with care o child of israel . and it will be in that day that a great horn will be sound and those who be wander in the land of assyria and those who have be send away into the land of egypt will come and they will give worship to the lord in the holy mountain at jerusalem .ho ! crown of pride of those who be give up to wine in ephraim and the dead flower of his glory which be on the head of those who be overcome by strong drink ! see the lord have a strong and cruel one like a rain of ice a storm of destruction like the overflowing of a strong river he will violently overcome them . the crown of pride of those who be give up to wine in ephraim will be crush under foot and the dead flower of his glory which be on the head of the fertile valley will be like the first early fruit before the summer which a man take and put in his mouth the minute he see it . in that day will the lord of army be a crown of glory and a fair ornament to the rest of his people and a spirit of wisdom to the judge and strength to those who keep back the attacker at the door of the town . and further these be uncertain through wine and have go out of the right way through strong drink the priest and the prophet be uncertain through strong drink they be overcome by wine they have go out of the way through strong drink their vision be false they go wrong in their decision . for all the table be cover with cough up food so that there be not a clean place . to whom will he give knowledge ? and to whom will he make clear the word ? will it be to those who have newly give up milk and who have only now be take from the breast ? for it be one rule after another one line after another here a little there a little . no but with broken talk and with a strange tongue he will give his word to this people to whom he say this be the rest give rest to him who be tire and by this you may get new strength but they would not give ear . for this cause the word of the lord will be to them rule after rule line after line here a little there a little so that they may go on their way and fall back may be break and take in the net . give ear then to the word of the lord you men of pride the ruler of this people in jerusalem because you have say we have make death our friend and with the underworld we have make an agreement when the overflow water come through they will not come near u for we be look to false word for help take cover in what be untrue for this cause say the lord god see i be place in zion a a base a stone a test stone an angle stone which be certain and of great value and he who have faith will not give way . and i will make right decision the measuring line and righteousness the weight and the ice storm will take away the safe place of false word and the secret place will be cover by the flow water . and the help you be look for from death will come to nothing and your agreement with the underworld will be break when the overflow water come through then you will be overcome by them . whenever they come through they will overtake you for they will come through morning after morning by day and by night and the news will be nothing but fear . for the bed be not long enough for a man to be stretch out on and the cover be not wide enough for him to be cover with . for the lord will come up a on mount perazim he will be move to wrath a in the valley of gibeon so that he may do his work strange be his work and give effect to his act unnatural be his act . and now take care that you do not make sport of him or your band will be make strong for i have have word from the lord the lord of army of an end of a complete end which be to come on all the land . let your ear be open to my voice give attention to what i say . be the ploughman for ever plough ? do he not get the earth ready and break up for the seed ? when the face of the earth have be level do he not put in the different sort of seed and the grain in line and the barley in it place and the spelt at the edge ? for his god be his teacher give him the knowledge of these thing . for the fitch be not crush with a sharp instrument and a cart wheel be not roll over the cummin but the grain of the fitch be hammer out with a stick and of the cummin with a rod . be the grain for bread crush ? he do not go on crush it for ever but he let his cart wheel and his horse go over it without crush it . this come from the lord of army purpose wonder and wise in all his act .ho ! ariel ariel the town against which david make war put year to year let the feast come round and i will send trouble on ariel and there will be weep and cry of grief and she will be to me a ariel . and i will make war on you like david and you will be shut in by earthwork and i will make tower round you . and you will be make low and your voice will come out of the earth and your word will be low out of the dust and your voice will come out of the earth like that of a spirit make bird like noise out of the dust . and the army of your attacker will be like small dust and all the cruel one like dry stem go before the wind suddenly it will come about . the lord of army will come in with thunder and earth shaking and great noise with rush wind and storm and the flame of burn fire . and all the nation make war on ariel and all those who be fight against her and shut her in with their tower will be like a dream like a vision of the night . and it will be like a man desire food and dreaming that he be feast but when he be awake there be nothing in his mouth or like a man in need of water dreaming that he be drink but when he be awake he be feeble and his soul be full of desire so will all the nation be which make war on mount zion . be surprised and full of wonder let your eye be cover and be blind be overcome but not with wine go with uncertain step but not because of strong drink . for the lord have send on you a spirit of deep sleep and by him your eye the prophet be shut and your head the seer be cover . and the vision of all this have become to you like the word of a book which be shut which men give to one who have knowledge of write say make clear to u what be in the book and he say i be not able to for the book be shut and they give it to one without learn say make clear to u what be in the book and he say i have no knowledge of writing . and the lord say because this people come near to me with their mouth and give honour to me with their lip but their heart be far from me and their fear of me be false a rule give them by the teaching of men for this cause i will again do a strange thing among this people a thing to be wonder at and the wisdom of their wise men will come to nothing and the sense of their guide will no longer be see . curse be those who go deep to keep their design secret from the lord and whose work be in the dark and who say who see u ? and who have knowledge of our act ? you be turn thing upside down ! be the wet earth the same to you a the one who be form it ? will the thing make say of him who make it he make me not or the thing form say of him who give it form he have no knowledge ? in a very short time lebanon will become a fertile field and the fertile field will seem like a wood . and in that day those whose ear be stop will be hear the word of the book and the eye of the blind will see through the mist and the dark . and the poor will have their joy in the lord increase and those in need will be glad in the holy one of israel . for the cruel one have come to nothing and those who make sport of the lord be go and those who be watch to do evil be cut off who give help to a man in a wrong cause and who put a net for the foot of him who give decision in the public place take away a man 's right without cause . for this reason the lord the saviour of abraham say about the family of jacob jacob will not now be put to shame or his face be cloud with fear . but when they the child of jacob see the work of my hand among them they will give honour to my name yes they will give honour to the holy one of jacob and go in fear of the god of israel . those whose heart be turn away from him will get knowledge and those who make an outcry against him will give attention to his teaching .ho ! uncontrolled child say the lord who give effect to a purpose which be not mine and who make an agreement but not by my spirit increase their sin who make a move to go down into egypt without authority from me who be look to the strength of pharaoh for help and whose hope be in the shade of egypt . and the strength of pharaoh will be your shame and your hope in the shade of egypt will come to nothing . for his chief be at zoan and his representative have come to hanes . for they have all come with offering to a people of no use to them in whom be no help or profit but only shame and a bad name . the word about the beast of the south . through the land of trouble and grief the land of the she lion and the voice of the lion of the snake and the burning wing snake they take their wealth on the back of young ass and their store on camel to a people in whom be no profit . for there be no use or purpose in the help of egypt so i have say about her she be rahab who have come to an end . now go put it in write before them on a board and make a record of it in a book so that it may be for the future a witness for all time to come . for they be an uncontrolled people false hearted who will not give ear to the teaching of the lord who say to the seer see not and to the prophet do not give u word of what be true but say false thing to give u pleasure get out of the good way turn from the right road do not keep the holy one of israel before our mind . for this cause the holy one of israel say because you will not give ear to this word and be look for help in way of deceit and evil and be put your hope in them this sin will be to you like a crack in a high wall cause it fall suddenly and in a minute . and he will let it be break a a potter 's vessel be break it will be smash to bit without mercy so that there will not be a bit in which one may take fire from the fireplace or water from the spring . for the lord the holy one of israel say in quiet and rest be your salvation peace and hope be your strength but you would not have it so . say no for we will go in flight on horse so you will certainly go in flight and we will go on the back of quick run beast so those who go after you will be quick foot . a thousand will go in fear before one even before five you will go in flight till you be like a pillar by itself on the top of a mountain and like a flag on a hill . for this cause the lord will be wait so that he may be kind to you and he will be lift up so that he may have mercy on you for the lord be a god of righteousness there be a blessing on all whose hope be in him . o people live in zion at jerusalem your weeping will be end he will certainly have mercy on you at the sound of your cry when it come to his ear he will give you an answer . and though the lord will give you the bread of trouble and the water of grief you will no longer put your teacher on one side but you will see your teacher and at your back when you be turn to the right hand or to the left a voice will be sound in your ear say this be the way in which you be to go . and you will make unclean what be cover your pictured image of silver and the plating of your image of gold you will send them away a an unclean thing say be go ! and he will give rain for your seed so that you may put it in the earth and you will have bread from the produce of the earth good and more than enough for your need in that day the cattle will get their food in wide grass land . and the ox and the young ass which be use for plough will have salt grain which have be make free from the waste with fork and basket . and there will be river and stream of water on every tall mountain and on every high hill in the day when great number be put to the sword when the tower come down . and the light of the moon will be a the light of the sun and the light of the sun will be seven time great a the light of seven day in the day when the lord put oil on the wound of his people and make them well from the blow they have undergone . see the name of the lord be come from far burn with his wrath with thick smoke go up his lip be full of passion and his tongue be like a burning fire and his breath be a an overflow stream come up even to the neck shake the nation for their destruction like the shaking of grain in a basket and he will put a cord in the mouth of the people turn them out of their way . you will have a song a in the night when a holy feast be keep and you will be glad in heart a when they go with music of the pipe to the mountain of the lord the rock of israel . and the lord will send out the sound of his great voice and they will see his arm stretch out with the heat of his wrath and the flame of a burning fire with a cloud burst and storm and a rain of ice . for through the voice of the lord the assyrian will be break and the lord 's rod will be lift up against him . and every blow of the rod of his punishment which the lord will send on him will be with the sound of music and with the waving of his sword the lord will make war against him . for a place of fire have long be ready yes it have be make ready for the king he have make it deep and wide it be mass with fire and much wood the breath of the lord like a stream of fire put a light to it .curse be those who go down to egypt for help and who put their faith in horse look to war carriage for salvation because of their number and to horseman because they be very strong but they be not look to the holy one of israel or turn their heart to the lord though he be wise and able to send evil and his purpose will not be change but he will go against the house of the evil doer and against those to whom they be look for help . for the egyptian be men and not god and their horse be flesh and not spirit and when the lord 's hand be stretch out the helper and he who be help will come down together . for the lord have say to me a a lion or a young lion make an angry noise over his food and if a band of herdsman come out against him he will not be in fear of their voice or give up his food for their noise so the lord of army will come down to make war against mount zion and it hill . like bird with outstretched wing so will the lord of army be a cover to jerusalem he will be a cover and salvation for it go over it he will keep it from danger . come back to him who have be so deeply sin against by the child of israel . for in that day they will all give up their image of silver and of gold the sin which they make for themselves . then the assyrian will come down by the sword but not of man the sword not of men will be the cause of his destruction and he will go in flight from the sword and his young men will be put to force work . and his rock will come to nothing because of fear and his chief will go in flight from the flag say the lord whose fire be in zion and his altar in jerusalem .see a king will be rule in righteousness and chief will give right decision . and a man will be a a safe place from the wind and a cover from the storm a river of water in a dry place a the shade of a great rock in a waste land . and the eye of those who see will not be shut and those who have hearing will give ear to the word . the man of sudden impulse will become wise in heart and he whose tongue be slow will get the power of talk clearly . the foolish man will no longer be name noble and they will not say of the false man that he be a man of honour . for the foolish man will say foolish thing have evil thought in his heart work what be unclean and talk falsely about the lord to keep food from him who be in need of it and water from him whose soul be desire it . the design of the false be evil purpose the destruction of the poor man by false word even when he be in the right . but the noble hearted man have noble purpose and by these he will be guide . give ear to my voice you woman who be live in comfort give attention to my word you daughter who have no fear of danger . in not much more than a year you who be not look for evil will be trouble for the produce of the vine garden will be cut off and there will be no get in of the grape . be shake with fear you woman who be live in comfort be trouble you who have no fear of danger take off your robe and put on clothing of grief . have sorrow for the field the pleasing field the fertile vine and for the land of my people where thorn will come up even for all the house of joy in the glad town . for the fair house will have no man live in them the town which be full of noise will become a waste the hill and the watchtower will be unpeopled for ever a joy for the ass of the wood a place of food for the flock till the spirit come on u from on high and the waste land become a fertile field and the fertile field be change into a wood . then in the waste land there will be an upright rule and righteousness will have it place in the fertile field . and the work of righteousness will be peace and the effect of an upright rule will be to take away fear for ever . and my people will be live in peace in house where there be no fear and in quiet resting place . but the tall tree will come down with a great fall and the town will be low in a low place . happy be you who be plant seed by all the water and send out the ox and the as .ho ! you who make waste those who do not make you waste act falsely to those who be not false to you . when you have come to an end of waste you will be make waste and after your false act they will do the same to you . o lord have mercy on u for we have be wait for your help be our strength every morning our salvation in time of trouble . at the loud noise the people have go in flight at your come up the nation have go in all direction . and the good take in war will be get together like the massing of young locust men will be rush on them like the rushing of locust . the lord be lift up his place be on high he have make zion full of righteousness and true religion . and she will have no more fear of change be full of salvation wisdom and knowledge the fear of the lord be her wealth . see the men of war be sorrow outside the town those who come look for peace be weep bitterly . the highway be waste no man be journey there the agreement be break he have make sport of the town he have no thought for man . the earth be sorrow and waste away lebanon be put to shame and have become waste sharon be like the arabah and in bashan and carmel the leaf be fall . now will i come forward say the lord now will i be lift up now will my power be see . your design will be without profit and their effect will be nothing you will be burn up by the fire of my breath . and the people will be like the burning of chalk a thorn cut down which be burn in the fire . give ear you who be far off to what i have do see my power you who be near . the sinner in zion be full of fear the hater of god be shake with wonder . who among u may keep his place before the burning fire ? who among u may see the eternal burning ? he whose way be true and whose word be upright he who give no thought to the profit of false act whose hand have not take reward who will have no part in put men to death and whose eye be shut against evil he will have a place on high he will be safely shut in by the high rock his bread will be give to him his water will be certain . your eye will see the king in his glory they will be look on a far stretching land . your heart will give thought to the cause of your fear where be the scribe where be he who make a record of the payment where be he by whom the tower be number ? never again will you see the cruel people a people whose tongue have no sense for you whose language be strange to you . let your eye be rest on zion the town of our holy feast you will see jerusalem a quiet rest place a tent which will not be move whose tent pin will never be pull up and whose cord will never be break . but there the lord will be with u in his glory ... wide river and stream where no boat will go with blade and no fair ship will be sail . for the lord be our judge the lord be our law giver the lord be our king he will be our saviour . your cord have become loose they be not able to make strong the support of their sail the sail be not stretch out then the blind will take much property the feeble foot will make division of the good of war . and the men of zion will not say i be ill for it people will have forgiveness for their sin .come near you nation and give ear take note you people let the earth and everything in it give ear the world and all those live in it . for the lord be angry with all the nation and his wrath be burn against all their army he have put them to the curse he have give them to destruction . their dead body will be thick on the face of the earth and their smell will come up and the mountain will be flow with their blood and all the hill will come to nothing . and the heaven will be roll together like the roll of a book and all their army will be go like a dead leaf from the vine or a dry fruit from the fig tree . for my sword in heaven be full of wrath see it be come down on edom in punishment on the people of my curse . the sword of the lord be full of blood it be fat with the best of the meat with the blood of lamb and goat with the best part of the sheep for the lord have a feast in bozrah and much cattle will be put to death in the land of edom . and the strong ox will go down to death together with the small cattle . for it be the day of the lord 's punishment when he give payment for the wrong do to zion . and it stream will be turn into boiling oil and it dust into burn stone and all the land will be on fire . it will not be put out day or night it smoke will go up for ever it will be waste from generation to generation no one will go through it for ever . but the bird of the waste land will have their place there it will be a heritage for the bittern and the raven and it will be measure out with line and weight a a waste land . the jackal will be there and her great one will be go they will say there be no longer a kingdom there and all her chief will have come to an end . and thorn will come up in her fair house and waste plant in her strong tower and fox will make their hole there and it will be a meeting place for ostrich . and the beast of the waste place will come together with the jackal and the evil spirit will be cry to one another even the night spirit will come and make her rest place there . the arrowsnake will make her hole and put her egg there and get her young together under her shade there the hawk will come together by two . see what be record in the book of the lord all these will be there not one without the other the mouth of the lord have give the order and his spirit have make them come together . and he have give them their heritage and by his hand it have be measure out to them it will be theirs for ever their rest place from generation to generation .the waste land and the dry place will be glad the lowland will have joy and be full of flower . it will be flower like the rise it will be full of delight and songs the glory of lebanon will be give to it the pride of carmel and sharon they will see the glory of the lord the power of our god . make strong the feeble hand give support to the shaking knee . say to those who be full of fear be strong and take heart see your god will give punishment the reward of god will come he himself will come to be your saviour . then the eye of the blind will see and the ear which be stop will be open . then will the feeble footed be jump like a roe and the voice which be stop will be loud in song for in the waste land stream will be burst out and water in the dry place . and the burning sand will become a pool and the dry earth spring of water the field where the sheep take their food will become wet land and water plant will take the place of grass . and a highway will be there it name will be the holy way the unclean and the sinner may not go over it and those who go on it will not be turn out of the way by the foolish . no lion will be there or any cruel beast they will not be see there but those for whom the lord have give a price even those whom he have make free will come back again they will come with song to zion on their head will be eternal joy delight and joy will be theirs and sorrow and sound of grief will be go for ever .and it come about in the fourteenth year of king hezekiah that sennacherib king of assyria come up against all the walled town of judah and take them . and the king of assyria send the rab shakeh from lachish to jerusalem to king hezekiah with a strong force and he take up his position by the stream of the high pool by the highway of the washerman 's and there come out to him eliakim the son of hilkiah who be over the house and shebna the scribe and joah the son of asaph the recorder . and the rab shakeh say to them say now to hezekiah these be the word of the great king the king of assyria in what be you place your hope ? you say you have a design and strength for war but these be only word now to whom be you look for support that you have go against my authority ? see you be base your hope on that broken rod of egypt which will go into a man 's hand if he make use of it for a support for so be pharaoh king of egypt to all who put their faith in him . and if you say to me our hope be in the lord our god be it not he whose high place and altar hezekiah have take away say to judah and jerusalem that worship may only be give before this altar ? and now take a chance with my master the king of assyria and i will give you two thousand horse if you be able to put horseman on them . how then may you put to shame the least of my master 's servant ? and you have put your hope in egypt for war carriage and horseman and have i now come to send destruction on this land without the lord 's authority ? it be the lord himself who say to me go up against this land and make it waste . then eliakim and shebna and joah say to the rab shakeh please make use of the aramaean language in talk to your servant for we be use to it and do not make use of the jew ' language in the hearing of the people on the wall . but the rab shakeh say be it to your master or to you that my master have send me to say these word ? have he not send me to the men seat on the wall ? for they be the people who will be short of food with you when the town be shut in . then the rab shakeh get up and say with a loud voice in the jew ' language give ear to the word of the great king the king of assyria this be what the king say do not be trick by hezekiah for there be no salvation for you in him . and do not let hezekiah make you put your faith in the lord say the lord will certainly keep u safe and this town will not be give into the hand of the king of assyria . do not give ear to hezekiah for this be what the king of assyria say make peace with me and come out to me and everyone will be free to take the fruit of his vine and of his fig tree and the water of his spring till i come and take you away to a land like yours a land of grain and wine a land of bread and vine garden . give no attention to hezekiah when he say to you the lord will keep u safe . have any one of the god of the nation keep his land from fall into the hand of the king of assyria ? where be the god of hamath and of arpad ? where be the god of sepharvaim ? where be the god of samaria ? and have they keep samaria out of my hand ? who among all the god of these country have keep their country from fall into my hand to give cause for the thought that the lord will keep jerusalem from fall into my hand ? but they keep quiet and give him no answer for the king 's order be give him no answer . then eliakim the son of hilkiah who be over the house and shebna the scribe and joah the son of asaph the recorder come to hezekiah with their clothing part a a sign of grief and give him an account of what the rab shakeh have say .and on hear it hezekiah take off his robe and put on haircloth and go into the house of the lord . and he send eliakim who be over the house and shebna the scribe and the chief priest dress in haircloth to isaiah the prophet the son of amoz . and they say to him hezekiah say this day be a day of trouble and punishment and shame for the child be ready to come to birth but there be no strength to give birth to them . it may be that the lord your god will give ear to the word of the rab shakeh whom the king of assyria his master have send to say evil thing against the living god and will make his word come to nothing so make your prayer for the rest of the people . so the servant of king hezekiah come to isaiah . and isaiah say to them this be what you be to say to your master the lord say be not trouble by the word which the servant of the king of assyria have say against me in your hearing . see i will put a spirit into him and bad news will come to his ear and he will go back to his land and there i will have him put to death . so the rab shakeh go back and when he get there the king of assyria be make war against libnah for it have come to his ear that the king of assyria have go away from lachish . and when news come to him that tirhakah king of ethiopia have make an attack on him ... and he send representative to hezekiah king of judah say this be what you be to say to hezekiah king of judah let not your god in whom be your faith give you a false hope say jerusalem will not be give into the hand of the king of assyria . no doubt the story have come to your ear of what the king of assyria have do to all land put them to the curse and will you be keep safe from their fate ? do the god of the nation keep safe those on whom my father send destruction gozan and haran and rezeph and the child of eden who be in telassar ? where be the king of hamath and the king of arpad and the king of the town of sepharvaim of hena and ivva ? and hezekiah take the letter from the hand of those who have come with it and after read it hezekiah go up to the house of the lord open the letter there before the lord and he make prayer to the lord say o lord of army the god of israel seat between the winged one you only be the god of all the kingdom of the earth you have make heaven and earth . let your ear be turn to u o lord let your eye be open o lord and see take note of all the word of sennacherib who have send men to say evil against the living god . truly o lord the king of assyria have make waste all the nation and their land and have give their god to the fire for they be no god but wood and stone the work of men 's hand so they have give them to destruction . but now o lord our god give u salvation from his hand so that it may be clear to all the kingdom of the earth that you and you only be the lord . then isaiah the son of amoz sent to hezekiah say the lord the god of israel say the prayer you have make to me against sennacherib king of assyria have come to my ear . this be the word which the lord have say about him in the eye of the virgin daughter of zion you be sham and laugh at the daughter of jerusalem have make sport of you . against whom have you say evil and bitter thing ? and against whom have your voice be loud and your eye lift up ? even against the holy one of israel . you have send your servant with evil word against the lord and have say with all my war carriage i have come up to the top of the mountain to the inmost part of lebanon and it tall cedar will be cut down and the best tree of it wood i will come up into his high place into his thick wood . i have make water hole and take their water and with my foot i have make all the river of egypt dry . have it not come to your ear how i do it long before purpose it in time long past ? now i have give effect to my design so that by you strong town might be turn into mass of broken wall . this be why their townsman have no power they be break and put to shame they be like the grass of the field or a green plant like the grass on the house top which a cold wind make waste . but i have knowledge of your get up and your resting of your go out and your come in . because your wrath against me and your pride have come to my ear i will put my hook in your nose and my cord in your lip and i will make you go back by the way you come . and this will be the sign to you you will get your food this year from what come up of itself and in the second year from the produce of the same and in the third year you will put in your seed and get in the grain and make vine garden and take of their fruit . and those of judah who be still live will again take root in the earth and give fruit . for from jerusalem those who have be keep safe will go out and those who be still live will go out of mount zion by the fixed purpose of the lord of army this will be do . for this cause the lord say about the king of assyria he will not come into this town or send an arrow against it he will not come before it with arm or put up an earthwork against it . by the way he come he will go back and he will not get into this town . for i will keep this town safe for my honour and for the honour of my servant david . and the angel of the lord go out and put to death in the army of the assyrian a hundred and eighty five thousand men and when the people get up early in the morning there be nothing to be see but dead body . sennacherib king of assyria go back to his place at nineveh . and it come about when he be worship in the house of nisroch his god that his son adrammelech and sharezer put him to death with the sword and they go in flight into the land of ararat . and esar haddon his son become king in his place .in those day hezekiah be ill and near death . and isaiah the prophet the son of amoz come to him and say to him the lord say put your house in order for your death be near . and hezekiah turn his face to the wall make his prayer to the lord say o lord keep in mind how i have be true to you with all my heart and have do what be good in your eye . and hezekiah give way to bitter weep . then the word of the lord come to isaiah say go to hezekiah and say the lord the god of david your father say your prayer have come to my ear and i have see your weep see i will give you fifteen more year of life . and i will keep you and this town safe from the hand of the king of assyria and i will keep watch over this town . and isaiah say this be the sign the lord will give you that he will do what he have say see i will make the shade which have go down on the step of ahaz with the sun go back ten step . so the shade go back the ten step by which it have go down . the writing of hezekiah king of judah after he have be ill and have get well from his disease . i say in the quiet of my day i be go down into the underworld the rest of my year be be take away from me . i say i will not see the lord even the lord in the land of the living i will not see man again or those live in the world . my rest place be pull up and take away from me like a herdsman 's tent my life be roll up like a linen worker 's thread i be cut off from the cloth on the frame from day even to night you give me up to pain . i be cry out with pain till the morning it be a if a lion be crush all my bone . i make cry like a bird i give out sound of grief like a dove my eye be look up with desire o lord i be crush take up my cause . what be i to say ? see that it be he who have do it all my time of sleep i be turn from side to side without rest . o lord for this cause i be wait for you give rest to my spirit make me well again and let me come back to life . see in place of peace my soul have bitter sorrow . but you have keep back my soul from the underworld for you have put all my sin out of your memory . for the underworld be not able to give you praise death give you no honour for those who go down into the underworld there be no hope in your mercy . the live the living man he will give you praise a i do this day the father will give the story of your mercy to his child . o lord quickly be my saviour so we will make my song to cord instrument all the day of our life in the house of the lord . and isaiah say let them take a cake of fig and put it on the diseased place and he will get well . and hezekiah say what be the sign that i will go up to the house of the lord ?at that time merodach baladan the son of baladan king of babylon send letter with an offering to hezekiah because he have news that hezekiah have be ill and be well again . and hezekiah be glad at their coming and let them see all his store of wealth the silver and the gold and the spice and the oil and all the house of his arm and everything there be in his store there be nothing in all his house or his kingdom which he do not let them see . then isaiah the prophet come to king hezekiah and say to him what do these men say and where do they come from ? and hezekiah say they come from a far country even from babylon . and he say what have they see in your house ? and hezekiah say in answer they saw everything in my house there be nothing among my store which i do not let them see . then say isaiah to hezekiah give ear to the word of the lord of army truly the day be come when everything in your house and whatever your father have put in store till this day will be take away to babylon all will be go . and your son even your offspring will they take away to be unsexed servant in the house of the king of babylon . then say hezekiah to isaiah good be the word of the lord which you have say . and he say in his heart there will be peace and quiet in my day .give comfort give comfort to my people say your god . say kind word to the heart of jerusalem cry out to her that her time of trouble be end that her punishment be complete that she have be reward by the lord 's hand twice over for all her sin . a voice of one cry make ready in the waste land the way of the lord make level in the lowland a highway for our god . let every valley be lift up and every mountain and hill be make low and let the rough place become level and the hilltop become a valley and the glory of the lord will be make clear and all flesh will see it together for the mouth of the lord have say it . a voice of one say give a cry ! and i say what be my cry to be ? all flesh be grass and all it strength like the flower of the field . the grass become dry the flower be dead because the breath of the lord go over it truly the people be grass . the grass be dry the flower be dead but the word of our god be eternal . you who give good news to zion get up into the high mountain you who give good news to jerusalem let your voice be strong let it be sound without fear say to the town of judah see your god ! see the lord god will come a a strong one ruling in power see those make free by him be with him and those whom he have make safe go before him . he will give food to his flock like a keeper of sheep with his arm he will get it together and will take up the lamb on his breast gently guide those which be with young . in the hollow of whose hand have the water be measure ? and who be able to take the heaven in his stretch out finger ? who have get together the dust of the earth in a measure ? who have take the weight of the mountain or put the hill into the scale ? by whom have the spirit of the lord be guide or who have be his teacher ? who give him suggestion and make clear to him the right way ? who give him knowledge guide him in the way of wisdom ? see the nation be to him like a drop hang from a bucket and like the small dust in the scale he take up the island like small dust . and lebanon be not enough to make a fire with or all it cattle enough for a burned offering . all the nation be a nothing before him even less than nothing a thing of no value . whom then be god like in your opinion ? or what will you put forward a a comparison with him ? the workman make an image and the gold worker put gold plat over it and make silver band for it . the wise workman make selection of the mulberry tree of the offer a wood which will not become soft so that the image may be fix to it and not be move . have you no knowledge of it ? have it not come to your ear ? have not news of it be give to you from the first ? have it not be clear to you from the time when the earth be place on it base ? it be he who be seat over the arch of the earth and the people in it be as small a locust by him the heaven be stretch out like an arch and make ready like a tent for a living place . he make ruler come to nothing the judge of the earth be of no value . they have only now be plant and their seed put into the earth and they have only now take root when he send out his breath over them and they become dry and the storm wind take them away like dry grass . who then seem to you to be my equal ? say the holy one . let your eye be lift up on high and see who have make these ? he who send out their numbered army who have knowledge of all their name by whose great strength because he be strong in power all of them be in their place . why do you say o jacob such word a these o israel the lord 's eye be not on my way and my god give no attention to my cause ? have you no knowledge of it ? have it not come to your ear ? the eternal god the lord the maker of the end of the earth be never feeble or tire there be no search out of his wisdom . he give power to the feeble increase the strength of him who have no force . even the young men will become feeble and tired and the best of them will come to the end of his strength but those who be wait for the lord will have new strength they will get wing like eagle run they will not be tire and walk they will have no weariness .come quietly before me o sea land and let the people get together their strength let them come near then let them say what they have to say let u put forward our cause against one another . who send out from the east one who be right wherever he go ? he give the nation into his hand and make him ruler over king he give them a the dust to his sword a dry stem before the wind to his bow . he go after them safely not touch the road with his foot . whose purpose and work be it ? his who send out the generation from the start . i the lord the first and with the last i be he . the sea land saw it and be in fear the end of the earth be shake they come near . they give help everyone to his neighbour and everyone say to his brother take heart ! so the metal worker put heart into the gold worker and he who be hammer the metal smooth say kind word to the iron worker say of the plate it be ready and he put it together with nail so that there might be no slipping . but a for you israel my servant and you jacob whom i have take for myself the seed of abraham my friend you whom i have take from the end of the earth and sent for from it farthest part say to you you be my servant whom i have take for myself and whom i have not give up have no fear for i be with you do not be look about in trouble for i be your god i will give you strength yes i will be your helper yes my true right hand will be your support . truly all those who be angry with you will be make low and put to shame those desire to do you wrong will come to nothing and never again be see . you will make search for your hater but they will not be there those who make war against you will be a nothing and will come to destruction . for i the lord your god have take your right hand in mine say to you have no fear i will be your helper . have no fear you worm jacob and you men of israel i will be your helper say the lord even he who take up your cause the holy one of israel . see i will make you like a new grain crush instrument with teeth crush the mountain small and make the hill like dry stem . you will send the wind over them and it will take them away they will go in all direction before the storm wind you will have joy in the lord and be glad in the holy one of israel . the poor and crush be look for water where no water be and their tongue be dry for need of it i the lord will give ear to their prayer i the god of israel will not give them up . i will make river on the dry mountain top and fountain in the valley i will make the waste land a pool of water and the dry land spring of water . i will put in the waste land the cedar the acacia the myrtle and the olive tree and in the lowland will be plant the fir tree the plane and the cypress together so that they may see and be wise and give their mind to it and that it may be clear to them all that the hand of the lord have do this and that the holy one of israel have make it . put forward your cause say the lord let your strong argument come out say the king of jacob . let the future be make clear to u give u news of the past thing so that we may give thought to them or of the thing to come so that we may see if they be true . give u word of what will be after this so that we may be certain that you be god yes do good or do evil so that we may all see it and be surprise . but you be nothing and your work be of no value foolish be he who take you for his god . i have send for one from the north and from the dawn he have come in my name he will get ruler together and go against them they will be like dust even a the wet earth be stamp on by the foot of the potter . who have give knowledge of it from the first so that we may be certain of it ? and from the start so that we may say his word be true ? there be no one who give news or say anything or who give ear to your word . i be the first to give word of it to zion and i give the good news to jerusalem . and i saw that there be no man even no wise man among them who might give an answer to my question . truly they be all nothing their work be nothing and of no value their metal image be of no more use than wind .see my servant whom i be support my loved one in whom i take delight i have put my spirit on him he will give the knowledge of the true god to the nation . he will make no cry his voice will not be loud his word will not come to men 's ear in the street . he will not let a crushed stem be quite broken and he will not let a feebly burning light be put out he will go on send out the true word to the people . his light will not be put out and he will not be crush till he have give the knowledge of the true god to the earth and the sea land will be wait for his teaching . god the lord even he who make the heaven measure them out on high stretch out the earth and give it produce he who give breath to the people on it and life to those who go about on it say i the lord have make you the vessel of my purpose i have take you by the hand and kept you safe and i have give you to be an agreement to the people and a light to the nation to give eye to the blind to make free the prisoner from the prison to let out those who be shut up in the dark . i be the lord that be my name i will not give my glory to another or my praise to picture image . see the thing say before have come about and now i give word of new thing before they come i give you news of them . make a new song to the lord and let his praise be sound from the end of the earth you who go down to the sea and everything in it the sea land and their people . let the waste land and it flock be glad the tent circle of kedar let the people of the rock give a glad cry from the top of the mountain let them make a sound of joy . let them give glory to the lord sound his praise in the sea land . the lord will go out a a man of war he will be move to wrath like a fight man his voice will be strong he will give a loud cry he will go against his attacker like a man of war . i have long be quiet i have keep myself in and do nothing now i will make sound of pain like a woman in childbirth breathe hard and quickly . i will make waste mountain and hill dry up all their plant and i will make river dry and pool dry land . and i will take the blind by a way of which they have no knowledge guide them by road strange to them i will make the dark place light before them and the rough place level . these thing will i do and will not give them up . they will be turn back and be greatly sham who put their hope in pictured image who say to metal image you be our god . give ear you whose ear be shut and let your eye be open you blind so that you may see . who be blind but my servant ? who have his ear stop but he whom i send ? who be blind a my true one or who have his ear shut like the lord 's servant ? see much but keep nothing in mind his ear be open but there be no hearing . it be the lord 's pleasure because of his righteousness to make the teaching great and give it honour . but this be a people whose property have be take away from them by force they be all take in hole and shut up in prison they be make prisoner and no one make them free they be take by force and no one say give them back . who be there among you who will give ear to this ? who will give attention to it for the time to come ? who give up jacob to those who take away his good and israel to his attacker ? do not the lord ? he against whom they do wrong and in whose way they would not go turn away from his teaching . for this reason he let loose on him the heat of his wrath and his strength be like a flame and it put fire round about him but he do not see it he be burn but do not take it to heart .but now say the lord your maker o jacob and your life giver o israel have no fear for i have take up your cause name you by your name i have make you mine . when you go through the water i will be with you and through the river they will not go over you when you go through the fire you will not be burn and the flame will have no power over you . for i be the lord your god the holy one of israel your saviour i have give egypt a a price for you ethiopia and seba for you . because of your value in my eye you have be honour and love by me so i will give men for you and people for your life . have no fear for i be with you i will take your seed from the east and get you together from the west i will say to the north give them up and to the south do not keep them back send back my son from far and my daughter from the end of the earth every one who be name by my name and whom i have make for my glory who have be form and design by me . send out the blind people who have eye and those who have ear but they be shut . let all the nation come together and let the people be present who among them be able to make this clear and give u word of early thing ? let their witness come forward so that they may be see to be true and that they may give ear and say it be true . you be my witness say the lord and my servant whom i have take for myself so that you may see and have faith in me and that it may be clear to you that i be he before me there be no god form and there will not be after me . i even i be the lord and there be no saviour but me . i give the word and make it clear and there be no strange god among you for this reason you be my witness say the lord . from time long past i be god and from this day i be he there be no one who be able to take you out of my hand when i undertake a thing by whom will my purpose be change ? the lord who have take up your cause the holy one of israel say because of you i have send to babylon and make all their seer come south and the chaldaean whose cry be in the ship . i be the lord your holy one the maker of israel your king . this be the word of the lord who make a way in the sea and a road through the deep water who send out the war carriage and the horse the army with all it force they have come down they will not get up again like a feebly burn light they be put out . give no thought to the thing which be past let the early time go out of your mind . see i be do a new thing now it be start will you not take note of it ? i will even make a way in the waste land and river in the dry country . the beast of the field will give me honour the jackal and the ostrich because i send out water in the waste land and river in the dry country to give drink to the people whom i have take for myself even the people whom i make to be the witness of my praise . but you have make no prayer to me o jacob and you have give no thought to me o israel . you have not make me burned offering of sheep or give me honour with your offering of beast i do not make you servant to give me an offering and i do not make you tire with request for perfume . you have not get me sweet smell plant with your money or give me pleasure with the fat of your offering but you have make me a servant to your sin and you have make me tired with your evil doings . i even i be he who take away your sin and i will no longer keep your evil doings in mind . put me in mind of this let u take up the cause between u put forward your cause so that you may be see to be in the right . your first father be a sinner and your guide have go against my word . your chief have make my holy place unclean so i have make jacob a curse and israel a thing of shame .and now give ear o jacob my servant and israel whom i have take for myself the lord who make you form you in your mother 's body the lord your helper say have no fear o jacob my servant and you jeshurun whom i have take for myself . for i will send water on the land need it and stream on the dry earth i will let my spirit come down on your seed and my blessing on your offspring . and they will come up like grass in a well watered field like water plant by the stream . one will say i be the lord 's and another will give himself the name jacob another will put a mark on his hand i be the lord 's and another will take the name of israel for himself . the lord the king of israel even the lord of army who have take up his cause say i be the first and the last and there be no god but me . if there be one like me let him come forward and say it let him make it clear and put it in order before me who have make clear in the past the thing to come ? let him make clear the future to me . have no fear be strong in heart have i not make it clear to you in the past and let you see it ? and you be my witness . be there any god but me or a rock of whom i have no knowledge ? those who make a pictured image be all of them a nothing and the thing of their desire will be of no profit to them and their servant see not and have no knowledge so they will be put to shame . whoever make a god make nothing but a metal image in which there be no profit . truly all those who make use of secret art will be put to shame and their word of power be only word of men let them all come forward together they will all be in fear and be put to shame . the iron worker be heat the metal in the fire give it form with his hammer and work on it with his strong arm then for need of food his strength give way and for need of water he become feeble . the woodworker be measure out the wood with his line mark it out with his pencil after smooth it with his plane and make circle on it with his instrument he give it the form and glory of a man so that it may be place in the house . he have cedar cut down for himself he take an oak and let it get strong among the tree of the wood he have an ash tree plant and the rain give it growth . then it will be use to make a fire so that a man may get warm he have the oven heat with it and make bread he make a god with it to which he give worship he make a pictured image out of it and go down on his face before it . with part of it he make a fire and on the fire he get meat cooked and take a full meal he make himself warm and say aha ! i be warm i have see the fire and the rest of it he make into a god even his pictured image he go down on his face before it give worship to it and make prayer to it say be my saviour for you be my god . they have no knowledge or wisdom for he have put a veil over their eye so that they may not see and on their heart so that they may not give attention . and no one take note no one have enough knowledge or wisdom to say i have put part of it in the fire and make bread on it i have have a meal of the flesh cooked with it and be i now to make the rest of it into a false god ? be i to go down on my face before a bit of wood ? a for him whose food be the dust of a dead fire he have be turn from the way by a twisted mind so that he be unable to keep himself safe by say what i have here in my hand be false . keep these thing in mind o jacob and you israel for you be my servant i have make you you be my servant o israel i will not let you go out of my memory . i have put your evil doings out of my mind like a thick cloud and your sin like a mist come back to me for i have take up your cause . make a song o heaven for the lord have do it give a loud cry you deep part of the earth let your voice be loud in song you mountain and you woods with all your tree for the lord have take up the cause of jacob and will let his glory be see in israel . the lord who have take up your cause and who give you life in your mother 's body say i be the lord who make all thing stretch out the heaven by myself and give the earth it limit who be with me ? who make the sign of those who give word of the future come to nothing so that those who have knowledge of secret art go off their head turn the wise men back and make their knowledge foolish who make the word of his servant certain and give effect to the purpose of his representative who say of jerusalem her people will come back to her and of the town of judah i will give order for their building and will make her waste place fertile again who say to the deep be dry and i will make your river dry who say of cyrus he will take care of my sheep and will do all my pleasure who say of jerusalem i will give the word for your building and of the temple your base will be put in place .the lord say to the man of his selection to cyrus whom i have take by the right hand put down nation before him and take away the arm of king make the door open before him so that the way into the town may not be shut i will go before you and make the rough place level the door of brass will be break and the iron rod cut in two and i will give you the store of the dark and the wealth of secret place so that you may be certain that i be the lord who give you your name even the god of israel . because of jacob my servant and israel whom i have take for myself i have send for you by name give you a name of honour though you have no knowledge of me . i be the lord and there be no other there be no god but me i will make you ready for war though you have no knowledge of me so that they may see from the east and from the west that there be no god but me i be the lord and there be no other . i be the giver of light and the maker of the dark cause blessing and send trouble i be the lord who do all these thing . let righteousness come down o heaven from on high and let the sky send it down like rain let the earth be open to give the fruit of salvation cause righteousness to come up with it i the lord have make it come about . curse be he who have an argument with his maker the pot which have an argument with the potter ! will the wet earth say to him who be work with it what be you do that your work have nothing by which it may be grip ? curse be he who say to a father to what be you give life ? or to a woman what be you in birth pain with ? the lord the holy one of israel and his maker say will you put a question to me about the thing which be to come or will you give me order about my son and the work of my hand ? i have make the earth form man on it by my hand the heaven have be stretch out and all the star put in their ordered place . i have send him out to overcome the nation and i will make all his way straight i will give him the work of build my town and he will let my prisoner go free without price or reward say the lord of army . the lord say the workman of egypt and the trader of ethiopia and the tall sabaeans will come over the sea to you and they will be yours they will go after you in chain they will come over and they will go down on their face before you and will make prayer to you say truly god be among you and there be no other god . truly you have a secret god the god of israel be a saviour ! all those who have go against him will be put to shame the maker of image will be make low . but the lord will make israel free with an eternal salvation you will not be put to shame or make low for ever and ever . for this be the word of the lord who make the heaven he be god the maker and designer of the earth who make it not to be a waste but a a living place for man i be the lord and there be no other . i have not give my word in secret in a place in the underworld i do not say to the seed of jacob go into a waste land to make request of me i the lord say what be true my word be righteousness . come together even come near you nation who be still live they have no knowledge who take up their image of wood and make prayer to a god in whom be no salvation . give the word put forward your cause let u have a discussion together who have give news of this in the past ? who make it clear in early time ? do not i the lord ? and there be no god but me a true god and a saviour there be no other . let your heart be turn to me so that you may have salvation all the end of the earth for i be god and there be no other . by myself have i take an oath a true word have go from my mouth and will not be change that to me every knee will be bent and every tongue will give honour . only in the lord will jacob overcome and be strong together all those who be angry with him will be put to shame and come to destruction . in the lord will all the seed of israel get their right and they will give glory to him .bel be bent down nebo be fall their image be on the beast and on the cattle the thing which you take about have become a weight to the tire beast . they be bent down they be fall together they be not able to keep their image safe but they themselves have be take prisoner . give ear to me o family of jacob and all the rest of the people of israel who have be support by me from their birth and have be my care from their early day even when you be old i will be the same and when you be grey haired i will take care of you i will still be responsible for what i make yes i will take you and keep you safe . who in your eye be my equal ? or what comparison will you make with me ? a for those who take gold out of a bag and put silver in the scale they give payment to a gold worker to make it into a god they go down on their face and give it worship . they put him on their back and take him up and put him in his fixed place from which he may not be move if a man give a cry for help to him he be unable to give an answer or get him out of his trouble . keep this in mind and be sham let it come back to your memory you sinner . let the thing which be past come to your memory for i be god and there be no other i be god and there be no one like me make clear from the first what be to come and from past time the thing which have not so far come about say my purpose be fix and i will do all my pleasure send for a bird of strong flight from the east the man of my purpose from a far country i have say it and i will give effect to it the thing design by me will certainly be do . give ear to me you feeble hearted who have no faith in my righteousness my righteousness be near it be not far off salvation will come quickly and i will make zion free and give israel my glory .come and take your seat in the dust o virgin daughter of babylon come down from your seat of power and take your place on the earth o daughter of the chaldaean for you will never again seem soft and delicate . take the crushing stone and get the meal crush take off your veil put away your robe let your leg be uncover go through the river . the shame of your unclothed condition will be see by all i will give punishment without mercy say the lord who take up our cause the lord of army be his name the holy one of israel . be seat in the dark without a word o daughter of the chaldaean for you will no longer be name the queen of kingdom . i be angry with my people i put shame on my heritage and give them into your hand you have no mercy on them you put a cruel yoke on those who be old and you say i will be a queen for ever you do not give attention to these thing and do not keep in mind what would come after . so now take note of this you who be give up to pleasure live without fear of evil say in your heart i be and there be no one like me i will never be a widow or have my child take from me . but these two thing will come on you suddenly in one day the loss of child and of husband in full measure they will come on you for all your secret art and all your wonder . for you have faith in your evil do you say no one see me by your wisdom and knowledge you have be turn out of the way and you have say in your heart i be and there be no other . because of this evil will come on you which may not be turn away for any price and trouble will overtake you from which no money will give salvation destruction will come on you suddenly without your knowledge . go on now with your secret art and all your wonder work to which you have give yourself up from your early day it may be that they will be of profit to you or by them you may put fear into your attacker . but your mind be trouble by the number of your guide let them now come forward for your salvation the measurer of the heaven the watcher of the star and those who be able to say from month to month what thing be come on you . truly they have become like dry stem they have be burn in the fire they be not able to keep themselves safe from the power of the flame it be not a coal for warm them or a fire by which a man may be seat . small profit have you have from those who from your early day get great profit out of you they have go in flight every one straight before him and you have no saviour .give ear to this o family of jacob you who be name by the name of israel and have come out of the body of judah who take oath by the name of the lord and make use of the name of the god of israel but not truly and not in good faith . for they say that they be of the holy town and put their faith in the god of israel the lord of army be his name . i give word in the past of the thing which come about they come from my mouth and i make them clear suddenly i do them and they come about . because i saw that your heart be hard and that your neck be an iron cord and your brow brass for this reason i make it clear to you in the past before it come i give you word of it for fear that you might say my god do these thing and my pictured and metal image make them come about . all this have come to your ear and you have see it will you not give witness to it ? i be now make clear new thing even secret thing of which you have no knowledge . they have only now be effect and not in the past and before this day they have not come to your ear for fear that you might say i have knowledge of them . truly you have no word of them no knowledge of them no news of them in the past have come to your ear because i saw how false be your behaviour and that your heart be turn against me from your early day . because of my name i will put away my wrath and for my praise i will keep myself from cut you off . see i have be test you for myself like silver i have put you through the fire of trouble . for myself even because of my name i will do it for i will not let my name be sham and my glory i will not give to another . give ear to me jacob and israel my loved one i be he i be the first and i be the last . yes by my hand be the earth place on it base and by my right hand the heaven be stretch out at my word they take up their place . come together all of you and give ear who among you have give news of these thing ? the lord 's love one will do his pleasure with babylon and with the seed of the chaldaean . i even i have give the word i have send for him i have make him come and have give effect to his undertaking . come near to me and give ear to this from the start i do not keep it secret from the time of it come into existence i be there and now the lord god have send me and give me his spirit . the lord who take up your cause the holy one of israel say i be the lord your god who be teach you for your profit guiding you by the way in which you be to go . if only you have give ear to my order then your peace would have be like a river and your righteousness a the wave of the sea your seed would have be like the sand and your offspring like the dust your name would not be cut off or come to an end before me . go out of babylon go in flight from the chaldaean with the sound of song make it clear give the news let the word go out even to the end of the earth say the lord have take up the cause of his servant jacob . they have no need of water when he be guide them through the waste land he make water come out of the rock for them the rock be part and the water come flow out . there be no peace say the lord for the evil doer .give ear o sea land to me and take note you people from far i have be mark out by the lord from the first when i be still in my mother 's body he have my name in mind and he have make my mouth like a sharp sword in the shade of his hand he have keep me and he have make me like a polished arrow keep me in his secret place and he say to me you be my servant israel in whom my glory will be see and i say i have undergone weariness for nothing i have give my strength for no purpose or profit but still the lord will take up my cause and my god will give me my reward . and now say the lord who make me his servant when i be still in my mother 's body so that i might make jacob come back to him and so that israel might come together to him and i be honour in the eye of the lord and my god become my strength . it be not enough for one who be my servant to put the tribe of jacob again in their place and to get back those of israel who have be send away my purpose be to give you a a light to the nation so that you may be my salvation to the end of the earth . the lord who take up israel 's cause even his holy one say to him whom men make sport of who be hat by the nation a servant of ruler king will see and get up from their place and chief will give worship because of the lord who keep faith even the holy one of israel who have take you for himself . this be the word of the lord i have give ear to you at a good time and i have be your helper in a day of salvation and i will keep you safe and will make you a glory for the people put the land in order and give them the heritage which now be waste say to those who be in chain go free to those who be in the dark come out into the light . they will get food by the way wherever they go and have grass land on all the dry mountain top . they will not be in need of food or drink or be trouble by the heat or the sun for he who have mercy on them will be their guide take them by the spring of water . and i will make all my mountain a way and my highway will be lift up . see these be come from far and these from the north and the west and these from the land of sinim . let your voice be loud in song o heaven and be glad o earth make sound of joy o mountain for the lord have give comfort to his people and will have mercy on his crushed one . but zion say the lord have give me up i have go from his memory . will a woman give up the child at her breast will she be without pity for the fruit of her body ? yes these may but i will not let you go out of my memory . see your name be mark on my hand your wall be ever before me . your builder be come quickly your hater and those who make you waste will go out of you . let your eye be lift up round about and see they be all come together to you . by my life say the lord truly you will put them all on you a an ornament and be clothe with them like a bride . for though the waste place of your land have be give to destruction now you will not be wide enough for your people and those who make you waste will be far away . the child to whom you give birth in other land will say in your ear the place be not wide enough for me make room for me to have a resting place . then you will say in your heart who have give me all these child ? when my child have be take from me and i be no longer able to have others who take care of these ? when i be by myself where then be these ? this be the word of the lord god see i will make a sign with my hand to the nation and put up my flag for the people and they will take up your son on their beast and your daughter on their back . and king will take care of you and queen will give you their milk they will go down on their face before you kiss the dust of your foot and you will be certain that i be the lord and that those who put their hope in me will not be sham . will the good of war be take from the strong man or the prisoner of the cruel one be let go ? but the lord say even the prisoner of the strong will be take from him and the cruel make to let go his good for i will take up your cause against your hater and i will keep your child safe . and the flesh of your attacker will be take by themselves for food and they will take their blood for drink a if it be sweet wine and all men will see that i the lord be your saviour even he who take up your cause the strong one of jacob .this be the word of the lord where be the statement which i give your mother when i put her away ? or to which of my creditor have i give you for money ? it be for your sin that you be give into the hand of others and for your evil do be your mother put away . why then when i come be there no man ? and no one to give answer to my voice ? have my hand become feeble so that it be unable to take up your cause ? or have i no power to make you free ? see at my word the sea become dry i make the river a waste land their fish be dead for need of water and make an evil smell . by me the heaven be clothe with black and i make haircloth their robe . the lord god have give me the tongue of those who be experience so that i may be able to give the word a special sense for the feeble every morning my ear be open to his teach like those who be experience and i have not put myself against him or let my heart be turn back from him . i be offer my back to those who give me blow and my face to those who be pull out my hair i do not keep my face cover from mark of shame . for the lord god be my helper i will not be put to shame so i have make my face like a rock and i be certain that he will give me my right . he who take up my cause be near who will go to law with me ? let u come together before the judge who be against me ? let him come near to me . see the lord god be my helper who will give a decision against me ? truly all of them will become old like a robe they will be food for the worm . who among you have the fear of the lord give ear to the voice of his servant who have be walk in the dark and have no light ? let him put his faith in the name of the lord look to his god for support . see all you who make a fire arm yourselves with burning branch go in the flame of your fire and among the branch you have put a light to . this will you have from my hand you will make your bed in sorrow .give ear to me you who be search for righteousness who be look for the lord see the rock from which you be cut out and the hole out of which you be take . let your thought be turn to abraham your father and to sarah who give you birth for when he be but one my voice come to him and i give him my blessing and make him a great people . for the lord have give comfort to zion he have make glad all her broken wall make her waste place like eden and change her dry land into the garden of the lord joy and delight will be there praise and the sound of melody . give attention to me o my people and give ear to me o my nation for teaching will go out from me and the knowledge of the true god will be a light to the people . suddenly will my righteousness come near and my salvation will be shin out like the light the sea land will be wait for me and they will put their hope in my strong arm . let your eye be lift up to the heaven and turn to the earth which be under them for the heaven will go in flight like smoke and the earth will become old like a coat and it people will come to destruction like insect but my salvation will be for ever and my righteousness will not come to an end . give ear to me you who have knowledge of righteousness in whose heart be my law have no fear of the evil word of men and give no thought to their curse . for like a coat they will be food for the insect the worm will make a meal of them like wool but my righteousness will be for ever and my salvation to all generation . awake ! awake ! put on strength o arm of the lord awake ! a in the old day in the generation long past . be it not by you that rahab be cut in two and the dragon wound ? do you not make the sea dry the water of the great deep ? do you not make the deep water of the sea a way for the lord 's people to go through ? those whom the lord have make free will come back with song to zion and on their head will be eternal joy delight and joy will be theirs and sorrow and sound of grief will be go for ever . i even i be your comforter be you so poor in heart a to be in fear of man who will come to an end and of the son of man who will be like grass ? and you have give no thought to the lord your maker by whom the heaven be stretch out and the earth place on it base and you go all day in fear of the wrath of the cruel one when he be make ready for your destruction . and where be the wrath of the cruel one ? the prisoner bent under his chain will quickly be make free and will not go down into the underworld and his bread will not come to an end . for i be the lord your god who make the sea calm when it wave be thunder the lord of army be his name . and i have put my word in your mouth cover you with the shade of my hand stretch out the heaven and place the earth on it base and say to zion you be my people . awake ! awake ! up ! o jerusalem you who have take from the lord 's hand the cup of his wrath tasting in full measure the wine which overcomes . she have no one among all her child to be her guide not one of the son she have take care of take her by the hand . these two thing have come on you who will be weep for you ? waste and destruction death from need of food and from the sword how may you be comfort ? your son be overcome like a roe in a net they be full of the wrath of the lord the punishment of your god . so now give ear to this you who be trouble and overcome but not with wine this be the word of the lord your master even your god who take up the cause of his people see i have take out of your hand the cup which overcomes even the cup of my wrath it will not again be give to you and i will put it into the hand of your cruel master and of those whose yoke have be hard on you who have say to your soul down on your face ! so that we may go over you and you have give your back like the earth even like the street for them to go over .awake ! awake ! put on your strength o zion put on your beautiful robe o jerusalem the holy town for from now there will never again come into you the unclean and those without circumcision . make yourself clean from the dust up ! and take the seat of your power o jerusalem the band of your neck be loose o prisoned daughter of zion . for the lord say you be give for nothing and you will be make free without price . for the lord god say my people go down at first into egypt to get a place for themselves there and the assyrian put a cruel yoke on them without cause . now then what have i here ? say the lord for my people be take away without cause they be make waste and give cry of sorrow say the lord and all the day the nation put shame on my name . for this cause i will make my name clear to my people in that day they will be certain that it be my word which come to them see here be i. how beautiful on the mountain be the foot of him who come with good news who give word of peace say that salvation be near who say to zion your god be rule ! the voice of your watchman ! their voice be loud in song together for they will see him eye to eye when the lord come back to zion . give sound of joy make melody together waste place of jerusalem for the lord have give comfort to his people he have take up the cause of jerusalem . the lord have let his holy arm be see by the eye of all nation and all the end of the earth will see the salvation of our god . away ! away ! go out from there touch no unclean thing go out from among her be clean you who take up the vessel of the lord . for you will not go out suddenly and you will not go in flight for the lord will go before you and the god of israel will come after you to keep you . see my servant will do well in his undertaking he will be honour and lift up and be very high . a people be surprise at him and his face be not beautiful so a to be desire his face be so change by disease a to be unlike that of a man and his form be no long that of the son of men . so will nation give him honour king will keep quiet because of him for what have not be make clear to them they will see and they will give their mind to what have not come to their ear .who would have have faith in the word which have come to our ear and to whom have the arm of the lord be unveil ? for his growth be like that of a delicate plant before him and like a root out of a dry place he have no grace of form to give u pleasure men make sport of him turn away from him he be a man of sorrow mark by disease and like one from whom men 's face be turn away he be look down on and we put no value on him . but it be our pain he take and our disease be put on him while to u he seem a one diseased on whom god 's punishment have come . but it be for our sin he be wound and for our evil doings he be crush he take the punishment by which we have peace and by his wound we be make well . we all go wander like sheep go every one of u after his desire and the lord put on him the punishment of u all . men be cruel to him but he be gentle and quiet a a lamb take to it death and a a sheep before those who take her wool make no sound so he say not a word . they take away from him help and right and who give a thought to his fate ? for he be cut off from the land of the living he come to his death for the sin of my people . and they put his body into the earth with sinner and his last resting place be with the evil doer though he have do no wrong and no deceit be in his mouth . and the lord be pleased ... see a seed long life ... will do well in his hand . ... ... make clear his righteousness before men ... have take their sin on himself . for this cause he will have a heritage with the great and he will have a part in the good of war with the strong because he give up his life and be number with the evil doer take on himself the sin of the people and make prayer for the wrongdoer .let your voice be loud in song o woman without child make melody and sound of joy you who do not give birth for the child of her who have no husband be more than those of the married wife say the lord . make wide the place of your tent and let the curtain of your house be stretch out without limit make your cord long and your tent pin strong . for i will make wide your limit on the right hand and on the left and your seed will take the nation for a heritage and make the waste town full of people . have no fear for you will not be sham or without hope you will not be put to shame for the shame of your early day will go out of your memory and you will no longer keep in mind the sorrow of your widowed year . for your maker be your husband the lord of army be his name and the holy one of israel be he who take up your cause he will be name the god of all the earth . for the lord have make you come back to him like a wife who have be send away in grief of spirit for one may not give up the wife of one 's early day . for a short time i give you up but with great mercy i will take you back again . in overflow wrath my face be veil from you for a minute but i will have pity on you for ever say the lord who take up your cause . for this be like the day of noah to me for a i take an oath that the water of noah would never again go over the earth so have i take an oath that i will not again be angry with you or say bitter word to you . for the mountain may be take away and the hill be move out of their place but my love will not be take from you or my agreement of peace break say the lord who have have mercy on you . o troubled one storm crush uncomforted ! see your stone will be frame in fair colour and your base will be sapphire . i will make your tower of ruby and your door of carbuncle and the wall round you will be of all sort of beautiful stone . and all your builder will be make wise by the lord and great will be the peace of your child . all your right will be make certain to you have no fear of evil and destruction will not come near you . see they may be move to war but not by my authority all those who come together to make an attack on you will be break against you . see i have make the iron worker blow on the burning coal and make the instrument of war by his work and i have make the waster for destruction . no instrument of war which be form against you will be of any use and every tongue which say evil against you will be judge false . this be the heritage of the servant of the lord and their righteousness come from me say the lord .ho ! everyone in need come to the water and he who have no strength let him get food come get bread without money wine and milk without price . why do you give your money for what be not bread and the fruit of your work for what will not give you pleasure ? give ear to me so that your food may be good and you may have the best in full measure . give ear and come to me take note with care so that your soul may have life and i will make an eternal agreement with you even the certain mercy of david . see i have give him a a witness to the people a ruler and a guide to the nation . see you will send for a nation of which you have no knowledge and those who have no knowledge of you will come run to you because of the lord your god and because of the holy one of israel for he have give you glory . make search for the lord while he be there make prayer to him while he be near let the sinner give up his way and the evil doer his purpose and let him come back to the lord and he will have mercy on him and to our god for there be full forgiveness with him . for my thought be not your thought or your way my way say the lord . for a the heaven be high than the earth so be my way high than your way and my thought than your thought . for a the rain come down and the snow from heaven and do not go back again but give water to the earth and make it fertile give seed to the planter and bread for food so will my word be which go out of my mouth it will not come back to me with nothing do but it will give effect to my purpose and do that for which i have send it . for you will go out with joy and be guide in peace the mountain and the hill will make melody before you and all the tree of the field will make sound of joy . in place of the thorn will come up the fir tree and in place of the blackberry the myrtle and it will be to the lord for a name for an eternal sign which will not be cut off .the lord say let your way of life be upright and let your behaviour be rightly order for my salvation be near and my righteousness will quickly be see . happy be the man who do this and the son of man whose behaviour be so ordered who keep the sabbath holy and his hand from do any evil . and let not the man from a strange country who have be join to the lord say the lord will certainly put a division between me and his people and let not the unsexed man say see i be a dry tree . for the lord say a for the unsexed who keep my sabbath and give their heart to please me and keep their agreement with me i will give to them in my house and inside my wall a place and a name well than that of son and daughter i will give them an eternal name which will not be cut off . and a for those from a strange country who be join to the lord to give worship to him and honour to his name to be his servant even everyone who keep the sabbath holy and keep his agreement with me i will make them come to my holy mountain and will give them joy in my house of prayer i will take pleasure in the burn offering which they make on my altar for my house will be name a house of prayer for all people . the lord god who get together the wandering one of israel say i will get together others in addition to those of israel who have come back . all you beast of the field come together for your meat even all you beast of the wood . his watchman be blind they be all without knowledge they be all dog without tongue unable to make a sound stretch out dream love sleep . yes the dog be for ever look for food while these the keeper of the sheep be without wisdom they have all go after their pleasure every one look for profit they be all the same . come they say i will get wine and we will take strong drink in full measure and tomorrow will be like today full of pleasure .the upright man go to his death and no one give a thought to it and god fear men be take away and no one be trouble by it for the upright man be take away because of evil do and go into peace . they be at rest in their last resting place every one go straight before him . but come near you son of her who be wise in secret art the seed of her who be false to her husband and of the loose woman . of whom do you make sport ? against whom be your mouth open wide and your tongue put out ? be you not uncontrolled child a false seed you who be burn with evil desire among the oak under every green tree put child to death in the valley under the crack of the rock ? among the smooth stone of the valley be your heritage they even they be your part even to them have you make a drink offering and a meal offering . be it possible for such thing to be overlook by me ? you have put your bed on a high mountain there you go up to make your offering . and on the back of the door and on the pillar you have put your sign for you have be false to me with another you have make your bed wide and make an agreement with them you have a desire for their bed where you saw it and you go to melech with oil and much perfume and you send your representative far off and go as low a the underworld . you be tire with your long journey but you do not say there be no hope you get new strength and so you be not feeble . and of whom be you in fear so that you be false and do not keep me in mind or give think to it ? have i not be quiet keep myself secret and so you be not in fear of me ? i will make clear what your righteousness be like and your work you will have no profit in them . your false god will not keep you safe in answer to your cry but the wind will take them they will be go like a breath but he who put his hope in me will take the land and will have my holy mountain a his heritage . and i will say make it high make it high get ready the way take the stone out of the way of my people . for this be the word of him who be high and lift up whose rest place be eternal whose name be holy my rest place be in the high and holy place and with him who be crush and poor in spirit to give life to the spirit of the poor and to make strong the heart of the crushed . for i will not give punishment for ever or be angry without end for from me breath go out and i it be who make the soul . i be quickly angry with his evil way and sent punishment on him veil my face in wrath and he go on turn his heart from me . i have see his way and i will make him well i will give him rest comfort him and his people who be sad . i will give the fruit of the lip peace peace to him who be near and to him who be far off say the lord and i will make him well . but the evil doer be like the troubled sea for which there be no rest and it water send up earth and waste . there be no peace say my god for the evil doer .make a loud cry do not be quiet let your voice be sound like a horn and make clear to my people their evil doings and to the family of jacob their sin . though they make prayer to me every day and take pleasure in the knowledge of my way like a nation which have do righteousness and have not give up the rule of their god they make request to me for the right order it be their delight to come near to god . they say why have we keep ourselves from food and you do not see it ? why have we keep ourselves from pleasure and you take no note of it ? if in the day when you keep from food you take the chance to do your business and get in your debt if keep from food make you quickly angry ready for fight and give blow with evil hand your holy day be not such a to make your voice come to my ear on high . have i give order for such a day a this ? a day for keep yourselves from pleasure ? be it only a question of the bent head of put on haircloth and be seat in the dust ? be this what seem to you a holy day well please to the lord ? be not this the holy day for which i have give order to let loose those who have wrongly be make prisoner to undo the band of the yoke and to let the crushed go free and every yoke be break ? be it not to give your bread to those in need and to let the poor who have no rest place come into your house ? to put a robe on the unclothed one when you see him and not to keep your eye shut for fear of see his flesh ? then will light be shin on you like the morning and your wound will quickly be well and your righteousness will go before you and the glory of the lord will come after you . then at the sound of your voice the lord will give an answer at your cry he will say here be i. if you take away from among you the yoke the put out of the finger of shame and the evil word and if you give your bread to those in need of it so that the troubled one may have his desire then you will have light in the dark and your night will be a the full light of the sun and the lord will be your guide at all time in dry place he will give you water in full measure and will make strong your bone and you will be like a watered garden and like an ever flow spring . and your son will be build again the old waste place you will make strong the base of old generation and you will be name he who put up the broken wall and he who make ready the way for use . if you keep the sabbath with care not do your business on my holy day and if the sabbath seem to you a delight and the new moon of the lord a thing to be honour and if you give respect to him by not do your business or go after your pleasure or say unholy word then the lord will be your delight and i will put you on the high place of the earth and i will give you the heritage of jacob your father for the mouth of the lord have say it .truly the lord 's hand have not become short so that he be unable to give salvation and his ear be not shut from hear but your sin have come between you and your god and by your evil doings his face have be veil from you so that he will give you no answer . for your hand be unclean with blood and your finger with sin your lip have say false thing and your tongue give out deceit . no one put forward an upright cause or give a true decision their hope be in deceit and their word be false they be with child with sin and give birth to evil . they give birth to snake 's egg and make spider 's thread whoever take their egg for food come to his death and the egg which be crush becomes a poison snake . their twisted thread will not make clothing and their work will give them nothing for cover themselves their work be work of sin and violent act be in their hand . their foot go quickly to evil and they take delight in the death of the upright their thought be thought of sin wasting and destruction be in their way . they have no knowledge of the way of peace and there be no sense of what be right in their behaviour they have make for themselves way which be not straight whoever go in them have no knowledge of peace . for this cause our right be far from u and righteousness do not overtake u we be look for light but there be only the dark for the shining of the sun but our way be in the night . we go on our way like blind men feel for the wall even like those who have no eye we be run against thing in daylight a if it be even our place be in the dark like dead men . we make noise of grief like bear and sad sound like dove we be look for our right but it be not there for salvation but it be far from u . for our evil doings be increase before you and our sin give witness against u for our evil doings be with u and we have knowledge of our sin we have go against the lord and be false to him turn away from our god our word have be uncontrolled and in our heart be thought of deceit . and the right be turn back and righteousness be far away for good faith be not to be see in the public place and upright behaviour may not come into the town . yes faith be go and he whose heart be turn from evil come into the power of the cruel and the lord saw it and he be angry that there be no one to take up their cause . and he saw that there be no man and be surprise that there be no one to take up their cause so his arm give salvation and he make righteousness his support . yes he put on righteousness a a breastplate and salvation a a head dress and he put on punishment a clothing and wrath a a robe . he will give them the right reward of their doings wrath to his attacker punishment to his hater and even on the sea land he will send punishment . so they will see the name of the lord from the west and his glory from the east for he will come like a rushing stream force on by a wind of the lord . and a a saviour he will come to zion turn away sin from jacob say the lord . and a for me this be my agreement with them say the lord my spirit which be on you and my word which i have put in your mouth will not go away from your mouth or from the mouth of your seed or from the mouth of your seed 's seed say the lord from now and for ever .up ! let your face be bright for your light have come and the glory of the lord be shin on you . for truly the earth will be dark and the people veil in black night but the lord will be shin on you and his glory will be see among you . and nation will come to your light and king to your bright dawn . let your eye be lift up and see they be all come together to you your son will come from far and your daughter take with love care . then you will see and be bright with joy and your heart will be shake with increase of delight for the produce of the sea will be turn to you the wealth of the nation will come to you . you will be full of camel train even the young camel of midian and ephah all from sheba will come with gold and spice give word of the great act of the lord . all the flock of kedar will come together to you the sheep of nebaioth will be ready for your need they will be please offering on my altar and my house of prayer will be beautiful . who be these come like a cloud like a flight of dove to their window ? vessel of the sea land be wait for me and the ship of tarshish first so that your son may come from far and their silver and gold with them to the place of the name of the lord your god and to the holy one of israel because he have make you beautiful . and men from strange country will be build up your wall and their king will be your servant for in my wrath i send punishment on you but in my grace i have have mercy on you . your door will be open at all time they will not be shut day or night so that men may come into you with the wealth of the nation with their king at their head . for the nation or kingdom which will not be your servant will come to destruction such nation will be completely waste . the glory of lebanon will come to you the cypress the plane and the sherbin tree together to make my holy place beautiful and the rest place of my foot will be full of glory . and the son of those who be cruel to you will come before you with bent head and those who make sport of you will go down on their face at your foot and you will be name the town of the lord the zion of the holy one of israel . and though you be turn away from and hat and have no helper i will make you a pride for ever a joy from generation to generation . and you will take the milk of the nation flow from the breast of king and you will see that i the lord be your saviour and he who take up your cause the strong one of jacob . in place of brass i will give gold and for iron silver and for wood brass and for stone iron and i will make peace your judge and righteousness your overseer . violent act will no longer be see in your land wasting or destruction in your limit but your wall will be name salvation and your door praise . the sun will not be your light by day and the moon will no longer be bright for you by night but the lord will be to you an eternal light and your god your glory . your sun will never again go down or your moon keep back her light for the lord will be your eternal light and the day of your sorrow will be end . your people will all be upright the land will be their heritage for ever the branch of my plant the work of my hand to be for my glory . the small of their family will become a thousand and a small one a strong nation i the lord will make it come quickly in it time .the spirit of the lord be on me because i be mark out by him to give good news to the poor he have send me to make the broken hearted well to say that the prisoner will be make free and that those in chain will see the light again to give knowledge that the year of the lord 's good pleasure have come and the day of punishment from our god to give comfort to all who be sad to give them a fair head dress in place of dust the oil of joy in place of the clothing of grief praise in place of sorrow so that they may be name tree of righteousness the planting of the lord and so that he may have glory . and they will be build again the old broken wall and will make new the old waste place and will put up again the town which have be waste for long generation . and men from strange country will be your herdsman and those who be not israelite will be your plowman and vine keeper . but you will be name the priest of the lord the servant of our god you will have the wealth of the nation for your food and you will be clothe with their glory . a they have twice as much grief and mark of shame be their heritage so in their land they will be reward twice over and will have eternal joy . for i the lord take pleasure in upright judging i will not put up with the violent take away of right and i will certainly give them their reward and i will make an eternal agreement with them . and their seed will be note among the nation and their offspring among the people it will be clear to all who see them that they be the seed to which the lord have give his blessing . i will be full of joy in the lord my soul will be glad in my god for he have put on me the clothing of salvation cover me with the robe of righteousness a the husband put on a fair head dress and the bride make herself beautiful with jewel . for a the earth put out bud and a the garden give growth to the seed which be plant in it so the lord will make righteousness and praise to be flower before all the nation .because of zion i will not keep quiet and because of jerusalem i will take no rest till her righteousness go out like the shining of the sun and her salvation like a burning light . and the nation will see your righteousness and all king your glory and you will have a new name give by the mouth of the lord . and you will be a fair crown in the hand of the lord and a king 's head dress in the hand of your god . you will not now be name she who be give up and your land will no longer be name the waste land but you will have the name my pleasure be in her and your land will be name married for the lord have pleasure in you and your land will be marry . for a a young man take a virgin for his wife so will your maker be marry to you and a a husband have joy in his bride so will the lord your god be glad over you . i have put watchman on your wall o jerusalem they will not keep quiet day or night you who be the lord 's recorder take no rest and give him no rest till he put jerusalem in her place to be praise in the earth . the lord have take an oath by his right hand and by the arm of his strength truly i will no longer give your grain to be food for your hater and men of strange country will not take the wine for which your work have be do but those who have get in the grain will have it for their food and will give praise to the lord and those who have get in the grape will take the wine of them in the open place of my holy house . go through go through the door make ready the way of the people let the highway be lift up let the stone be take away let a flag be lift up over the people . the lord have send out word to the end of the earth say to the daughter of zion see your saviour come those whom he have make free be with him and those to whom he have give salvation go before him . and they will be name the holy people those whose cause have be take up by the lord and you will be name desire a town not give up .who be this who come from edom with blood red robe from bozrah ? he whose clothing be fair step with pride in his great strength ? i whose glory be in the right strong for salvation . why be your clothing red and why be your robe like those of one who be crush the grape ? i have be crush the grape by myself and of the people there be no man with me in my wrath and in my passion they be crush under my foot and my robe be mark with their life blood and all my clothing be red . for the day of punishment be in my heart and the year for the payment of the price for my people have come . and i saw that there be no helper and i be wonder that no one give them support so my arm do the work of salvation and my wrath be my support . and in my passion the people be crush under my foot and break in my wrath and i put down their strength to the earth . i will give news of the mercy of the lord and his great act even all the thing the lord have do for u in his great grace to the house of israel even all he have do for u in his unnumbered mercy . for he say truly they be my people child who will not be false so he be their saviour out of all their trouble . it be no sent one or angel but he himself who be their saviour in his love and in his pity he take up their cause and he take them in his arm care for them all through the year . but they go against him cause grief to his holy spirit so he be turn against them and make war on them . then the early day come to their mind the day of moses his servant and they say where be he who make the keeper of his flock come up from the sea ? where be he who put his holy spirit among them he who make the arm of his glory go at the right hand of moses by whom the water be part before them to make himself an eternal name he who make them go through the deep water like a horse in the waste land ? like the cattle which go down into the valley they go without fall the spirit of the lord guide them so you go before your people to make yourself a great name . let your eye be look down from heaven from your holy and beautiful house where be your deep feeling the working of your power ? do not keep back the moving of your pity and your mercy for you be our father though abraham have no knowledge of u and israel give no thought to u you o lord be our father from the early day you have take up our cause . o lord why do you send u wander from your way make our heart hard so that we have no fear of you ? come back because of your servant the tribe of your heritage . why have evil men go over your holy place so that it have be crush under the foot of our hater ? we have become a those who be never rule by you on whom your name be not name .o let the heaven be break open and come down so that the mountain may be shake before you a when fire put the brushwood in flame or a when water be boil from the heat of the fire to make your name fear by your hater so that the nation may be shake before you while you do act of power for which we be not look and which have not come to the ear of men in the past . the ear have not have news of or the eye see ... any god but you work for the man who be wait for him . will you not have mercy on him who take pleasure in do righteousness even on those who keep in mind your way ? truly you be angry and we go on do evil and sin against you in the past . for we have all become like an unclean person and all our good act be like a dirty robe and we have all become old like a dead leaf and our sin like the wind take u away . and there be no one who make prayer to your name or who be move to keep true to you for your face be veil from u and you have give u into the power of our sin . but now o lord you be our father we be the earth and you be our maker and we be all the work of your hand . be not very angry o lord and do not keep our sin in mind for ever give ear to our prayer for we be all your people . your holy town have become a waste zion have become a waste jerusalem be a mass of broken wall . our holy and beautiful house where our father give praise to you be burn with fire and all the thing of our desire have come to destruction . in view of all this will you still do nothing o lord ? will you keep quiet and go on increase our punishment ?i have be ready to give an answer to those who do not make prayer to me i have be offer myself to those who be not search for me i say here be i here be i to a nation which give no respect to my name . all day my hand have be stretch out to an uncontrolled people who go in an evil way after the purpose of their heart a people who make me angry every day make offering in garden and burn perfume on brick . who be seat in the resting place of the dead and by night be in the secret place who take pig 's flesh for food and have the liquid of disgust thing in their vessel . who say keep away do not come near me for fear that i make you holy these be a smoke in my nose a fire burn all day . see it be record before me say the lord i will not keep back my hand till i have send punishment for their sin and the sin of their father who be burn perfume on the mountain and say evil thing against me on the hill so i will take the measure of their sin and will send the punishment for them into their breast . this be the word of the lord a the new wine be see in the grape and they say do not send destruction on it for a blessing be in it so will i do for my servant in order that i may not put an end to them all . and i will take a seed out of jacob and out of judah one who will have my mountain for a heritage and the people i have take to be mine will have it for themselves and my servant will have their resting place there . and sharon will be a grass land for the flock and the valley of achor a resting place for the herd for my people whose heart have be turn back to me . but a for you who have give up the lord who have no care for my holy mountain who get ready a table for chance and make offering of mixed wine to fate your fate will be the sword and you will all go down to death because when my voice come to you you make no answer you do not give ear to my word but you do what be evil in my eye desire what be not please to me . for this cause say the lord god my servant will have food but you will be in need of food my servant will have drink but you will be dry my servant will have joy but you will be sham my servant will make song in the joy of their heart but you will be cry for sorrow and make sound of grief from a broken spirit . and your name will become a curse to my people and the lord god will put you to death and give his servant another name so that he who be request a blessing will make use of the name of the true god and he who take an oath will do so by the true god because the past trouble be go out of mind and because they be cover from my eye . for see i be make a new heaven and a new earth and the past thing will be go completely out of mind . but men will be glad and have joy for ever in what i be make for i be make jerusalem a delight and her people a joy . and i will be glad over jerusalem and have joy in my people and the voice of weep will no longer be sound in her or the voice of grief . no longer will there be there a child whose day be cut short or an old man whose day have not come to their full measure for the young man at his death will be a hundred year old and he whose life be short than a hundred year will seem a one curse . and they will be build house and living in them plant vine garden and get the fruit of them . they will no longer be build for the use of others or plant for others to have the fruit for the day of my people will be like the day of a tree and my loved one will have joy in full measure in the work of their hand . their work will not be for nothing and they will not give birth to child for destruction for they be a seed to whom the lord have give his blessing and their offspring will be with them . and before they make their request i will give an answer and while they be still make prayer to me i will give ear . the wolf and the lamb will take their food together and the lion will make a meal of grass like the ox but dust will be the snake 's food . there will be no cause of pain or destruction in all my holy mountain say the lord .the lord say heaven be the seat of my power and earth be the rest place for my foot what sort of house will you make for me and what place will be my rest place ? for all these thing my hand have make and they be mine say the lord but to this man only will i give attention to him who be poor and break in spirit fear my word . he who put an ox to death put a man to death he who make an offering of a lamb put a dog to death he who make a meal offering make an offering of pig 's blood he who make an offering of perfume for a sign give worship to an image a they have go after their desire and their soul take pleasure in their disgusting thing so i will go after trouble for them and will send on them what they be fear because no one make answer to my voice or give ear to my word but they do what be evil in my eye go after that in which i take no pleasure . give ear to the word of the lord you who be in fear at his word your countryman hat you and drive you out because of my name have say let the lord 's glory be make clear so that we may see your joy but they will be put to shame . there be a noise of war from the town a sound from the temple the voice of the lord give punishment to his hater . before her pain come she give birth before her pain she give birth to a man child . when have such a story come to men 's ear ? who have see such thing ? will a land come to birth in one day ? will a nation be give birth in a minute ? for when zion 's pain come on her she give birth to her child straight away . will i by whom the birth be start not make it complete ? say the lord . will i who make child come to birth let them be keep back ? say your god . have joy with jerusalem and be glad with her all you her lover take part in her joy all you who be sorrow for her so that you may take of the comfort flow from her breast and be delight with the full measure of her glory . for the lord say see i will make her peace like a river and the glory of the nation like an overflow stream and she will take her child in her arm gently care for them on her knee . a to one who be comfort by his mother so will i give you comfort and you will be comfort in jerusalem . and you will see it and your heart will be glad and your bone will get new strength like young grass and the hand of the lord will be see at work for his servant and his wrath against his hater . for the lord be come with fire and his war carriage will be like the storm wind to give punishment in the heat of his wrath and his passion be like flame of fire . for with fire and sword will the lord come judge all the earth and his sword will be on all flesh and great number will be put to death by him . a for those who keep themselves separate and make themselves clean in the garden go after one in the middle take pig 's flesh for food and other disgust thing such a the mouse their work and their thought will come to an end together say the lord . and i be come to get together all nation and tongue and they will come and will see my glory . and i will put a sign among them and i will send those who be still live to the nation to tarshish put and lud meshech and rosh tubal and javan to the sea land far away who have not have word of me or see my glory and they will give the knowledge of my glory to the nation . and they will take your countryman out of all the nation for an offering to the lord on horse and in carriage and in cart and on ass and on camel to my holy mountain jerusalem say the lord a the child of israel take their offering in a clean vessel into the house of the lord . and some of them will i take for priest and levites say the lord . for a the new heaven and the new earth which i will make will be for ever before me say the lord so will your seed and your name be for ever . and it will be that from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath all flesh will come to give worship before me say the lord . and they will go out to see the dead body of the men who have do evil against me for their worm will ever be live and their fire will never be put out and they will be a thing of fear to all flesh .the word of jeremiah the son of hilkiah of the priest who be in anathoth in the land of benjamin to whom the word of the lord come in the day of josiah the son of amon king of judah in the thirteenth year of his rule . and it come again in the day of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah up to the eleventh year of zedekiah the son of josiah king of judah till jerusalem be take away in the fifth month . now the word of the lord come to me say before you be form in the body of your mother i have knowledge of you and before your birth i make you holy i have give you the work of be a prophet to the nation . then say i o lord god ! see i have no power of word for i be a child . but the lord say to me do not say i be a child for wherever i send you you be to go and whatever i give you order to say you be to say . have no fear because of them for i be with you to keep you safe say the lord . then the lord put out his hand touch my mouth and the lord say to me see i have put my word in your mouth see this day i have put you over the nation and over the kingdom for uproot and smash down for destruction and overturn for build up and plant . again the word of the lord come to me say jeremiah what do you see ? and i say i see a branch of an almond tree . then the lord say to me you have see well for i keep watch over my word to give effect to it . and the word of the lord come to me a second time say what do you see ? and i say i see a boiling pot and it face be from the north . then the lord say to me out of the north evil will come burst out on all the people of the land . for see i will send for all the family of the kingdom of the north say the lord and they will come everyone place his high seat at the way into jerusalem and against it wall on every side and against all the town of judah . and i will give my decision against them on account of all their evil do because they have give me up burn perfume to other god and worship the work of their hand . so make yourself ready and go and say to them everything i give you order to say do not be overcome by fear of them or i will send fear on you before them . for see this day have i make you a walled town and an iron pillar and wall of brass against all the land against the king of judah against it captain against it priest and against the people of the land . they will be fight against you but they will not overcome you for i be with you say the lord to give you salvation .and the word of the lord come to me say go and say in the ear of jerusalem the lord say i still keep the memory of your kind heart when you be young and your love when you become my bride how you go after me in the waste of sand in an unplanted land . israel be holy to the lord the first fruit of his increase all who make attack on him be judge a wrongdoer evil come on them say the lord . give ear to the word of the lord o son of jacob and all the family of israel these be the word of the lord what evil have your father see in me that they have go far from me and walk after what be false have become false ? and they never say where be the lord who take u up out of the land of egypt who be our guide through the waste of sand through an unplanted land full of deep hole through a dry land of deep shade which no one go through and where no man be live ? and i take you into a fertile land where you be live on it fruit and it wealth but when you come in you make my land unclean and make my heritage a disgusting thing . the priest do not say where be the lord ? and those who be expert in the law have no knowledge of me and the ruler do evil against me and the prophet become prophet of the baal go after thing without value . for this reason i will again put forward my cause against you say the lord even against you and against your child 's child . for go over to the sea land of kittim and see send to kedar and give deep thought to it and see if there have ever be such a thing . have any nation ever make a change in their god though they be no god ? but my people have give up their glory in exchange for what be of no profit . be full of wonder o heavens at this be overcome with fear be completely waste say the lord . for my people have do two evil they have give up me the fountain of living water and have make for themselves water hole cut out from the rock broken water hole of no use for store water . be israel a servant ? have he be a house servant from birth ? why have he be make waste ? the young lion have make an outcry against him with a loud voice they have make his land waste his town be burn up with no one living in them . even the child of noph and tahpanhes have put shame on you . have not this come on you because you have give up the lord your god who be your guide by the way ? and now what have you to do on the way to egypt to get your drink from the water of the nile ? or what have you to do on the way to assyria to get your drink from the water of the river ? the evil you yourselves have do will be your punishment your error will be your judge be certain then and see that it be an evil and a bitter thing to give up the lord your god and no long to be move by fear of me say the lord the lord of army . for in the past your yoke be break by your hand and your cord part and you say i will not be your servant for on every high hill and under every branching tree your behaviour be like that of a loose woman but when you be plant by me you be a noble vine in every way a true seed how then have you be change into the branching plant of a strange vine ? for even if you be wash with soda and take much soap still your evil do be mark before me say the lord god . how be you able to say i be not unclean i have not go after the baal ? see your way in the valley be clear about what you have do you be a quick foot camel twist her way in and out an untrained as use to the waste land breathe up the wind in her desire at her time who be able to send her away ? all those who be look for her will have no need to make themselves tired in her month they will get her . do not let your foot be without shoe or your throat dry from need of water but you say there be no hope no for i have be a lover of strange god and after them i will go . a the thief be sham when he be take so be israel sham they their king and their ruler their priest and their prophet who say to a tree you be my father and to a stone you have give me life for their back have be turn to me not their face but in the time of their trouble they will say up ! and be our saviour . but where be the god you have make for yourselves ? let them come if they be able to give you salvation in the time of your trouble for the number of your god be a the number of your town o judah . why will you put forward your cause against me ? you have all do evil against me say the lord . i give your child blow to no purpose they get no good from train your sword have be the destruction of your prophet like a death give lion . o generation see the word of the lord . have i be a waste land to israel ? or a land of dark night ? why do my people say we have get loose we will not come to you again ? be it possible for a virgin to put out of her memory her ornament or a bride her robe ? but my people have put me out of their memory for unnumbered day . with what care be your way order when you be look for love ! so ... your way . and in the skirt of your robe may be see the life blood of those who have do no wrong ... and still you say i have do no wrong truly his wrath be turn away from me . see i will take up the cause against you because you say i have do no wrong . why do you go about so much for the purpose of change your way ? you will be sham on account of egypt a you be sham on account of assyria . truly you will go out from him with your hand on your head for the lord have give up those in whom you have put your faith and they will be of no help to you .they say if a man put away his wife and she go from him and become another man 's will he go back to her again ? will not that land have be make unclean ? but though you have be act like a loose woman with a number of lover will you now come back to me ? say the lord . let your eye be lift up to the open hilltop and see where have you not be take by your lover ? you have be seat wait for them by the wayside like an arabian in the waste land you have make the land unclean with your loose way and your evil do . so the shower have be keep back and there have be no spring rain still your brow be the brow of a loose woman you will not let yourself be sham . will you not from this time make your prayer to me cry my father you be the friend of my early year ? will he be angry for ever ? will he keep his wrath to the end ? these thing you have say and have do evil and have have your way . and the lord say to me in the day of josiah the king have you see what israel turn away from me have do ? she have go up on every high mountain and under every branching tree act like a loose woman there . and i say after she have do all these thing she will come back to me but she do not . and her false sister judah saw it . and though she saw that because israel turn away from me have be untrue to me i have put her away and give her a statement in write end the relation between u still judah her false sister have no fear but go and do the same . so that through all her loose behaviour the land become unclean and she be untrue give herself to stone and tree . but for all this her false sister judah have not come back to me with all her heart but with deceit say the lord . and the lord say to me israel in her turn away be see to be more upright than false judah . go and give out these word to the north and say come back o israel though you have be turn away from me say the lord my face will not be against you in wrath for i be full of mercy say the lord i will not be angry for ever . only be conscious of your sin the evil you have do against the lord your god you have go with strange men under every branching tree give no attention to my voice say the lord . come back o child who be turn away say the lord for i be a husband to you and i will take you one from a town and two from a family and will make you come to zion and i will give you keeper please to my heart who will give you your food with knowledge and wisdom . and it will come about when your number be increase in the land in those day say the lord that they will no longer say the ark of the agreement of the lord it will not come into their mind they will not have any memory of it or be conscious of the loss of it and it will not be make again . at that time jerusalem will be name the seat of the lord 's kingdom and all the nation will come together to it to the name of the lord to jerusalem and no long will their step be guide by the purpose of their evil heart . in those day the family of judah will go with the family of israel and they will come together out of the land of the north into the land which i give for a heritage to your father . but i say how be i to put you among the child and give you a desired land a heritage of glory among the army of the nation ? and i say you be to say to me my father and not be turn away from me . truly a a wife be false to her husband so have you be false to me o israel say the lord . a voice be sound on the open hilltops the weeping and the prayer of the child of israel because their way be twist they have not keep the lord their god in mind . come back you child who have be turn away and i will take away your desire for wander . see we have come to you for you be the lord our god . truly the hill and the noise of an army on the mountain be a false hope truly in the lord our god be the salvation of israel . but the baal have take all the work of our father from our early day their flock and their herd their son and their daughter . let u be stretch on the earth in our downfall cover ourselves with our shame for we have be sinner against the lord our god we and our father from our early year even till this day and we have not give ear to the voice of the lord our god .if you will come back o israel say the lord you will come back to me and if you will put away your disgust way you will not be send away from before me . and you will take your oath by the living lord in good faith and wisdom and righteousness and the nation will make use of you a a blessing and in you will they take a pride . for this be what the lord say to the men of judah and to jerusalem get your unworked land plough up do not put in your seed among thorn . undergo a circumcision of the heart you men of judah and people of jerusalem or my wrath may come out like fire burning so that no one be able to put it out because of the evil of your doings . say openly in judah give it out in jerusalem and say let the horn be sound in the land cry out in a loud voice come together and let u go into the walled town . put up a flag for a sign to zion go in flight so that you may be safe wait no longer for i will send evil from the north and a great destruction . a lion have go up from his secret place in the wood and one who make waste the nation be on his way he have go out from his place to make your land unpeopled so that your town will be make waste with no man live in them . for this put on haircloth with weep and loud cry for the burn wrath of the lord be not turn back from u . and it will come about in that day say the lord that the heart of the king will be dead in him and the heart of the ruler and the priest will be overcome with fear and the prophet with wonder . then say i ah lord god ! your word be not true when you say to this people and to jerusalem you will have peace when the sword have come even to the soul . at that time it will be say to this people and to jerusalem a burning wind from the open hilltop in the waste land be blow on the daughter of my people not for separate or clean the grain a full wind will come for me and now i will give my decision against them . see he will come up like the cloud and his war carriage like the storm wind his horse be quick than eagle . sorrow be ours for destruction have come on u . o jerusalem make your heart clean from evil so that you may have salvation . how long be evil purpose to have a resting place in you ? for a voice be sound from dan give out evil from the hill of ephraim make this come to the mind of the nation make a statement openly against jerusalem that attacker be come from a far country and their voice will be loud against the town of judah . like keeper of a field they be against her on every side because she have be fight against me say the lord . your way and your doings have make these thing come on you this be your sin truly it be bitter go deep into your heart . my soul my soul ! i be pain to my inmost heart my heart be trouble in me i be not able to be quiet because the sound of the horn the note of war have come to my ear . news be give of destruction on destruction all the land be make waste suddenly my tent straight away my curtain be make waste . how long will i go on see the flag and hear the sound of the war horn ? for my people be foolish they have no knowledge of me they be evil minded child without sense all of them they be wise in evil do but have no knowledge of do good . look at the earth i saw that it be waste and without form and to the heaven that they have no light . look at the mountain i saw them shake and all the hill be move about . look i saw that there be no man and all the bird of heaven have go in flight . look i saw that the fertile field be a waste and all it town be break down before the lord and before his burning wrath . for this be what the lord have say all the land will become a waste i will make destruction complete . the earth will be weep for this and the heaven on high will be black because i have say it and i will not go back from it it be my purpose and it will not be change . all the land be in flight because of the noise of the horseman and the bowman they have take cover in the woodland and up on the rock every town have be give up not a man be live in them . and you when you be make waste what will you do ? though you be clothe in red though you make yourself beautiful with ornament of gold though you make your eye wide with paint it be for nothing that you make yourself fair your lover have no more desire for you they have design on your life . a voice have come to my ear like the voice of a woman in birth pain the pain of one give birth to her first child the voice of the daughter of zion fight for breath stretch out her hand say now sorrow be mine ! for my strength be go from me before the taker of life .go quickly through the street of jerusalem and see now and get knowledge and make a search in her wide place if there be a man if there be one in her who be upright who keep faith and she will have my forgiveness . and though they say by the living lord truly their oath be false . o lord do not your eye see good faith ? you have give them punishment but they be not trouble you have send destruction on them but they do not take your teach to heart they have make their face hard than a rock they would not come back . then i say but these be the poor they be foolish for they have no knowledge of the way of the lord or of the behaviour desire by their god . i will go to the great men and have talk with them for they have knowledge of the way of the lord and of the behaviour desire by their god . but a for these their one purpose be a broken yoke and burst band . and so a lion from the wood will put them to death a wolf of the waste land will make them waste a leopard will keep watch on their town and everyone who go out from them will be food for the beast because of the great number of their sin and the increase of their wrongdoing . how be it possible for you to have my forgiveness for this ? your child have give me up take their oath by those who be no god when i have give them food in full measure they be false to their wife take their pleasure in the house of loose woman . they be full of desire like horse after a meal of grain everyone go after his neighbour 's wife . be i not to give punishment for these thing ? say the lord will not my soul take payment from such a nation a this ? go up against her vine and make waste let the destruction be complete take away her branch for they be not the lord 's . for the people of israel and the people of judah have be very false to me say the lord . they would have nothing to do with the lord say he will do nothing and no evil will come to u we will not see the sword or be short of food and the prophet will become wind and the word be not in them so it will be do to them . for this reason the lord the god of army have say because you have say this i will make my word in your mouth a fire and this people wood and they will be burn up by it . see i will send you a nation from far away o people of israel say the lord a strong nation and an old nation a nation whose language be strange to you so that you may not get the sense of their word . their arrow give certain death they be all men of war . they will take all the produce of your field which would have be food for your son and your daughter they will take your flock and your herd they will take all your vine and your fig tree and with the sword they will make waste your walled town in which you put your faith . but even in those day say the lord i will not let your destruction be complete . and it will come about when you say why have the lord our god do all these thing to u ? that you will say to them a you give me up make yourselves servant to strange god in your land so will you be servant to strange men in a land which be not yours . say this openly in jacob and give it out in judah say give ear now to this o foolish people without sense who have eye but see nothing and ear without the power of hear have you no fear of me ? say the lord will you not be shake with fear before me who have put the sand a a limit for the sea by an eternal order so that it may not go past it ? and though it be ever in motion it be not able to have it way though the sound of it wave be loud they be not able to go past it . but the heart of this people be uncontrolled and turn away from me they be break loose and go . and they do not say in their heart now let u give worship to our god who give the rain the winter and the spring rain at the right time who keep for u the ordered week of the grain cutting . through your evil do these thing have be turn away and your sin have keep back good from you . for there be sinner among my people they keep watch like men watch for bird they put a net and take men in it . a the fowl house be full of bird so be their house full of deceit for this reason they have become great and have get wealth . they have become fat and strong they have go far in work of evil they give no support to the cause of the child without a father so that they may do well they do not see that the poor man get his right . be i not to give punishment for these thing ? say the lord will not my soul take payment from such a nation a this ? a thing of wonder and fear have come about in the land the prophet give false word and the priest give decision by their direction and my people be glad to have it so and what will you do in the end ?go in flight out of jerusalem so that you may be safe you child of benjamin and let the horn be sound in tekoa and the flag be lift up on beth haccherem for evil be look out from the north and a great destruction . the fair and delicate one the daughter of zion will be cut off by my hand . keeper of sheep with their flock will come to her they will put up their tent round her everyone will get food in his place . make war ready against her up ! let u go up when the sun be high . sorrow be ours ! for the day be turn and the shade of even be stretch out . up ! let u go up by night and send destruction on her great house . for this be what the lord of army have say let tree be cut down and an earthwork be place against jerusalem sorrow on the false town ! inside her there be nothing but cruel way . a the spring keep it water cold so she keep her evil in her the sound of cruel and violent behaviour be in her before me at all time be disease and wound . undergo teach o jerusalem or my soul will be turn away from you and i will make you a waste an unpeopled land . this be what the lord of army have say everything will be take from the rest of israel a the last grape be take from the vine let your hand be turn to the small branch like one pull off grape . to whom be i to give word witness so that they may take note ? see their ear be stop and they be not able to give attention see the word of the lord have be a cause of shame to them they have no delight in it . for this reason i be full of the wrath of the lord i be tire of keep it in may it be let loose on the child in the street and on the band of the young men together for even the husband with his wife will be take the old man with him who be full of day . and their house will be hand over to others their field and their wife together for my hand will be stretch out against the people of the land say the lord . for from the least of them even to the great everyone be give up to get money from the prophet even to the priest everyone be work deceit . and they have make little of the wound of my people say peace peace when there be no peace . let them be put to shame because they have do disgusting thing . they have no shame they be not able to become red with shame so they will come down with those who be fall when my punishment come on them they will be make low say the lord . this be what the lord have say take your place look out on the way make search for the old road say where be the good way ? and go in it that you may have rest for your soul . but they say we will not go in it . and i put watchman over you say give attention to the sound of the horn but they say we will not give attention . so then give ear you nation and ... give ear o earth see i will make evil come on this people even the fruit of their thought because they have not give attention to my word and they would have nothing to do with my law . to what purpose do sweet perfume come to me from sheba and spice from a far country ? your burn offering give me no pleasure your offering of beast be not please to me . for this reason the lord have say see i will put stone in the way of this people and the father and the son together will go fall over them the neighbour and his friend will come to destruction . the lord have say see a people be come from the north country a great nation will be put in motion from the inmost part of the earth . bow and spear be in their hand they be cruel and have no mercy their voice be like the thunder of the sea and they go on horse everyone in his place like men go to the fight against you o daughter of zion . the news of it have come to our ear our hand have become feeble trouble have come on u and pain like the pain of a woman in childbirth . go not out into the field or by the way for there be the sword of the attacker and fear on every side . o daughter of my people put on haircloth roll yourself in the dust give yourself to sorrow a for an only son with most bitter cry of grief for he who make waste will come on u suddenly . i have make you a tester among my people so that you may have knowledge of their way and put it to the test . all of them be turn away go about with false story they be brass and iron they be all worker of deceit . the blower be blow strongly the lead be burn away in the fire they go on heat the metal to no purpose for the evil doer be not take away . they will be name waste silver because the lord have give them up .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord say take your place in the doorway of the lord 's house and give out this word there and say give ear to the word of the lord all you of judah who come inside these door to give worship to the lord . the lord of army the god of israel say let your way and your doings be change for the good and i will let you go on living in this place . put no faith in false word say the temple of the lord the temple of the lord the temple of the lord be these . for if your way and your doings be truly change for the good if you truly give right decision between a man and his neighbour if you be not cruel to the man from a strange country and to the child without a father and to the widow and do not put the upright to death in this place or go after other god cause damage to yourselves then i will let you go on living in this place in the land which i give to your father in the past and for ever . see you put your faith in false word which be of no profit . will you take the good of others put men to death and be untrue to your wife and take false oath and have perfume burn to the baal and go after other god which be strange to you and come and take your place before me in this house which be name by my name and say we have be make safe so that you may do all these disgust thing ? have this house which be name by my name become a hole of thief to you ? truly i even i have see it say the lord . but go now to my place which be in shiloh where i put my name at first and see what i do to it because of the evil do of my people israel . and now because you have do all these work say the lord and i send my word to you get up early and send but you do not give ear and my voice come to you but you give no answer for this reason i will do to the house which be name by my name and in which you have put your faith and to the place which i give to you and to your father a i have do to shiloh . and i will send you away from before my face a i have send away all your brother even all the seed of ephraim . and a for you jeremiah make no prayer for this people send up no cry or prayer for them make no request for them to me for i will not give ear . do you not see what they be do in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem ? the child go for wood the father get the fire burn the woman be work the paste to make cake for the queen of heaven and drink offering be drain out to other god move me to wrath . be they move me to wrath ? say the lord be they not move themselves to their shame ? so this be what the lord god have say see my wrath and my passion will be let loose on this place on man and beast and on the tree of the field and on the produce of the earth it will be burn and will not be put out . these be the word of the lord of army the god of israel put your burn offering with your offering of beast and take flesh for your food . for i say nothing to your father and give them no order on the day when i take them out of egypt about burn offering or offering of beast but this be the order i give them say give ear to my voice and i will be your god and you will be my people go in all the way order by me so that all may be well for you . but they take no note and do not give ear but be guide by the thought and the pride of their evil heart go back and not forward . from the day when your father come out of egypt till this day i have send my servant the prophet to you get up early every day and send them but still they take no note and would not give ear but they make their neck stiff do bad than their father . and you be to say all these word to them but they will not give ear to you you will send out your voice to them but they will give no answer . and you be to say to them this be the nation which have not give ear to the voice of their god or take his teach to heart good faith be dead and be cut off from their mouth . let your hair be cut off o jerusalem and let it go and let a song of grief go up on the open hilltop for the lord be turn away from the generation of his wrath and have give them up . for the child of judah have do what be evil in my eye say the lord they have put their disgusting image in the house which be name by my name make it unclean . and they have put up the high place of topheth in the valley of the son of hinnom burn their son and their daughter there in the fire a thing which be not order by me and never come into my mind . for this cause the day be come say the lord when it will no longer be name topheth or the valley of the son of hinnom but the valley of death for they will put the dead into the earth in topheth till there be no more room . and the body of this people will be food for the bird of heaven and for the beast of the earth and there will be no one to send them away . and in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem i will put an end to the laughing voice the voice of joy and the voice of the newly marry man and the voice of the bride for the land will become a waste .at that time say the lord they will take the bone of the king of judah and the bone of his ruler and the bone of the priest and the bone of the prophet and the bone of the people of jerusalem out of their resting place and they will put them out before the sun and the moon and all the star of heaven whose lover and servant they have be after whom they have go to whom they have make prayer and to whom they have give worship they will not be put together or place in the earth they will be waste on the face of the earth . and death will be desire more than life by the rest of this evil family who be still live in all the place where i have send them away say the lord of army . far you be to say to them this be what the lord have say will those who be fall not be lift up again ? will he who have go away not come back ? why do these people of jerusalem go back for ever turn away ? they will not give up their deceit they will not come back . i take note and give ear but no one say what be right no man have regret for his evil do say what have i do ? everyone go off on his way like a horse rush to the fight . truly the stork in the heaven be conscious of her fixed time the dove and the swallow and the crane keep to the time of their come but my people have no knowledge of the law of the lord . how be it that you say we be wise and the law of the lord be with u ? but see the false pen of the scribe have make it false . the wise men be sham they be overcome with fear and take see they have give up the word of the lord and what use be their wisdom to them ? so i will give their wife to others and their field to those who will take them for themselves for everyone from the least to the great be give up to get money from the priest even to the prophet everyone be false . and they have make little of the wound of the daughter of zion say peace peace when there be no peace . let them be put to shame because they have do disgusting thing . they have no shame they be not able to become red with shame so they will come down with those who be fall in the time of their punishment they will be make low say the lord . i will put an end to them completely say the lord there be no grape on the vine and no fig on the fig tree and the leaf be dry . why be we seat do nothing ? come together and let u go to the walled town and let destruction overtake u there for the lord our god have send destruction on u and give u bitter water for our drink because we have do evil against the lord . we be look for peace but no good come and for a time of well be but there be only a great fear . the loud breathing of the horse come to our ear from dan at the sound of the outcry of his war horse all the land be shake with fear for they have come and have make a meal of the land and everything in it the town and the people live in it . see i will send snake and poison snake among you against which the wonder worker have no power and they will give you wound which may not be make well say the lord . sorrow have come on me ! my heart in me be feeble . the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people come from a far land be the lord not in zion ? be not her king in her ? why have they make me angry with their image and their strange god which be no god ? the grain cutting be past the summer be end and no salvation have come to u . for the destruction of the daughter of my people i be break i be dress in the clothing of grief fear have take me in it grip . be there no life give oil in gilead ? be there no expert in medical art ? why then have my people not be make well ?if only my head be a stream of water and my eye fountain of weep so that i might go on weep day and night for the dead of the daughter of my people ! if only i have in the waste land a night 's rest place for traveller so that i might go away far from my people ! for they be all untrue a band of false men . their tongue be bent like a bow to send out false word they have become strong in the land but not for good faith they go on from evil to evil and they have no knowledge of me say the lord . let everyone keep watch on his neighbour and put no faith in any brother for every brother will certainly be trick his brother and every neighbour will go about say evil . everyone will make sport of his neighbour with deceit not say what be true their tongue have be train to say false word they be twisted hat to come back . there be wrong on wrong deceit on deceit they have give up the knowledge of me say the lord . so the lord of army have say see i will make them soft in the fire and put them to the test this i will do because of their evil do . his tongue be an arrow causing death the word of his mouth be deceit he say word of peace to his neighbour but in his heart he be wait secretly for him . be i not to send punishment for these thing ? say the lord will not my soul take payment from such a nation a this ? give yourselves to weep cry out in sorrow for the mountain and for the field of the waste land send up a song of grief because they be burn up so that no one go through there be no sound of cattle the bird of the heaven and the beast be in flight and be go . and i will make jerusalem a mass of broken stone the live place of jackal and i will make the town of judah a waste with no man live there . who be the wise man able to see this ? who be he to whom the word of the lord have come so that he may make it clear ? why be the land give to destruction and burn up like a waste place so that no one go through ? and the lord say because they have give up my law which i put before them give no attention to my voice and not be guide by it but they have be walk in the pride of their heart go after the baal a their father give them teach . so the lord of army the god of israel have say i will give them even this people bitter plant for food and bitter water for drink . and i will send them wander among the nation among people strange to them and to their father and i will send the sword after them till i have put an end to them . this be what the lord of army have say take thought and send for the weeping woman so that they may come and send for the wise woman so that they may come let them quickly make cry of sorrow for u so that drop may be flow from our eye till they be stream with water . for a sound of weeping go up from zion a cry how have destruction come on u ? we be overcome with shame because we have go away from our land he have send u out from our house . but even now give ear to the word of the lord o you woman let your ear be open to the word of his mouth train your daughter to give cry of sorrow everyone teach her neighbour a song of grief . for death have come up into our window force it way into our great house cut off the child in the street and the young men in the wide place . the body of men will be fall like waste on the open field and like grain drop by the grain cutter and no one will take them up . this be the word of the lord let not the wise man take pride in his wisdom or the strong man in his strength or the man of wealth in his wealth but if any man have pride let it be in this that he have the wisdom to have knowledge of me that i be the lord work mercy give true decision and do righteousness in the earth for in these thing i have delight say the lord . see the day be come say the lord when i will send punishment on all those who have circumcision in the flesh on egypt and on judah and on edom and on the child of ammon and on moab and on all who have the end of their hair cut who be live in the waste land for all these nation and all the people of israel be without circumcision in their heart .give ear to the word which the lord say to you o people of israel this be what the lord have say do not go in the way of the nation have no fear of the sign of heaven for the nation go in fear of them . for that which be fear by the people be foolish it be the work of the hand of the workman for a tree be cut down by him out of the wood with his axe . they make it beautiful with silver and gold they make it strong with nail and hammer so that it may not be move . it be like a pillar in a garden of plant and have no voice it have to be lift for it have no power of walking . have no fear of it for it have no power of do evil and it be not able to do any good . there be no one like you o lord you be great and your name be great in power . who would not have fear of you o king of the nation ? for it be your right for among all the wise men of the nation and in all their kingdom there be no one like you . but they be together like beast and foolish the teaching of false god be wood . silver hammer into plate be send from tarshish and gold from uphaz the work of the expert workman and of the hand of the gold worker blue and purple be their clothing all the work of expert men . but the lord be the true god he be the living god and an eternal king when he be angry the earth be shake with fear and the nation give way before his wrath . this be what you be to say to them the god who have not make the heaven and the earth will be cut off from the earth and from under the heaven . he have make the earth by his power he have make the world strong in it place by his wisdom and by his wise design the heaven have be stretch out . at the sound of his voice there be a massing of water in the heaven and he make the mist go up from the end of the earth he make the thunder flame for the rain and send out the wind from his store house . then every man become like a beast without knowledge every gold worker be put to shame by the image he have make for his metal image be deceit and there be no breath in them . they be nothing a work of error in the time of their punishment destruction will overtake them . the heritage of jacob be not like these for the maker of all thing be his heritage the lord of army be his name . get your good together and go out of the land o you who be shut up in the walled town . for the lord have say i will send the people in flight like a stone from the land at this time trouble them so that they will be conscious of it . sorrow be mine for i be wound ! my wound may not be make well and i say cruel be my disease i may not be free from it . my tent be pull down and all my cord be break my child have go from me and they be not no longer be there anyone to give help in stretch out my tent and hang up my curtain . for the keeper of the sheep have become like beast not look to the lord for direction so they have not do wisely and all their flock have be put to flight . news be go about see it be come a great shaking be come from the north country so that the town of judah may be make waste and become the living place of jackal . o lord i be conscious that a man 's way be not in himself man have no power of guide his step . o lord put me right but with wise purpose not in your wrath or you will make me small . let your wrath be let loose on the nation which have no knowledge of you and on the family who give no worship to your name for they have make a meal of jacob truly they have make a meal of him and put an end to him and make his field a waste .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord say give ear to the word of this agreement and say to the men of judah and to the people of jerusalem the lord the god of israel have say let that man be curse who do not give ear to the word of this agreement to the order which i give your father on the day when i take them out of the land of egypt out of the oven of iron say give ear to my voice and do all the order i have give you so you will be my people and i will be your god so that i may give effect to the oath which i make to your father to give them a land flow with milk and honey as at this day . and i say in answer so be it o lord . and the lord say to me give out these word in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem say give ear to the word of this agreement and do them . for i give certain witness to your father on the day when i take them up out of the land of egypt and even to this day get up early and witness and say give ear to my voice . but they give no attention and do not give ear but they go on every man in the pride of his evil heart so i sent on them all the curse in this agreement which i give them order to keep but they do not . and the lord say to me there be an evil design at work among the men of judah and the people of jerusalem . they be turn back to the sin of their father who would not give ear to my word they have go after other god and become their servant the people of israel and the people of judah have not keep the agreement which i make with their father . so the lord have say i will send evil on them which they will not be able to get away from and they will send up a cry for help to me but i will not give ear to them . then the town of judah and the people of jerusalem will go cry for help to the god to whom they have be burn perfume but they will give them no salvation in the time of their trouble . for the number of your god be a the number of your town o judah and for every street in jerusalem you have put up altar to the baal for burn perfume to the baal . and a for you make no prayer for this people send up no cry or prayer for them for i will not give ear to their cry in the time of their trouble . about judah . what have you to do in my house ? be it your think that oath and holy flesh will get you out of your trouble ? will you make yourself safe in this way ? you have be name by the lord a branching olive tree fair with beautiful fruit with the noise of a great rushing he have put it on fire and it branch be break . for the lord of army by whom you be plant have give his decision for evil against you because of the evil which the people of israel and the people of judah have do in move me to wrath by offer perfume to the baal . and the lord give me knowledge of it and i saw it then you make clear to me their doings . but i be like a gentle lamb take to be put to death i have no think that they be design evil against me say come and let u make trouble his food cut him off from the land of the living so that there may be no more memory of his name . but o lord of army judge in righteousness test the thought and the heart let me see your punishment come on them for i have put my cause before you . so this be what the lord of army have say about the men of anathoth who have make design against your life say you be not to be a prophet in the name of the lord or death will overtake you by our hand so the lord of army have say see i will send punishment on them the young men will be put to the sword their son and their daughter will come to death through need of food not one of them will keep his life for i will send evil on the men of anathoth in the year of their punishment .you be in the right o lord when i put my cause before you still let me take up with you the question of your decision why do the evil doer do well ? why be the worker of deceit living in comfort ? they have be plant by you they have take root they go on and give fruit you be near in their mouth but far from their thought . but you o lord have knowledge of me you see me search and test how my heart be with you let them be pull out like sheep to be put to death make them ready for the day of death . how long will the land have grief and the plant of all the land be dry ? because of the sin of the people live in it destruction have overtake the beast and the bird because they say god do not see our way . if run with the fight men have make you tired how will you be able to keep up with horse ? and if in a land of peace you go in flight what will become of you in the thick growth of jordan ? for even your brother your father 's family even they have be untrue to you cry loudly after you have no faith in them though they say fair word to you . i have give up my house i have let my heritage go i have give the loved one of my soul into the hand of her hater . my heritage have become like a lion in the woodland to me her voice have be loud against me so i have hate for her . my heritage be like a brightly colour bird to me the cruel bird be attack her on every side go get together all the beast of the field make them come for destruction . the keeper of sheep have be the destruction of my vine garden crush my heritage under their foot they have make my fair heritage an unplanted waste they have make it waste it be weep to me be waste all the land be make waste because no man take it to heart . those who make waste have come on all the open hilltop in the waste land for the sword of the lord send destruction from one end of the land to the other end of the land no flesh have peace . though good grain be plant they have get in thorn they have give themselves pain without profit they will be sham on account of their produce because of the burn wrath of the lord . this be what the lord have say against all my evil neighbour who put their hand on the heritage which i give my people israel see i will have them uproot from their land uproot the people of judah from among them . and it will come about that after they have be uproot i will again have pity on them and i will take them back every man to his heritage and every man to his land . and it will be that if they give their mind to learn the way of my people use my name in their oath by the living lord a they have be teach my people to take oath by the baal then their place will be make certain among my people . but if they will not give ear then i will have that nation uproot and give to destruction say the lord .this be what the lord say to me go and get yourself a linen band and put it round you and do not put it in water . so a the lord say i get a band for a price and put it round my body . and the word of the lord come to me a second time say take the band which you get for a price which be round your body and go to parah and put it in a secret place there in a hole of the rock . so i go and put it in a secret place by parah a the lord have say to me . then after a long time the lord say to me up ! go to parah and get the band which i give you order to put there . so i go to parah and uncover the hole take the band from the place where i have put it away and the band be damage and of no use for anything . then the word of the lord come to me say the lord have say in this way i will do damage to the pride of judah and to the great pride of jerusalem . these evil people who say they will not give ear to my word who go on in the pride of their heart and have become servant and worshipper of other god will become like this band which be of no use for anything . for a a band go tightly round a man 's body so i make all the people of israel and all the people of judah tightly unite to me so that they might be a people for me and a name and a praise and a glory but they would not give ear . so you be to say this word to them this be the word of the lord the god of israel every skin bottle will be full of wine and they will say to you be it not quite clear to u that every skin bottle will be full of wine ? then you be to say to them the lord have say i will make all the people of this land even the king seat on david 's seat and the priest and the prophet and all the people of jerusalem overcome with strong drink . i will have them smash against one another father and son together say the lord i will have no pity or mercy i will have no feeling for them to keep me from give them to destruction . give ear and let your ear be open be not lift up for these be the word of the lord . give glory to the lord your god before he make it dark and before your foot be slip on the dark mountain and while you be look for a light he make it into deep dark into black night . but if you do not give ear to it my soul will be weep in secret for your pride my eye will be weep bitterly stream with water because the lord 's flock have be take away a prisoner . say to the king and to the queen mother make yourselves low be seat on the earth for the crown of your glory have come down from your head . the town of the south be shut up and there be no one to make them open judah be take away a prisoner all judah be take away a prisoner . let your eye be lift up o jerusalem and see those who be come from the north . where be the flock which be give to you your beautiful flock ? what will you say when he put over you those whom you yourself have make your friend ? will not pain take you like a woman in childbirth ? and if you say in your heart why have these thing come on me ? because of the number of your sin your skirt have be uncover and violent punishment overtakes you . be it possible for the skin of the ethiopian to be change or the marking on the leopard ? then it might be possible for you to do good who have be train to do evil . so i will send them in all direction a dry grass be take away by the wind of the waste land . this be your fate the part measure out to you by me say the lord because you have put me out of your memory and put your faith in what be false . so i will have your skirt uncover before your face in order that your shame may be see . i have see your disgust act even your false behaviour and your cry of desire and your loose way on the hill in the field . unhappy be you o jerusalem you have no desire to be make clean how long will you be in turn back to me ?the word of the lord come to jeremiah when there be no water . judah be weep and it door be dark with sorrow and people be seat on the earth clothe in black and the cry of jerusalem have go up . their great men have send their servant for water they come to the hole and there be no water to be see they come back with nothing in their vessel they be overcome with shame and fear cover their head . those who do work on the land be in fear for there have be no rain on the land and the farmer be sham cover their head . and the roe give birth in the field let her young one be uncared for because there be no grass . and the ass of the field on the open hilltop be open their mouth wide like jackal to get air their eye be hollow because there be no grass . though our sin give witness against u do something o lord for the honour of your name for again and again we have be turn away from you we have do evil against you . o you hope of israel it saviour in time of trouble why be you like one who be strange in the land and like a traveller put up his tent for a night ? why be you like a man surprise like a man of war who be not able to give help ? but you o lord be with u and we be name by your name do not go away from u . this be what the lord have say about this people even so they have be glad to go from the right way they have not keep their foot from wander so the lord have no pleasure in them now he will keep their wrongdoing in mind and send punishment for their sin . and the lord say to me make no prayer for this people for their good . when they go without food i will not give ear to their cry when they give burn offering and meal offering i will not take pleasure in them but i will put an end to them by the sword and by need of food and by disease . then i say ah lord god ! see the prophet say to them you will not see the sword or be short of food but i will give you certain peace in this place . then the lord say to me the prophet say false word in my name and i give them no order and i say nothing to them what they say to you be a false vision and wonder work word without substance the deceit of their heart . so this be what the lord have say about the prophet who make use of my name though i send them not and say the sword and need of food will not be in this land the sword and need of food will put an end to those prophet . and the people to whom they be prophet will be push out dead into the street of jerusalem because there be no food and because of the sword and they will have no one to put their body into the earth them or their wife or their son or their daughter for i will let loose their evil do on them . and you be to say this word to them let my eye be stream with water night and day and let it not be stop for the virgin daughter of my people be wound with a great wound with a very bitter blow . if i go out into the open country there be those put to death by the sword ! and if i go into the town there be those who be diseased from need of food ! for the prophet and the priest go about in the land and have no knowledge . have you completely give up judah ? be your soul turn in disgust from zion ? why have you give u blow from which there be no one to make u well ? we be look for peace but no good come and for a time of well be but there be only a great fear . we be conscious o lord of our sin and of the wrongdoing of our father we have do evil against you . do not be turn from u in disgust because of your name do not put shame on the seat of your glory keep u in mind let not your agreement with u be break . be any of the false god of the nation able to make rain come ? be the heaven able to give shower ? be you not he o lord our god ? so we will go on wait for you for you have do all these thing .then the lord say to me even if moses and samuel come before me i would have no desire for this people send them away from before me and let them go . and it will be when they say to you where be we to go ? then you be to say to them the lord have say such a be for death to death and such a be for the sword to the sword and such a be to be in need of food to need of food and such a be to be take away prisoner to be take away . and i will put over them four division say the lord the sword cause death dog pull the dead body about and the bird of heaven and the beast of the earth to take their body for food and put an end to them . and i will make them a cause of fear to all the kingdom of the earth because of manasseh the son of hezekiah king of judah and what he do in jerusalem . for who will have pity on you o jerusalem ? and who will have sorrow for you ? or who will go out of his way to see how you be ? you have give me up say the lord you have go back so my hand be stretch out against you for your destruction i be tire of change my purpose . and i have send a cleaning wind on them in the public place of the land i have take their child from them i have give my people to destruction they have not be turn from their way . i have let their widow be increase in number more than the sand of the sea i have send against them against the mother and the young men one who make waste in the heat of the day cause pain and fear to come on her suddenly . the mother of seven be without strength her spirit be go from her her sun have go down while it be still day she have be sham and overcome and the rest of them i will give up to the sword before their hater say the lord . sorrow be mine my mother because you have give birth to me a cause of fight and argument in all the earth ! i have not make men my creditor and i be not in debt to any but every one of them be curse me . ... be it possible for iron to be break even iron from the north and brass ? i will give your wealth and your store to your attacker without a price because of all your sin even in every part of your land . they will go away with your hater into a land which be strange to you for my wrath be on fire with a flame which will be burn on you . o lord you have knowledge keep me in mind and come to my help and give their right reward to those who be attack me take me not away for you be slow to be angry see how i have undergo shame because of you from all those who make little of your word but to me your word be a joy make my heart glad for i be name by your name o lord god of army . i do not take my seat among the band of those who be glad and i have no joy i keep by myself because of your hand for you have make me full of wrath . why be my pain unending and my wound without hope of be make well ? sorrow be mine for you be to me a a stream offering false hope and a water which be not certain . for this cause the lord have say if you will come back then i will again let you take your place before me and if you give out what be of value and not that which have no value you will be a my mouth let them come back to you but do not go back to them . and i will make you a strong wall of brass to this people they will be fight against you but they will not overcome you for i be with you to keep you safe say the lord . i will keep you safe from the hand of the evil doer and i will give you salvation from the hand of the cruel one .then again the word of the lord come to me say you be not to take a wife for yourself or have son or daughter in this place . for this be what the lord have say about the son and daughter who come to birth in this place and about their mother who have give them birth and about their father who have give life to them in this land death from evil disease will overtake them there will be no weep for them and their body will not be put to rest they will be like waste on the face of the earth the sword and need of food will put an end to them their dead body will be meat for the bird of heaven and for the beast of the earth . for this be what the lord have say do not go into the house of sorrow do not go to make weeping or song of grief for them for i have take away my peace from this people say the lord even mercy and pity . death will overtake great as well a small in the land their body will not be put in a resting place and no one will be weep for them or wound themselves or cut off their hair for them no one will make a feast for them in sorrow to give them comfort for the dead or put to their lip the cup of comfort on account of their father or their mother . and you be not to go into the house of feasting or be seat with them to take food or drink . for the lord of army the god of israel have say see before your eye and in your day i will put an end in this place to the laughing voice and the voice of joy to the voice of the newly marry man and the voice of the bride . and it will be that when you say all these word to the people then they will say to you why have the lord do all this evil against u ? what be our wrongdoing and what be our sin which we have do against the lord our god ? then you will say to them because your father have give me up say the lord and have go after other god and become their servant and their worshipper and have give me up and have not keep my law and you have do bad evil than your father for see every one of you be guide by the pride of his evil heart so a not to give ear to me for this reason i will send you away out of this land into a land which be strange to you to you and to your father there you will be the servant of other god day and night and you will have no mercy from me . for this cause see the day be come say the lord when it will no longer be say by the living lord who take the child of israel up out of the land of egypt . but by the living lord who take the child of israel up out of the land of the north and from all the country where he have send them and i will take them back again to their land which i give to their father . see i will send for great number of fisherman say the lord and they will take them like fish in a net and after that i will send for number of bowman and they will go after them drive them from every mountain and from every hill and out of the hole of the rock . for my eye be on all their way there be no cover for them from my face and their evil do be not keep secret from my eye . and i will give them the reward of their evil do and their sin twice over because they have make my land unclean and have make my heritage full of the body of their unholy and disgusting thing . o lord my strength and my strong tower my safe place in the day of trouble the nation will come to you from the end of the earth and say the heritage of our father be nothing but deceit even false thing in which there be no profit . will a man make for himself god which be no god ? for this reason truly i will make them see this once i will give them knowledge of my hand and my power and they will be certain that my name be the lord .the sin of judah be record with a pen of iron and with the sharp point of a jewel it be cut on their heart of stone and on the horn of their altar for a sign to them their altar and their wood pillar under every branching tree on the high hill and the mountain in the field . i will give your wealth and all your store to be take away in war without a price because of your sin in every part of your land . and your hand will have to let go your heritage which i give you and i will make you a servant to your hater in a land which be strange to you for you have put my wrath on fire with a flame which will go on burning for ever . this be what the lord have say curse be the man who put his faith in man and make flesh his arm and whose heart be turn away from the lord . for he will be like the brushwood in the upland and will not see when good come but his living place will be in the dry place in the waste land in a salt and unpeopled land . a blessing be on the man who put his faith in the lord and whose hope the lord be . for he will be like a tree plant by the water push out it root by the stream he will have no fear when the heat come but his leaf will be green in a dry year he will have no care and will go on give fruit . the heart be a twisted thing not to be search out by man who be able to have knowledge of it ? i the lord be the searcher of the heart the tester of the thought so that i may give to every man the reward of his way in keep with the fruit of his doings . like the partridge get egg together but not produce young be a man who get wealth but not by right before half his day be end it will go from him and at his end he will be foolish . a seat of glory place on high from the first be our holy place . o lord the hope of israel all who give you up will be put to shame those who go away from you will be cut off from the earth because they have give up the lord the fountain of living water . make me well o lord and i will be well be my saviour and i will be safe for you be my hope . see they say to me where be the word of the lord ? let it come now . a for me i have not say let the day of trouble come to them quickly and i have not be hop for the death give day you have knowledge of what come from my lip it be open before you . be not a cause of fear to me you be my safe place in the day of evil . let them be put to shame who be attack me but let me not be sham let them be overcome with fear but let me not be overcome send on them the day of evil and put them to destruction twice over . this be what the lord have say to me go and take your place in the doorway of benjamin where the king of judah come in and by which they go out and in all the doorway of jerusalem and say to them give ear to the word of the lord you king of judah and all the people of jerusalem who come in by these door this be what the lord have say see to yourselves that you take up no weight on the sabbath day or take it in through the door of jerusalem and take no weight out of your house on the sabbath day or do any work but keep the sabbath day holy a i give order to your father but they give no attention and would not give ear but they make their neck stiff so that they might not give ear and might not get teach . and it will be that if with all care you give ear to me say the lord and take no weight through the doorway of this town on the sabbath day but keep the sabbath day holy and do no work in it then through the door of this town there will come king and prince seat on the seat of david go in carriage and on horseback they and their prince and the men of judah and the people of jerusalem and this town will keep it place for ever . and they will come from the town of judah and from the place round about jerusalem and from the land of benjamin and from the lowland and from the mountain and from the south with burn offering and offering of beast and meal offering and perfume and offering of praise to the house of the lord . but if you do not give ear to me to keep the sabbath day holy and to let no weight be lift and take through the door of jerusalem on the sabbath day then i will put a fire in it doorway burn up the great house of jerusalem and it will never be put out .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord say up ! go down to the potter 's house and there i will let my word come to your ear . then i go down to the potter 's house and he be do his work on the stone . and when the vessel which he be form out of earth get damage in the hand of the potter he make it again into another vessel a it seem good to the potter to make it . then the word of the lord come to me say o israel be i not able to do with you a this potter do ? say the lord . see like earth in the potter 's hand be you in my hand o israel . whenever i say anything about uproot a nation or a kingdom and smash it and send destruction on it if in that very minute that nation of which i be talk be turn away from it evil my purpose of do evil to them will be change . and whenever i say anything about build up a nation or a kingdom and plant it if in that very minute it do evil in my eye go against my order then my good purpose which i say i would do for them will be change . now then say to the men of judah and to the people of jerusalem this be what the lord have say see i be form an evil thing against you and design a design against you let every man come back now from his evil way and let your way and your doings be change for the good . but they will say there be no hope we will go on in our design and every one of u will do what he be move by the pride of his evil heart to do . so this be what the lord have say make search among the nation and see who have have word of such thing the virgin of israel have do a very shocking thing . will the white snow go away from the top of sirion ? will the cold water flow from the mountain become dry ? for my people have put me out of their memory burn perfume to that which be nothing and because of this i will put a cause of fall in their way even in the old road and will make them go on side road in a way not lift up make their land a thing of wonder cause sound of surprise for ever everyone who go by will be overcome with wonder shake his head . i will send them in flight a from an east wind before the attacker i will let them see my back and not my face on the day of their downfall . then they say come let u make a design against jeremiah for teach will never be cut off from the priest or wisdom from the wise or the word from the prophet . come let u make use of his word for an attack on him and let u give attention with care to what he say . give thought to me o lord and give ear to the voice of those who put forward a cause against me . be evil to be the reward of good ? for they have make a deep hole for my soul . keep in mind how i take my place before you to say a good word for them so that your wrath might be turn away from them . for this cause let their child be without food and give them over to the power of the sword and let their wife be without child and become widow let their men be overtake by death and their young men be put to the sword in the fight . let a cry for help go up from their house when you send an arm band on them suddenly for they have make a hole in which to take me and have put net for my foot secretly . but you lord have knowledge of all the design which they have make against my life let not their evil do be cover or their sin be wash away from before your eye but let it be a cause of fall before you so do to them in the time of your wrath .this be what the lord have say go and get for money a potter 's bottle make of earth and take with you some of the responsible men of the people and of the priest and go out to the valley of the son of hinnom by the way into the door of broken pot and there say in a loud voice the word which i will give you say give ear to the word of the lord o king of judah and people of jerusalem the lord of army the god of israel have say see i will send evil on this place which will be bitter to the ear of anyone hearing of it . because they have give me up and make this place a strange place burn perfume in it to other god of whom they and their father and the king of judah have no knowledge and they have make this place full of the blood of those who have do no wrong and they have put up the high place of the baal burn their son in the fire a thing which be not order by me and it be never in my mind for this cause see a time be come say the lord when this place will no longer be name topheth or the valley of the son of hinnom but the valley of death . i will make the purpose of judah and jerusalem come to nothing in this place i will have them put to the sword by their hater and by the hand of those who have design on their life and their dead body i will give to be food for the bird of heaven and the beast of the earth . and i will make this town a thing of wonder and a cause of surprise everyone who go by will be overcome with wonder and make sound of surprise because of all it trouble . i will make them take the flesh of their son and the flesh of their daughter for food they will be make a meal of one another because of their bitter need and the cruel grip of their hater and those who have make design against their life . then let the potter 's bottle be break before the eye of the men who have go with you and say to them this be what the lord of army have say even so will this people and this town be break by me a a potter 's bottle be break and may not be put together again and the body of the dead will be put in the earth in topheth till there be no more room . this be what i will do to this place say the lord and to it people make this town like topheth and the house of jerusalem and the house of the king of judah which they have make unclean will be like the place of topheth even all the house on whose roof perfume have be burn to all the army of heaven and drink offering drain out to other god . then jeremiah come from topheth where the lord have send him to give the prophet 's word and he take his place in the open square of the lord 's house and say to all the people the lord of army the god of israel have say see i will send on this town and on all her town all the evil which i have say because they make their neck stiff so that they might not give ear to my word .now it come to the ear of pashhur the son of immer the priest who be chief in authority in the house of the lord that jeremiah be say these thing and pashhur give blow to jeremiah and have his foot chain in a framework of wood in the high doorway of benjamin which be in the house of the lord . then on the day after pashhur let jeremiah loose . then jeremiah say to him the lord have give you the name of magor missabib cause of fear on every side not pashhur . for the lord have say see i will make you a cause of fear to yourself and to all your friend they will come to their death by the sword of their hater and your eye will see it and i will give all judah into the hand of the king of babylon and he will take them away prisoner into babylon and put them to the sword . and more than this i will give all the wealth of this town and all it profit and all it thing of value even all the store of the king of judah will i give into the hand of their hater who will put violent hand on them and take them away to babylon . and you pashhur and all who be in your house will go away prisoner you will come to babylon and there your body will be put to rest you and all your friend to whom you say false word . o lord you have be false to me and i be trick you be strong than i and have overcome me i have become a thing to be laugh at all the day everyone make sport of me . for every word i say be a cry for help i say with a loud voice violent behaviour and wasting because the word of the lord be make a shame to me and a cause of laugh all the day . and if i say i will not keep him in mind i will not say another word in his name then it be in my heart like a burning fire shut up in my bone and i be tire of keep myself in i be not able to do it . for number of them say evil secretly in my hearing there be fear on every side they say come let u give witness against him all my near friend who be watch for my fall say it may be that he will be take by deceit and we will get the good of him and give him punishment . but the lord be with me a a great one greatly to be fear so my attacker will have a fall and they will not overcome me they will be greatly sham because they have not do wisely even with an unending shame keep in memory for ever . but o lord of army test the upright and see the thought and the heart let me see your punishment come on them for i have put my cause before you . make melody to the lord give praise to the lord for he have make the soul of the poor man free from the hand of the evil doer . a curse on the day of my birth let there be no blessing on the day when my mother have me . a curse on the man who give the news to my father say you have a male child make him very glad . may that man be like the town overturn by the lord without mercy let a cry for help come to his ear in the morning and the sound of war in the middle of the day because he do not put me to death before my birth take place so my mother 's body would have be my last resting place and she would have be with child for ever . why do i come from my mother 's body to see pain and sorrow so that my day might be waste with shame ?the word which come to jeremiah from the lord when king zedekiah send to him pashhur the son of malchiah and zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest say will you get direction from the lord for u for nebuchadrezzar king of babylon be make war against u it may be that the lord will do something for u like all the wonder he have do and make him go away from u . then jeremiah say to them this be what you be to say to zedekiah the lord god of israel have say see i be turn back the instrument of war in your hand with which you be fight against the king of babylon and the chaldaean who be outside the wall and shut you in and i will get them together inside this town . and i myself will be fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm even with angry feeling and passion and in great wrath . and i will send a great disease on the people live in this town on man and on beast cause their death . and after that say the lord i will give up zedekiah king of judah and his servant and his people even those in the town who have not come to their end from the disease and the sword and from need of food into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and into the hand of their hater and into the hand of those desire their death he will put them to the sword he will not let anyone get away he will have no pity or mercy . and to this people you be to say the lord have say see i put before you the way of life and the way of death . he who keep in this town will come to his death by the sword and through need of food and through disease but he who go out and give himself up to the chaldaean who be shut you in will go on living and will keep his life safe . for my face be turn to this town for evil and not for good say the lord it will be give into the hand of the king of babylon and he will have it burn with fire . about the family of the king of judah . give ear to the word of the lord o family of david this be what the lord have say do what be right in the morning and make free from the hand of the cruel one him whose good have be violently take away or my wrath will go out like fire burning so that no one may put it out because of the evil of your doings . see i be against you you who be live on the rock of the valley say the lord you who say who will come down against u ? or who will get into our house ? i will send punishment on you in keep with the fruit of your doings say the lord and i will put a fire in her woodland burn up everything round about her .this be what the lord have say go down to the house of the king of judah and there give him this word and say give ear to the word of the lord o king of judah seat on the seat of david you and your servant and your people who come in by these door . this be what the lord have say do what be right judge uprightly and make free from the hand of the cruel one him whose good have be violently take away do no wrong and be not violent to the man from a strange country and the child without a father and the widow and let not those who have do no wrong be put to death in this place . for if you truly do this then there will come in through the door of this house kings seat on the seat of david go in carriage and on horseback he and his servant and his people but if you do not give ear to these word i give you my oath by myself say the lord that this house will become a waste . for this be what the lord have say about the family of the king of judah you be gilead to me and the top of lebanon but truly i will make you waste with town unpeopled . and i will make ready those who will send destruction on you everyone arm for war by them your best cedar tree will be cut down and put in the fire . and nation from all side will go past this town and every man will say to his neighbour why have the lord do such thing to this great town ? and they will say because they give up the agreement of the lord their god and become worshipper and servant of other god . let there be no weep for the dead and make no song of grief for him but make bitter weep for him who have go away for he will never come back or see again the country of his birth . for this be what the lord have say about shallum the son of josiah king of judah who become king in place of josiah his father who go out from this place he will never come back there again but death will come to him in the place where they have take him away prisoner and he will never see this land again . a curse be on him who be build his house by wrongdoing and his room by do what be not right who make use of his neighbour without payment and give him nothing for his work who say i will make a wide house for myself and room of great size and have window cut out and have it roof with cedar and paint with bright red . be you to be a king because you make more use of cedar than your father ? do not your father take food and drink and do right judge in righteousness and then it be well for him ? he be judge in the cause of the poor and those in need then it be well . be not this to have knowledge of me ? say the lord . but your eye and your heart be fix only on profit for yourself on cause the death of him who have do no wrong and on violent and cruel act . so this be what the lord have say about jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah they will make no weeping for him say ah my brother ! or ah sister ! they will make no weeping for him say ah lord ! or ah his glory ! they will do to him what they do to the dead body of an as his body will be pull out and place on the earth outside the door of jerusalem . go up to lebanon and give a cry let your voice be loud in bashan cry out from abarim for all your lover have come to destruction my word come to you in the time of your well be but you say i will not give ear . this have be your way from your early year you do not give attention to my voice . all the keeper of your sheep will be food for the wind and your lover will be take away prisoner truly then you will be sham and unhonoured because of all your evil do . o you who be live in lebanon make your live place in the cedar how greatly to be pity will you be when pain come on you a on a woman in childbirth ! by my life say the lord even if coniah the son of jehoiakim king of judah be the ring on my right hand even from there i would have you pull off and i will give you into the hand of those desire your death and into the hand of those whom you be fear even into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and into the hand of the chaldaean . i will send you out and your mother who give you birth into another country not the land of your birth and there death will come to you . but to the land on which their soul 's desire be fix they will never come back . be this man coniah a broken vessel of no value ? be he a vessel in which there be no pleasure ? why be they violently send out he and his seed into a land which be strange to them ? o earth earth earth give ear to the word of the lord ! the lord have say let this man be record a have no child a man who will not do well in all his life for no man of his seed will do well seat on the seat of the kingdom of david and ruling again in judah .a curse be on the keeper who be cause the destruction and loss of the sheep of my field say the lord . so this be what the lord the god of israel have say against the keeper who have the care of my people you have let my flock be break up drive them away and not care for them see i will send on you the punishment for the evil of your doings say the lord . and i will get the rest of my flock together from all the country where i have send them and will make them come back again to their resting place and they will have offspring and be increase . and i will put over them keeper who will take care of them never again will they be overcome with fear or be trouble and there will not be the loss of one of them say the lord . see the day be come say the lord when i will give to david a true branch and he will be rule a king act wisely do what be right and judge uprightly in the land . in his day judah will have salvation and israel will be live without fear and this be the name by which he will be name the lord be our righteousness . and so truly the day be come when they will say no longer by the living lord who take the child of israel up out of the land of egypt but by the living lord who take up the seed of israel and make them come out of the north country and from all the country where i have send them and they will be live in the land which be theirs . about the prophet . my heart be break in me all my bone be shake i be like a man full of strong drink like a man overcome by wine because of the lord and because of his holy word . for the land be full of men who be untrue to their wife because of the curse the land be full of grief the green field of the waste land have become dry and they be quick to do evil their strength be for what be not right . for the prophet as well a the priest be unclean even in my house i have see their evil do say the lord . for this cause their step will be slip on their way they will be force on into the dark and have a fall there for i will send evil on them in the year of their punishment say the lord . and i have see way without sense in the prophet of samaria they become prophet of the baal cause my people israel to go wrong . and in the prophet of jerusalem i have see a shock thing they be untrue to their wife walk in deceit and they make strong the hand of evil doer so that a man may not be turn back from his evil do they have all become like sodom to me and it people like gomorrah . so this be what the lord of army have say about the prophet see i will give them a bitter plant for their food and bitter water for their drink for from the prophet of jerusalem unclean behaviour have go out into all the land . this be what the lord of army have say do not give ear to the word which the prophet say to you they give you teaching of no value it be from themselves that their vision come and not out of the mouth of the lord . they keep on say to those who have no respect for the word of the lord you will have peace and to everyone who go on his way in the pride of his heart they say no evil will come to you . for which of them have knowledge of the secret of the lord and have see him and give ear to his word ? which of them have take note of his word and give attention to it ? see the storm wind of the lord even the heat of his wrath have go out a roll storm bursting on the head of the evil doer . the wrath of the lord will not be turn back till he have do till he have put into effect the purpose of his heart in day to come you will have full knowledge of this . i do not send these prophet but they go run i say nothing to them but they give out the prophet 's word . but if they have be in my secret then they would have make my people give ear to my word turn them from their evil way and from the evil of their doings . be i only a god who be near say the lord and not a god at a distance ? in what secret place may a man take cover without my see him ? say the lord . be there any place in heaven or earth where i be not ? say the lord . my ear have be open to what the prophet have say who say false word in my name say i have have a dream i have have a dream i have have a dream be my word in the heart of the prophet who give out false word even the prophet of the deceit of their heart ? whose purpose be to take away the memory of my name from my people by their dream of which every man be talk to his neighbour a their father give up the memory of my name for the baal . if a prophet have a dream let him give out his dream and he who have my word let him give out my word in good faith . what have the dry stem to do with the grain ? say the lord . be not my word like fire ? say the lord and like a hammer smash the rock to bit ? for this cause i be against the prophet say the lord who take my word every one from his neighbour . see i be against the prophet say the lord who let their tongue say he have say . see i be against the prophet of false dream say the lord who give them out and make my people go out of the way by their deceit and their uncontrolled word but i do not send them or give them order and they will be of no profit to this people say the lord . and if this people or the prophet or a priest questioning you say what word of weight be there from the lord ? then you be to say to them you be the word for i will not be trouble with you any more say the lord . and a for the prophet and the priest and the people who say a word of weight from the lord ! i will send punishment on that man and on his house . but this be what you be to say every man to his neighbour and every man to his brother what answer have the lord give ? and what have the lord say ? and you will no longer put people in mind of the word of weight of the lord for every man 's word will be a weight on himself for the word of the living god of the lord of army our god have be twist by you . this be what you be to say to the prophet what answer have the lord give to you ? and what have the lord say ? but if you say the word of weight of the lord this be what the lord have say because you say the weight of the lord and i have send to you say you be not to say the weight of the lord for this reason truly i will put you completely out of my memory and i will put you and the town which i give to you and to your father away from before my face and i will give you a name without honour for ever and unending shame which will never go from the memory of men .the lord give me a vision and i saw two basket full of fig put in front of the temple of the lord after nebuchadrezzar king of babylon have take prisoner jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah and the chief of judah and the expert workman and metal worker from jerusalem and have take them to babylon . one basket have very good fig like the fig which first come to growth and the other basket have very bad fig so bad that they be of no use for food . then the lord say to me what do you see jeremiah ? and i say fig the good fig be very good and the bad very bad and of no use for food they be so bad . and the word of the lord come to me say this be what the lord the god of israel have say like these good fig so in my eye will be the prisoner of judah whom i have send from this place into the land of the chaldaean for their good . for i will keep my eye on them for good and i will take them back again to this land build them up and not pull them down plant them and not uproot them . and i will give them a heart to have knowledge of me that i be the lord and they will be my people and i will be their god for they will come back to me with all their heart . and like the bad fig which be so bad that they be of no use for food so i will give up zedekiah king of judah and his chief and the rest of jerusalem who be still in this land and those who be in the land of egypt i will give them up to be a cause of fear and of trouble among all the kingdom of the earth to be a name of shame and common talk and a cutting word and a curse in all the place wherever i will send them wander . and i will send the sword and need of food and disease among them till they be all cut off from the land which i give to them and to their father .the word which come to jeremiah about all the people of judah in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah this be the first year of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon . this word jeremiah give out to all the people of judah and to those live in jerusalem say from the thirteenth year of josiah the son of amon king of judah even till this day for twenty three year the word of the lord have be come to me and i have give it to you get up early and talk to you but you have not give ear . and the lord have send to you all his servant the prophet get up early and send them but you have not give attention and your ear have not be open to give hearing say come back now everyone from his evil way and from the evil of your doings and keep your place in the land which the lord have give to you and to your father from time long past even for ever do not go after other god to be their servant and to give them worship and do not make me angry with the work of your hand cause evil to yourselves . but you have not give ear to me say the lord so that you have make me angry with the work of your hand cause evil to yourselves . so this be what the lord of army have say because you have not give ear to my word see i will send and take all the family of the north say the lord and nebuchadrezzar king of babylon my servant and make them come against this land and against it people and against all these nation on every side and i will give them up to complete destruction and make them a cause of fear and surprise and a waste place for ever . and more than this i will take from them the sound of laugh voice the voice of joy the voice of the newly marry man and the voice of the bride the sound of the stone crush the grain and the shining of light . all this land will be a waste and a cause of wonder and these nation will be the servant of the king of babylon for seventy year . and it will come about after seventy year be end that i will send punishment on the king of babylon and on that nation say the lord for their evil do and on the land of the chaldaean and i will make it a waste for ever . and i will make that land undergo everything i have say against it even everything record in this book which jeremiah the prophet have say against all the nation . for a number of nation and great king will make servant of them even of them and i will give them the reward of their act even the reward of the work of their hand . for this be what the lord the god of israel have say to me take the cup of the wine of this wrath from my hand and make all the nation to whom i send you take of it . and after drink it they will go roll from side to side and be off their head because of the sword which i will send among them . then i take the cup from the lord 's hand and give a drink from it to all the nation to whom the lord send me jerusalem and the town of judah and their king and their prince to make them a waste place a cause of fear and surprise and a curse a it be this day pharaoh king of egypt and his servant and his prince and all his people and all the mixed people and all the king of the land of uz and all the king of the land of the philistine and ashkelon and gaza and ekron and the rest of ashdod edom and moab and the child of ammon and all the king of tyre and all the king of zidon and the king of the land across the sea dedan and tema and buz and all who have the end of their hair cut and all the king of arabia and all the king of the mixed people live in the waste land and all the king of zimri and all the king of elam and all the king of the medes and all the king of the north far and near one with another and all the kingdom of the world on the face of the earth . and you be to say to them this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say take of this cup and be overcome and let it come out again from your lip and from your fall you will never be lift up again because of the sword which i will send among you . and it will be if they will not take of the cup in your hand then you be to say to them this be what the lord of army have say you will certainly take of it . for see i be start to send evil on the town which be name by my name and be you to be without any punishment ? you will not be without punishment for i will send a sword on all people live on the earth say the lord of army . so a a prophet give out these word among them and say to them the voice of the lord will be sound like a lion from on high he will send out his voice from his holy place like the loud voice of a lion against his flock he will give a cry like those who be crush the grape against all the people of the earth . a noise will come even to the end of the earth for the lord have a cause against the nation he will give his decision against all flesh a for the evil doer he will give them to the sword say the lord . this be what the lord of army have say see evil be go out from nation to nation and a great storm will come up from the inmost part of the earth . and at that day the body of those whom the lord have put to death will be see from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth there will be no weep for them their body will not be take up or put to rest in the earth they will be like waste on the face of the land . give cry of grief you keeper of sheep give cry for help roll yourselves in the dust you chiefs of the flock for the day of your destruction have fully come and i will send you in all direction and your fall will be like that of the male of the flock . there will be no way of flight for the keeper of sheep no road for the chief of the flock to get away safely . a sound of the cry of the keeper of sheep and the bitter cry of the chief of the flock ! for the lord have make waste their green field . and there be no sound in the field of peace because of the burn wrath of the lord . the lion have come out of his secret place for the land have become a waste because of the cruel sword and because of the heat of his wrath .when jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah first become king this word come from the lord say this be what the lord have say take your place in the open square of the lord 's house and say to all the town of judah who come into the lord 's house for worship everything i give you order to say to them keep back not a word it may be that they will give ear and that every man will be turn from his evil way so that my purpose of send evil on them because of the evil of their doings may be change . and you be to say to them this be what the lord have say if you do not give ear to me and go in the way of my law which i have put before you and give ear to the word of my servant the prophet whom i send to you get up early and send them though you give no attention then i will make this house like shiloh and will make this town a curse to all the nation of the earth . and in the hearing of the priest and the prophet and all the people jeremiah say these word in the house of the lord . now when jeremiah have come to the end of say everything the lord have give him order to say to all the people the priest and the prophet and all the people take him by force say death will certainly be your fate . why have you say in the name of the lord this house will be like shiloh and this land a waste with no one living in it ? and all the people have come together to jeremiah in the house of the lord . and the ruler of judah hearing of these thing come up from the king 's house to the house of the lord and take their seat by the new door of the lord 's house . then the priest and the prophet say to the ruler and to all the people the right fate for this man be death for he have say word against this town in your hearing . then jeremiah say to all the ruler and to all the people the lord have send me a his prophet to say against this house and against this town all the word which have come to your ear . so now make a change for the good in your way and your doings and give ear to the voice of the lord your god then the lord will let himself be turn from the decision he have make against you for evil . a for me here i be in your hand do with me whatever seem good and right in your opinion . only be certain that if you put me to death you will make yourselves and your town and it people responsible for the blood of one who have do no wrong for truly the lord have send me to you to say all these word in your ear . then the ruler and all the people say to the priest and the prophet it be not right for this man to be put to death for he have say word to u in the name of the lord our god . then some of the responsible men of the land get up and say to all the meeting of the people micah the morashtite who be a prophet in the day of hezekiah king of judah say to all the people of judah this be what the lord of army have say zion will become like a ploughed field and jerusalem will become a mass of broken wall and the mountain of the house like the high place of the woodland . do hezekiah and all judah put him to death ? do he not in the fear of the lord make prayer for the grace of the lord and the lord let himself be turn from the decision he have make against them for evil ? by this act we might do great evil against ourselves . and there be another man who be a prophet of the lord uriah the son of shemaiah of kiriath jearim he say against this town and against this land all the word which jeremiah have say and when his word come to the ear of jehoiakim the king and all his men of war and his captain the king would have put him to death but uriah hearing of it be full of fear and go in flight into egypt and jehoiakim the king send elnathan the son of achbor and certain men with him into egypt . and they take uriah out of egypt and come back with him to jehoiakim the king who put him to death with the sword and have his dead body put into the rest place of the body of the common people . but ahikam the son of shaphan give jeremiah his help so that he be not give into the hand of the people to be put to death .when zedekiah the son of josiah king of judah first become king this word come to jeremiah from the lord say this be what the lord have say to me make for yourself band and yoke and put them on your neck and send them to the king of edom and to the king of moab and to the king of the child of ammon and to the king of tyre and to the king of zidon by their servant who come to jerusalem to zedekiah king of judah and give them order to say to their master this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say say to your master i have make the earth and man and beast on the face of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm and i will give it to anyone at my pleasure . and now i have give all these land into the hand of nebuchadnezzar the king of babylon my servant and i have give the beast of the field to him for his use . and all the nation will be servant to him and to his son and to his son 's son till the time come for his land to be overcome and then a number of nation and great king will take it for their use . and it will come about that if any nation do not become a servant to this same nebuchadnezzar king of babylon and do not put it neck under the yoke of the king of babylon then i will send punishment on that nation say the lord by the sword and need of food and by disease till i have give them into his hand . and you be not to give attention to your prophet or your reader of sign or your dreamer or those who see into the future or those who make use of secret art who say to you you will not become servant of the king of babylon for they say false word to you so that you may be send away far from your land and so that you may be force out by me and come to destruction . but a for that nation which put it neck under the yoke of the king of babylon and become his servant i will let that nation keep on in it land farm it and live in it say the lord . and i say all this to zedekiah king of judah say put your neck under the yoke of the king of babylon and become his servant and his people so that you may keep your life . why be you desire death you and your people by the sword and because food be go and by disease a the lord have say of the nation which do not become the servant of the king of babylon ? and you be not to give ear to the prophet who say to you you will not become servant of the king of babylon for what they say be not true . for i have not send them say the lord but they be say what be false in my name so that i might send you out by force cause destruction to come on you and on your prophet . and i say to the priest and to all the people this be what the lord have say give no attention to the word of your prophet who say to you see in a very little time now the vessel of the lord 's house will come back again from babylon for what they say to you be false . give no attention to them become servant of the king of babylon and keep yourselves from death why let this town become a waste ? but if they be prophet and if the word of the lord be with them let them now make request to the lord of army that the vessel which be still in the house of the lord and in the house of the king of judah and at jerusalem may not go to babylon . for this be what the lord have say about the rest of the vessel which be still in this town which nebuchadnezzar king of babylon do not take away when he take jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah a prisoner from jerusalem to babylon with all the great men of judah and jerusalem for this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say about the rest of the vessel in the house of the lord and in the house of the king of judah and at jerusalem they will be take away to babylon and there they will be till the day when i send their punishment on them say the lord . then i will take them up and put them back in their place .and it come about in that year when zedekiah first become king of judah in the fourth year in the fifth month that hananiah the son of azzur the prophet who come from gibeon say to jeremiah in the house of the lord before the priest and all the people these be the word of the lord of army the god of israel by me the yoke of the king of babylon have be break . in the space of two year i will send back into this place all the vessel of the lord 's house which nebuchadnezzar king of babylon take away from this place to babylon and i will let jeconiah the son of jehoiakim king of judah come back to this place with all the prisoner of judah who go to babylon say the lord for i will have the yoke of the king of babylon broken . then the prophet jeremiah say to the prophet hananiah before the priest and all the people who have come into the house of the lord the prophet jeremiah say so be it may the lord do so may the lord give effect to the word which you have say and let the vessel of the lord 's house and all the people who have be take away come back from babylon to this place . but still give ear to this word which i be say to you and to all the people the prophet who be before me and before you from early time give word to a number of country and great kingdom about war and destruction and disease . the prophet whose word be of peace when his word come true will be see to be a prophet whom the lord have send . then hananiah the prophet take the yoke from the neck of the prophet jeremiah and it be break by his hand . and before all the people hananiah say the lord have say even so will i let the yoke of the king of babylon be break off the neck of all the nation in the space of two year . then the prophet jeremiah go away . then after the yoke have be break off the neck of the prophet jeremiah by hananiah the prophet the word of the lord come to jeremiah say go and say to hananiah this be what the lord have say yoke of wood have be break by you but in their place i will make yoke of iron . for the lord of army the god of israel have say i have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all these nation make them servant to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon and they be to be his servant and in addition i have give him the beast of the field . then the prophet jeremiah say to hananiah the prophet give ear now hananiah the lord have not send you but you be make this people put their faith in what be false . for this reason the lord have say see i will send you away from off the face of the earth this year death will overtake you because you have say word against the lord . so death come to hananiah the prophet the same year in the seventh month .now these be the word of the letter which jeremiah the prophet send from jerusalem to the responsible men among those who have be take away and to the priest and the prophet and to all the rest of the people whom nebuchadnezzar have take away prisoner from jerusalem to babylon after jeconiah the king and the queen mother and the unsexed servant and the ruler of judah and jerusalem and the expert workman and the metal worker have go away from jerusalem by the hand of elasah the son of shaphan and gemariah the son of hilkiah whom zedekiah king of judah send to babylon to nebuchadnezzar king of babylon say this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say to all those whom i have take away prisoner from jerusalem to babylon go on building house and living in them and plant garden and use the fruit of them take wife and have son and daughter and take wife for your son and give your daughter to husband so that they may have son and daughter and be increase in number there and do not become less . and be work for the peace of the land to which i have have you take away prisoner and make prayer to the lord for it for in it peace you will have peace . for this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say do not let yourselves be trick by the prophet who be among you and the reader of sign and give no attention to their dream which they may have for they be say to you what be false in my name i have not send them say the lord . for this be what the lord have say when seventy year be end for babylon i will have pity on you and give effect to my good purpose for you cause you to come back to this place . for i be conscious of my thought about you say the lord thought of peace and not of evil to give you hope at the end . and you will go on cry to me and make prayer to me and i will give ear to you . and you will be search for me and i will be there when you have go after me with all your heart . i will be near you again say the lord and your fate will be change and i will get you together from all the nation and from all the place where i have send you away say the lord and i will take you back again to the place from which i send you away prisoner . for you have say the lord have give u prophet in babylon . for this be what the lord have say about the king who be seat on the seat of david 's kingdom and about all the people live in this town your countryman who have not go out with you a prisoner this be what the lord of army have say see i will send on them the sword and need of food and disease and will make them like bad fig which be of no use for food they be so bad . i will go after them attack them with the sword and with need of food and with disease and will make them a cause of fear to all the kingdom of the earth to be a curse and a wonder and a surprise and a name of shame among all the nation where i have send them because they have not give ear to my word say the lord when i send to them my servant the prophet get up early and send them but you do not give ear say the lord . and now give ear to the word of the lord all you whom i have send away prisoner from jerusalem to babylon . this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say about ahab the son of kolaiah and about zedekiah the son of maaseiah who be say to you what be false in my name see i will give them up into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and he will put them to death before your eye . and their fate will be use a a curse by all the prisoner of judah who be in babylon who will say may the lord make you like zedekiah and like ahab who be burn in the fire by the king of babylon because they have do shame in israel and have take their neighbour ' wife and in my name have say false word which i do not give them order to say and i myself be the witness say the lord . about shemaiah the nehelamite . shemaiah the nehelamite send a letter in his name to zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest say the lord have make you priest in place of jehoiada the priest to be an overseer in the house of the lord for every man who be off his head and be act a a prophet to put such men in prison and in chain . so why have you make no protest against jeremiah of anathoth who be act a a prophet to you ? for he have send to u in babylon say the time will be long go on building house and living in them and plant garden and use the fruit of them . and zephaniah the priest make clear to jeremiah the prophet what be say in the letter read it to him . then the word of the lord come to jeremiah the prophet say send to all those who have be take away say this be what the lord have say about shemaiah the nehelamite because shemaiah have be act a a prophet to you and i do not send him and have make you put your faith in what be false for this cause the lord have say truly i will send punishment on shemaiah and on his seed not a man of his family will have a place among this people and he will not see the good which i be go to do to my people say the lord because he have say word against the lord .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord say the lord the god of israel have say put down in a book all the word which i have say to you . for see the day be come say the lord when i will let the fate of my people israel and judah be change say the lord and i will make them come back to the land which i give to their father so that they may take it for their heritage . and these be the word which the lord say about israel and about judah . this be what the lord have say a voice of shake fear have come to our ear of fear and not of peace . put the question and see if it be possible for a man to have birth pain why do i see every man with his hand grip his side a a woman do when the pain of birth be on her and all face be turn green ? ha ! for that day be so great that there be no day like it it be the time of jacob 's trouble but he will get salvation from it . for it will come about on that day say the lord of army that his yoke will be break off his neck and his band will be burst and men of strange land will no longer make use of him a their servant but they will be servant to the lord their god and to david their king whom i will give back to them . so have no fear o jacob my servant say the lord and do not be trouble o israel for see i will make you come back from far away and your seed from the land where they be prisoner and jacob will come back and will be quiet and at peace and no one will give him cause for fear . for i be with you say the lord to be your saviour for i will put an end to all the nation where i have send you wander but i will not put an end to you completely though with wise purpose i will put right your error and will not let you go quite without punishment . for the lord have say your disease may not be make well and your wound be bitter . there be no help for your wound there be nothing to make you well . your lover have no more thought for you they go after you no longer for i have give you the wound of a hater even cruel punishment why be you cry for help because of your wound ? for your pain may never be take away because your evil do be so great and because your sin be increase i have do these thing to you . for this cause all those who take you for their food will themselves become your food and all your attacker every one of them will be take prisoner and those who send destruction on you will come to destruction and all those who take away your good by force will undergo the same themselves . for i will make you healthy again and i will make you well from your wound say the lord because they have give you the name of an outlaw say it be zion care for by no man . the lord have say see i be change the fate of the tent of jacob and i will have pity on his house the town will be put up on it hill and the great house will be living place again . and from them will go out praise and the sound of laugh and i will make them great in number and they will not become less and i will give them glory and they will not be small . and their child will be a they be in the old day and the meeting of the people will have it place before me and i will send punishment on all who be cruel to them . and their chief will be of their number their ruler will come from among themselves and i will let him be present before me so that he may come near to me for who may have strength of heart to come near me ? say the lord . and you will be my people and i will be your god . see the storm wind of the lord even the heat of his wrath have go out a roll storm bursting on the head of the evil doer . the wrath of the lord will not be turn back till he have do till he have put into effect the purpose of his heart in day to come you will have full knowledge of this .at that time say the lord i will be the god of all the family of israel and they will be my people . the lord have say grace come in the waste land to a people keep safe from the sword even to israel on the way to his rest place . from far away he saw the lord my love for you be an eternal love so with mercy i have make you come with me . i will again make new your building o virgin of israel and you will take up your place again you will take up your instrument of music and go out in the dance of those who be glad . again will your vine garden be plant on the hill of samaria the planter will be plant and use the fruit . for there will be a day when those who get in the grape on the hill of ephraim will be cry up ! let u go up to zion to the lord our god . for the lord have say make a glad song for jacob and give a cry on the top of the mountain give the news give praise and say the lord have give salvation to his people even to the rest of israel . see i will take them from the north country and get them from the inmost part of the earth and with them the blind and the feeble foot the woman with child and her who be in birth pain together a very great army they will come back here . they will come with weeping and go before them i will be their guide guide them by stream of water in a straight way where there be no fall for i be a father to israel and ephraim be the first of my son . give ear to the word of the lord o you nation and give news of it in the sea land far away and say he who have send israel wandering will get him together and will keep him a a keeper do his flock . for the lord have give a price for jacob and make him free from the hand of him who be strong than he . so they will come with song on the high place flow together to the good thing of the lord to the grain and the wine and the oil to the young one of the flock and of the herd their soul will be like a watered garden and they will have no more sorrow . then the virgin will have joy in the dance and the young men and the old will be glad for i will have their weeping turn into joy i will give them comfort and make them glad after their sorrow . i will give the priest their desired fat thing and my people will have a full measure of my good thing say the lord . so have the lord say in ramah there be a sound of cry weep and bitter sorrow rachel weep for her child she will not be comfort for their loss . the lord have say this keep your voice from sorrow and your eye from weep for your work will be reward say the lord and they will come back from the land of their hater . and there be hope for the future say the lord and your child will come back to the land which be theirs . certainly ephraim 's word of grief have come to my ear you have give me train and i have undergone it like a young cow unused to the yoke let me be turn and come back for you be the lord my god . truly after i have be turn i have regret for my way and after i have get knowledge i make sign of sorrow i be put to shame truly i be cover with shame because i have to undergo the shame of my early year . be ephraim my dear son ? be he the child of my delight ? for whenever i say thing against him i still keep him in my memory so my heart be trouble for him i will certainly have mercy on him say the lord . put up guide pillar make road sign for yourself give attention to the highway even the way in which you go be turn again o virgin of israel be turn to these your town . how long will you go on turn this way and that o wander daughter ? for the lord have make a new thing on the earth a woman change into a man . so the lord of army the god of israel have say again will these word be use in the land of judah and in it town when i have let their fate be change may the blessing of the lord be on you o rest place of righteousness o holy mountain . and judah and all it town will be live there together the farmer and those who go about with flock . for i have give new strength to the tired soul and to every sorrow soul in full measure . at this awake from my sleep i saw and my sleep be sweet to me . see the day be come say the lord when i will have israel and judah plant with the seed of man and with the seed of beast . and it will come about that a i have be watch over them for the purpose of uprooting and smash down and overturn and send destruction and cause trouble so i will be watch over them for the purpose of build up and plant say the lord . in those day they will no longer say the father have be taste bitter grape and the child 's teeth be put on edge . but everyone will be put to death for the evil which he himself have do whoever have take bitter grape will himself have his teeth put on edge . see the day be come say the lord when i will make a new agreement with the people of israel and with the people of judah not like the agreement which i make with their father on the day when i take them by the hand to be their guide out of the land of egypt which agreement be break by them and i give them up say the lord . but this be the agreement which i will make with the people of israel after those day say the lord i will put my law in their inner part write it in their heart and i will be their god and they will be my people . and no long will they be teach every man his neighbour and every man his brother say get knowledge of the lord for they will all have knowledge of me from the least of them to the great of them say the lord for they will have my forgiveness for their evil do and their sin will go from my memory for ever . these be the word of the lord who have give the sun for a light by day order the moon and star for a light by night who put the sea in motion cause the thunder of it wave the lord of army be his name . if the order of these thing before me be ever break say the lord then will the seed of israel come to an end a a nation before me for ever . this be what the lord have say if the heaven on high may be measure and the base of the earth search out then i will give up the seed of israel because of all they have do say the lord . see the day be come say the lord for the building of the lord 's town from the tower of hananel to the doorway of the angle . and the measuring line will go out in front of it as far a the hill gareb go round to goah . and all the valley of the dead body and all the field of death as far a the stream kidron up to the angle of the horse ' doorway to the east will be holy to the lord it will not again be uproot or overturn for ever .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord in the tenth year of zedekiah king of judah which be the eighteenth year of nebuchadrezzar . now at that time the king of babylon 's army be round jerusalem shut it in and jeremiah the prophet be shut up in the place of the armed watchman in the house of the king of judah . for zedekiah king of judah have have him shut up say why have you a a prophet be say the lord have say see i will give this town into the hand of the king of babylon and he will take it and zedekiah king of judah will not get away from the hand of the chaldaean but will certainly be give up into the hand of the king of babylon and will have talk with him mouth to mouth and see him eye to eye . and he will take zedekiah away to babylon where he will be till i have pity on him say the lord though you be fight with the chaldaean thing will not go well for you ? and jeremiah say the word of the lord come to me say see hanamel the son of shallum your father 's brother will come to you and say give the price and get for yourself my property in anathoth for you have the right of the near relation . so hanamel the son of my father 's brother come to me a the lord have say to the place of the arm watchman and say to me give the price and get my property which be in anathoth in the land of benjamin for you have the near relation 's right to the heritage so get it for yourself . then it be clear to me that this be the word of the lord . so i get for a price the property in anathoth from hanamel the son of my father 's brother and give him the money seventeen shekel of silver and i put it in write stamp it with my stamp and i take witness and put the money into the scale . so i take the paper witness the business one copy roll up and stamp and one copy open and i give the paper to baruch the son of neriah the son of mahseiah before the eye of hanamel the son of my father 's brother and of the witness who have put their name to the paper and before all the jew who be seat in the place of the armed watchman . and i give order to baruch in front of them say this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say take these paper the witness of this business the one which be roll up and stamp and the one which be open and put them in a vessel of earth so that they may be keep for a long time . for the lord of army the god of israel have say there will again be trade in house and field and vine garden in this land . now after i have give the paper to baruch the son of neriah i make my prayer to the lord say ah lord god ! see you have make the heaven and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm and there be nothing you be not able to do you have mercy on thousand and send punishment for the evil do of the father on their child after them the great the strong god the lord of army be his name great in wisdom and strong in act whose eye be open on all the way of the son of men give to everyone the reward of his way and the fruit of his doings you have do sign and wonder in the land of egypt and even to this day in israel and among other men and have make a name for yourself as at this day and have take your people israel out of the land of egypt with sign and with wonder and with a strong hand and an outstretched arm causing great fear and have give them this land which you give your word to their father to give them a land flow with milk and honey and they come in and take it for their heritage but they do not give ear to your voice and be not rule by your law they have do nothing of all you give them order to do so you have make all this evil come on them see they have make earthwork against the town to take it and the town be give into the hand of the chaldaean who be fight against it because of the sword and need of food and disease and what you have say have take place and truly you see it . and you have say to me give the money to get yourself a property and have the business witness though the town be give into the hand of the chaldaean . and the word of the lord come to jeremiah say see i be the lord the god of all flesh be there anything so hard that i be unable to do it ? so this be what the lord have say see i be give this town into the hand of the chaldaean and into the hand of nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon and he will take it and the chaldaean who be fight against this town will come and put the town on fire burn it together with the house on the roof of which perfume have be burn to the baal and drink offering have be drain out to other god move me to wrath . for the child of israel and the child of judah have do nothing but evil in my eye from their early year the child of israel have only make me angry with the work of their hand say the lord . for this town have be to me a cause of wrath and of burn passion from the day of it building till this day so that i put it away from before my face because of all the evil of the child of israel and of the child of judah which they have do to make me angry they and their king their prince their priest and their prophet and the men of judah and the people of jerusalem . and they have be turn their back and not their face to me and though i be their teacher get up early and teach them their ear be not open to teach . but they put their disgusting image into the house which be name by my name make it unclean . and they put up the high place of the baal in the valley of the son of hinnom make their son and their daughter go through the fire to molech which i do not give them order to do and it never come into my mind that they would do this disgust thing cause judah to be turn out of the way . and now the lord the god of israel have say of this town about which you say it be give into the hand of the king of babylon by the sword and by need of food and by disease see i will get them together from all the country where i have send them in my wrath and in the heat of my passion and in my bitter feeling and i will let them come back into this place where they may take their rest safely . and they will be my people and i will be their god and i will give them one heart and one way so that they may go on in the worship of me for ever for their good and the good of their child after them and i will make an eternal agreement with them that i will never give them up but ever do them good and i will put the fear of me in their heart so that they will not go away from me . and truly i will take pleasure in do them good and all my heart and soul will be give to plant them in this land in good faith . for the lord have say a i have make all this great evil come on this people so i will send on them all the good which i say about them . and there will be trade in field in this land of which you say it be a waste without man or beast it be give into the hand of the chaldaean . men will get field for money and put the business in write stamp the paper and have them witness in the land of benjamin and in the country round jerusalem and in the town of judah and in the town of the hill country and in the town of the lowland and in the town of the south for i will let their fate be change say the lord .then the word of the lord come to jeremiah the second time while he be still shut up in the place of the arm watchman say these be the word of the lord who be do it the lord who be form it to make it certain the lord be his name let your cry come to me and i will give you an answer and let you see great thing and secret thing of which you have no knowledge . for this be what the lord the god of israel have say about the house of this town and the house of the king of judah which have be break down to make earthwork and ... ... and to make them full of the dead body of men whom i have put to death in my wrath and in my passion and because of whose evil do i have keep my face cover from this town . see i will make it healthy and well again i will even make them well i will let them see peace and good faith in full measure . and i will let the fate of judah and of israel be change build them up as at first . and i will make them clean from all their sin with which they have be sin against me i will have forgiveness for all their sin with which they have be sin against me and with which they have do evil against me . and this town will be to me for a name of joy for a praise and a glory before all the nation of the earth who hearing of all the good which i be do for them will be shake with fear because of all the good and the peace which i be do for it . this be what the lord have say there will again be sound in this place of which you say it be a waste without man and without beast even in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem which be waste and unpeopled without man and without beast happy sound the voice of joy the voice of the newly marry man and the voice of the bride the voice of those who say give praise to the lord of army for the lord be good for his mercy be unchanging for ever the voice of those who go with praise into the house of the lord . for i will let the land come back to it first condition say the lord . this be what the lord of army have say again there will be in this place which be a waste without man and without beast and in all it town a resting place where the keeper of sheep will make their flock take rest . in the town of the hill country in the town of the lowland and in the town of the south and in the land of benjamin and in the country round jerusalem and in the town of judah the flock will again go under the hand of him who be number them say the lord . see the day be come say the lord when i will give effect to the good word which i have say about the people of israel and the people of judah . in those day and at that time i will let a branch of righteousness come up for david and he will be a judge in righteousness in the land . in those day judah will have salvation and jerusalem will be safe and this be the name which will be give to her the lord be our righteousness . for the lord have say david will never be without a man to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of israel and the priest and the levite will never be without a man to come before me offer burn offering and perfume and meal offering and offering of beast at all time . and the word of the lord come to jeremiah say the lord have say if it be possible for my agreement of the day and the night to be break so that day and night no longer come at their fix time then my agreement with my servant david may be break so that he no longer have a son to take his place on the seat of the kingdom and my agreement with the levite the priest my servant . a it be not possible for the army of heaven to be number or the sand of the sea measure so will i make the seed of my servant david and the levite my servant . and the word of the lord come to jeremiah say have you take note of what these people have say the two family which the lord take for himself he have give up ? this they say look down on my people a be in their eye no longer a nation . the lord have say if i have not make day and night and if the limit of heaven and earth have not be fix by me then i will give up care for the seed of jacob and of david my servant so that i will not take of his seed to be ruler over the seed of abraham isaac and jacob for i will let their fate be change and will have mercy on them .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord when nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and all his army and all the kingdom of the earth which be under his rule and all the people be fight against jerusalem and all it town say the lord the god of israel have say go and say to zedekiah king of judah this be what the lord have say see i will give this town into the hand of the king of babylon and he will have it burn with fire and you will not get away from him but will certainly be take and give up into his hand and you will see the king of babylon eye to eye and he will have talk with you mouth to mouth and you will go to babylon . but give ear to the word of the lord o zedekiah king of judah this be what the lord have say about you death will not come to you by the sword you will come to your end in peace and such burning a they make for your father the early king before you will be make for you and they will be weep for you and say ah lord ! for i have say the word say the lord . then jeremiah the prophet say all these thing to zedekiah king of judah in jerusalem when the army of the king of babylon be fight against jerusalem and against all the town of judah which have not be take against lachish and against azekah for these be the last of the walled town of judah . the word which come to jeremiah from the lord after king zedekiah have make an agreement with all the people in jerusalem to give news in public that servant be to be make free that every man be to let his hebrew man servant and his hebrew servant girl go free so that no one might make use of a jew his countryman a a servant and this be do by all the ruler and the people who have take part in the agreement and every one let his man servant and his servant girl go free not to be use a servant any longer they do so and let them go . but later they take back again the servant and the servant girl whom they have let go free and put them again under the yoke a servant and servant girl . for this reason the word of the lord come to jeremiah from the lord say the lord the god of israel have say i make an agreement with your father on the day when i take them out of egypt out of the prison house say at the end of seven year every man be to let go his countryman who be a hebrew who have become yours for a price and have be your servant for six year you be to let him go free but your father give no attention and do not give ear . and now turn away from evil you have do what be right in my eye give a public undertaking for every man to make his neighbour free and you have make an agreement before me in the house which be name by my name but again you have put shame on my name and you have take back every one his man servant and his servant girl whom you have send away free and you have put them under the yoke again to be your servant and servant girl . and so the lord have say you have not give ear to me and undertaken publicly every man to let loose his countryman and his neighbour see i undertake to let loose against you the sword and disease and need of food and i will send you wander among all the kingdom of the earth . and i will give the men who have go against my agreement and have not give effect to the word of the agreement which they make before me when the ox be cut in two and they go between the part of it the ruler of judah and the ruler of jerusalem the unsexed servant and the priest and all the people of the land who go between the part of the ox even these i will give up into the hand of their hater and into the hand of those who have design against their life and their dead body will become food for the bird of heaven and the beast of the earth . and zedekiah king of judah and his ruler i will give into the hand of their hater and into the hand of those who have design against their life and into the hand of the king of babylon 's army which have go away from you . see i will give order say the lord and make them come back to this town and they will make war on it and take it and have it burn with fire and i will make the town of judah waste and unpeopled .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord in the day of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah say go into the house of the rechabites and have talk with them and take them into the house of the lord into one of the room and give them wine . then i take jaazaniah the son of jeremiah the son of habazziniah and his brother and all his son and all the rechabites and i take them into the house of the lord into the room of the son of hanan the son of igdaliah the man of god which be near the ruler ' room which be over the room of maaseiah the son of shallum the keeper of the door and i put before the son of the rechabites basins full of wine and cup and i say to them take some wine . but they say we will take no wine for jonadab the son of rechab our father give u order say you be to take no wine you or your son for ever and you be to make no house or put in seed or get vine garden plant or have any but all your day you be to go on living in tent so that you may have a long life in the land where you be live a in a strange country . and we have keep the rule of jonadab the son of rechab our father in everything which he give u order to do drink no wine all our day we and our wife and our son and our daughter build no house for ourselves have no vine garden or field or seed but we have be live in tent and have do everything which jonadab our father give u order to do . but when nebuchadrezzar king of babylon come up into the land we say come let u go to jerusalem away from the army of the chaldaean and from the army of the aramaean and so we be live in jerusalem . then the word of the lord come to jeremiah say this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say go and say to the men of judah and the people of jerusalem be there no hope of teach you to give ear to my word ? say the lord . the order which jonadab the son of rechab give to his son to take no wine be do and to this day they take no wine for they do the order of their father but i have send my word to you get up early and send them and you have not give ear to me . and i have send you all my servant the prophet get up early and send them say come back now every man from his evil way and do good and go not after other god to become their servant and you will go on living in the land which i have give to you and to your father but your ear have not be open and you have not give attention to me . though the son of jonadab the son of rechab have do the order of their father which he give them this people have not give ear to me for this reason the lord the god of army the god of israel have say see i will send on judah and on all the people of jerusalem all the evil which i say i would do to them because i send my word to them but they do not give ear cry out to them but they give no answer . but to the rechabites jeremiah say this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say because you have do the order of jonadab your father and have keep his rule and do everything a he give you order to do it for this reason the lord of army the god of israel have say jonadab the son of rechab will never be without a man to take his place before me .now it come about in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah that this word come to jeremiah from the lord say take a book and put down in it all the word i have say to you against israel and against judah and against all the nation from the day when my word come to you in the day of josiah till this day . it may be that the people of judah hearing of all the evil which it be my purpose to do to them will be turn every man from his evil way so that they may have my forgiveness for their evil do and their sin . then jeremiah sent for baruch the son of neriah and baruch take down from the mouth of jeremiah all the word of the lord which he have say to him write them in a book . and jeremiah give order to baruch say i be shut up and be not able to go into the house of the lord so you be to go read there from the book which you have take down from my mouth the word of the lord in the hearing of the people in the lord 's house on a day when they go without food and in the hearing of all the men of judah who have come out from their town . it may be that their prayer for grace will go up to the lord and that every man will be turn from his evil way for great be the wrath and the passion make clear by the lord against this people . and baruch the son of neriah do a jeremiah the prophet give him order to do read from the book the word of the lord in the lord 's house . now it come about in the fifth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah in the ninth month that it be give out publicly that all the people in jerusalem and all the people who come from the town of judah to jerusalem be to keep from food before the lord . then baruch give a public reading of the word of jeremiah from the book in the house of the lord in the room of gemariah the son of shaphan the scribe in the high square a one go in by the new doorway of the lord 's house in the hearing of all the people . and micaiah the son of gemariah the son of shaphan after hear all the word of the lord from the book go down to the king 's house to the scribe 's room and all the ruler be seat there elishama the scribe and delaiah the son of shemaiah and elnathan the son of achbor and gemariah the son of shaphan and zedekiah the son of hananiah and all the ruler . then micaiah give them an account of all the word which have come to his ear when baruch be read the book to the people . so all the ruler send jehudi the son of nethaniah the son of shelemiah the son of cushi to baruch say take in your hand the book from which you have be read to the people and come . so baruch the son of neriah take the book in his hand and come down to them . then they say to him be seat now and give u a reading from it . so baruch do so read it to them . now it come about that after hear all the word they say to one another in fear we will certainly give the king an account of all these word . and question baruch they say say now how do you put all these word down in write from his mouth ? then baruch answering say he say all these thing to me by word of mouth and i put them down with ink in the book . then the ruler say to baruch go and put yourself in a safe place you and jeremiah and let no man have knowledge of where you be . then they go into the open square to the king but the book they put away in the room of elishama the scribe and they give the king an account of all the word . so the king send jehudi to get the book and he take it from the room of elishama the scribe . and jehudi give a reading of it in the hearing of the king and all the ruler who be by the king 's side . now the king be seat in the winter house and a fire be burn in the fireplace in front of him . and it come about that whenever jehudi in his reading have get through three or four division the king cut them with his penknife put them into the fire till all the book be burn up in the fire which be burn in the fireplace . but they have no fear and give no sign of grief not the king or any of his servant after hear all these word . and elnathan and delaiah and gemariah have make a strong request to the king not to let the book be burn but he would not give ear to them . and the king give order to jerahmeel the king 's son and seraiah the son of azriel and shelemiah the son of abdeel to take baruch the scribe and jeremiah the prophet but the lord keep them safe . then after the book in which baruch have put down the word of jeremiah have be burn by the king the word of the lord come to jeremiah say take another book and put down in it all the word which be in the first book which jehoiakim king of judah put into the fire . and about jehoiakim king of judah you be to say this be what the lord have say you have put this book into the fire say why have you put in it that the king of babylon will certainly come cause the destruction of this land and put an end to every man and beast in it ? for this reason the lord have say of jehoiakim king of judah he will have no son to take his place on the seat of david his dead body will be put out to undergo the heat of the day and the cold of the night . and i will send punishment on him and on his seed and on his servant for their evil do i will send on them and on the people of jerusalem and the men of judah all the evil which i say against them but they do not give ear . then jeremiah take another book and give it to baruch the scribe the son of neriah who put down in it from the mouth of jeremiah all the word of the book which have be burn in the fire by jehoiakim king of judah and in addition a number of other word of the same sort .and zedekiah the son of josiah become king in place of coniah the son of jehoiakim whom nebuchadrezzar king of babylon make king in the land of judah . but he and his servant and the people of the land do not give ear to the word of the lord which he say by jeremiah the prophet . and zedekiah the king send jehucal the son of shelemiah and zephaniah the son of maaseiah the priest to the prophet jeremiah say make prayer now to the lord our god for u . now jeremiah be go about among the people for they have not put him in prison . and pharaoh 's army have come out from egypt and the chaldaean who be attack jerusalem hear news of them go away from jerusalem . then the word of the lord come to the prophet jeremiah say the lord the god of israel have say this be what you be to say to the king of judah who send you to get direction from me see pharaoh 's army which have come out to your help will go back to egypt to their land . and the chaldaean will come back again and make war against this town and they will take it and put it on fire . the lord have say have no false hop say to yourselves the chaldaean will go away from u for they will not go away . for even if you have overcome all the army of the chaldaean fight against you and there be only wound men among them still they would get up every man in his tent and put this town on fire . and it come about that when the chaldaean army outside jerusalem have go away for fear of pharaoh 's army jeremiah go out of jerusalem to go into the land of benjamin with the purpose of take up his heritage there among the people . but when he be at the benjamin door a captain of the watch name irijah the son of shelemiah the son of hananiah who be station there put his hand on jeremiah the prophet say you be go to give yourself up to the chaldaean . then jeremiah say that be not true i be not go to the chaldaean . but he would not give ear to him so irijah make him prisoner and take him to the ruler . and the ruler be angry with jeremiah and give him blow and put him in prison in the house of jonathan the scribe for they have make that the prison . so jeremiah come into the hole of the prison under the arch and be there for a long time . then king zedekiah sent and get him out and the king question him secretly in his house say be there any word from the lord ? and jeremiah say there be . then he say you will be give up into the hand of the king of babylon . then jeremiah say to king zedekiah what have be my sin against you or against your servant or against this people that you have put me in prison ? where now be your prophet who say to you the king of babylon will not come against you and against this land ? and now be please to give ear o my lord the king let my prayer for help come before you and do not make me go back to the house of jonathan the scribe for fear that i may come to my death there . then by the order of zedekiah the king jeremiah be put into the place of the arm watchman and they give him every day a cake of bread from the street of the bread maker till all the bread in the town be use up . so jeremiah be keep in the place of the armed watchman .now it come to the ear of shephatiah the son of mattan and gedaliah the son of pashhur and jucal the son of shelemiah and pashhur the son of malchiah that jeremiah have say to all the people these be the word of the lord whoever go on living in this town will come to his death by the sword or through need of food or by disease but whoever go out to the chaldaean will keep his life out of the power of the attacker and be safe . the lord have say this town will certainly be give into the hand of the army of the king of babylon and he will take it . then the ruler say to the king let this man be put to death because he be put fear into the heart of the men of war who be still in the town and into the heart of the people by say such thing to them this man be not work for the well be of the people but for their damage . then zedekiah the king say see he be in your hand for the king be not able to do anything against them . so they take jeremiah and put him into the water hole of malchiah the king 's son in the place of the arm watchman and they let jeremiah down with cord . and in the hole there be no water but wet earth and jeremiah go down into the wet earth . now it come to the ear of ebed melech the ethiopian an unsexed servant in the king 's house that they have put jeremiah into the water hole the king at that time be seat in the doorway of benjamin and ebed melech go out from the king 's house and say to the king my lord the king these men have do evil in all they have do to jeremiah the prophet whom they have put into the water hole and he will come to his death in the place where he be through need of food for there be no more bread in the town . then the king give order to ebed melech the ethiopian say take with you three men from here and get jeremiah out of the water hole before death overtakes him . so ebed melech take the men with him and go into the house of the king to the place where the clothing be keep and get from there old clothing and bit of old cloth and let them down by cord into the water hole where jeremiah be . and ebed melech the ethiopian say to jeremiah put these bit of old cloth under your arm under the cord . and jeremiah do so . so pull jeremiah up with the cord they get him out of the water hole and jeremiah be keep in the place of the armed watchman . then king zedekiah send for jeremiah the prophet and take him into the ruler ' doorway in the house of the lord and the king say to jeremiah i have a question to put to you keep nothing back from me . then jeremiah say to zedekiah if i give you the answer to your question will you not certainly put me to death ? and if i make a suggestion to you you will not give it a hearing . so king zedekiah give his oath to jeremiah secretly say by the living lord who give u our life i will not put you to death or give you up to these men who be desire to take your life . then jeremiah say to zedekiah these be the word of the lord the god of army the god of israel if you go out to the king of babylon 's captain then you will have life and the town will not be burn with fire and you and your family will be keep from death but if you do not go out to the king of babylon 's captain then this town will be give into the hand of the chaldaean and they will put it on fire and you will not get away from them . and king zedekiah say to jeremiah i be trouble on account of the jew who have go over to the chaldaean for fear that they may give me up to them and they will put me to shame . but jeremiah say they will not give you up be guide now by the word of the lord a i have give it to you and it will be well for you and you will keep your life . but if you do not go out this be what the lord have make clear to me see all the rest of the woman in the house of the king of judah will be take out to the king of babylon 's captain and these woman will say your near friend have be false to you and have get the good of you they have make your foot go deep into the wet earth and they be turn away back from you . and they will take all your wife and your child out to the chaldaean and you will not get away out of their hand but will be take by the hand of the king of babylon and this town will be burn with fire . then zedekiah say to jeremiah let no man have knowledge of these word and you will not be put to death . but if it come to the ear of the ruler that i have be talk with you and they come and say to you give u word now of what you have say to the king and what the king say to you keep nothing back and we will not put you to death then you be to say to them i make my request to the king that he would not send me back to my death in jonathan 's house . then all the ruler come to jeremiah question him and he give them an answer in the word the king have give him order to say . so they say nothing more to him for the thing be not make public . so jeremiah be keep in the place of the arm watchman till the day when jerusalem be take .and it come about that when jerusalem be take in the ninth year of zedekiah king of judah in the tenth month nebuchadrezzar king of babylon with all his army come against jerusalem shut it in on every side in the eleventh year of zedekiah in the fourth month on the ninth day of the month the town be break into all the captain of the king of babylon come in and take their place in the middle doorway of the town nergal shar ezer ruler of sin magir the rabmag and nebushazban the rab sari and all the captain of the king of babylon . and when zedekiah king of judah and all the men of war saw it they go in flight from the town by night by the way of the king 's garden through the doorway between the two wall and they go out by the arabah . but the chaldaean army go after them and overtake zedekiah in the lowland of jericho and they make him a prisoner and take him up to nebuchadrezzar king of babylon to riblah in the land of hamath to be judge by him . then the king of babylon put the son of zedekiah to death before his eye in riblah and the king of babylon put to death all the great men of judah . and more than this he put out zedekiah 's eye and have him put in chain to take him away to babylon . and the chaldaean put the king 's house on fire as well a the house of the people and have the wall of jerusalem break down . then nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take away to babylon a prisoner all the rest of the workman who be still in the town as well a those who have give themselves up to him and all the rest of the people . but nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men let the poor of the people who have nothing whatever go on living in the land of judah and give them vine garden and field at the same time . now nebuchadrezzar king of babylon give order about jeremiah to nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men say take him and keep an eye on him and see that no evil come to him but do with him whatever he say to you . so nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men send nebushazban the rab sari and nergal shar ezer the rabmag and all the chief captain of the king of babylon and they send and take jeremiah out of the place of the watchman and give him into the care of gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan to take him to his house so he be live among the people . now the word of the lord come to jeremiah while he be shut up in the place of the arm watchman say go and say to ebed melech the ethiopian this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say see my word will come true for this town for evil and not for good they will come about before your eye on that day . but i will keep you safe on that day say the lord you will not be give into the hand of the men you be fear . for i will certainly let you go free and you will not be put to the sword but your life will be give to you out of the hand of your attacker because you have put your faith in me say the lord .the word which come to jeremiah from the lord after nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men have let him go from ramah when he have take him for he have be put in chain among all the prisoner of jerusalem and judah who be take away prisoner to babylon . and the captain of the arm men take jeremiah and say to him the lord your god give word of the evil which be to come on this place and the lord have make it come and have do a he say because of your sin against the lord in not give ear to his voice and that be why this thing have come on you . now see this day i be free you from the chain which be on your hand . if it seem good to you to come with me to babylon then come and i will keep an eye on you but if it do not seem good to you to come with me to babylon then do not come see all the land be before you if it seem good and right to you to go on living in the land then go back to gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan whom the king of babylon have make ruler over the town of judah and make your live place with him among the people or go wherever it seem right to you to go . so the captain of the arm men give him food and some money and let him go . so jeremiah go to gedaliah the son of ahikam in mizpah and be live with him among the people who be still in the land . now when it come to the ear of all the captain of the force who be in the field and their men that the king of babylon have make gedaliah the son of ahikam ruler in the land and have put under his care the men and woman and child all the poor of the land those who have not be take away to babylon then they come to gedaliah in mizpah even ishmael the son of nethaniah and johanan the son of kareah and seraiah the son of tanhumeth and the son of ephai the netophathite and jezaniah the son of the maacathite they and their men . and gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan take an oath to them and their men say have no fear of the servant of the chaldaean go on living in the land and become the servant of the king of babylon and all will be well . a for me i will be live in mizpah a your representative before the chaldaean who come to u but you be to get in your wine and summer fruit and oil and put them in your vessel and make living place for yourselves in the town which you have take . in the same way when all the jew who be in moab and among the child of ammon and in edom and in all the country have news that the king of babylon have let judah keep some of it people and that he have put over them gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan then all the jew come back from all the place to which they have go in flight and come to the land of judah to gedaliah to mizpah and get in a great store of wine and summer fruit . now johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force which be in the field come to gedaliah in mizpah and say to him have it come to your knowledge that baalis the king of the child of ammon have send ishmael the son of nethaniah to take your life ? but gedaliah the son of ahikam put no faith in what they say . then johanan the son of kareah say to gedaliah in mizpah secretly let me now go and put ishmael the son of nethaniah to death without anyone 's knowledge why let him take your life so that all the jew who have come together to you may be send in flight and the rest of the men of judah come to an end ? but gedaliah the son of ahikam say to johanan the son of kareah you be not to do this for what you say about ishmael be false .now it come about in the seventh month that ishmael the son of nethaniah the son of elishama of the king 's seed have with him ten men come to gedaliah the son of ahikam in mizpah and they have a meal together in mizpah . then ishmael the son of nethaniah and the ten men who be with him get up and attack gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan with the sword put to death him whom the king of babylon have make ruler over the land . and ishmael put to death all the jew who be with him even with gedaliah at mizpah and the chaldaean men of war . now on the second day after he have put gedaliah to death when no one have knowledge of it some people come from shechem from shiloh and samaria eighty men with the hair of their face cut off and their clothing out of order and with cut on their body and in their hand meal offering and perfume which they be take to the house of the lord . and ishmael the son of nethaniah go out from mizpah with the purpose of meet them weep on his way and it come about that when he be face to face with them he say come to gedaliah the son of ahikam . and when they come inside the town ishmael the son of nethaniah and the men who be with him put them to death and put their body into a deep hole . but there be ten men among them who say to ishmael do not put u to death for we have secret store in the country of grain and oil and honey . so he do not put them to death with their countryman . now the hole into which ishmael have put the dead body of the men whom he have put to death be the great hole which asa the king have make for fear of baasha king of israel and ishmael the son of nethaniah make it full of the body of those who have be put to death . then ishmael take away a prisoner all the rest of the people who be in mizpah the king 's daughter and all the people still in mizpah whom nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men have put under the care of gedaliah the son of ahikam ishmael the son of nethaniah take them away prisoner with the purpose of go over to the child of ammon . but when johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the armed force who be with him have news of all the evil which ishmael the son of nethaniah have do they take their men and go out to make war on ishmael the son of nethaniah and they come face to face with him by the great water in gibeon . now when all the people who be with ishmael saw johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force with him then they be glad . and all the people whom ishmael have take away prisoner from mizpah turn round come back and go to johanan the son of kareah . but ishmael the son of nethaniah get away from johanan with eight men and go to the child of ammon . then johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force who be with him take all the rest of the people whom ishmael the son of nethaniah have make prisoner after he have put to death gedaliah the son of ahikam the people from mizpah that be the men of war and the woman and the child and the unsexed servant whom he have take back with him from gibeon and they go and be live in the rest place of chimham which be near beth lehem on the way into egypt because of the chaldaean for they be in fear of them because ishmael the son of nethaniah have put to death gedaliah the son of ahikam whom the king of babylon have make ruler over the land .then all the captain of the force and johanan the son of kareah and jezaniah the son of hoshaiah and all the people from the least to the great come near and say to jeremiah the prophet let our request come before you and make prayer for u to the lord your god even for this small band of u for we be only a small band out of what be a great number a your eye may see that the lord your god may make clear to u the way in which we be to go and what we be to do . then jeremiah the prophet say to them i have give ear to you see i will make prayer to the lord your god a you have say and it will be that whatever the lord may say in answer to you i will give you word of it keep nothing back . then they say to jeremiah may the lord be a true witness against u in good faith if we do not do everything which the lord your god send you to say to u . if it be good or if it be evil we will be guide by the voice of the lord our god to whom we be send you so that it may be well for u when we give ear to the voice of the lord our god . and it come about that after ten day the word of the lord come to jeremiah . and he send for johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force who be still with him and all the people from the least to the great and say to them these be the word of the lord the god of israel to whom you send me to put your request before him if you still go on living in the land then i will go on building you up and not pull you down plant you and not uproot you for my purpose of do evil to you have be change . have no fear of the king of babylon of whom you be now in fear have no fear of him say the lord for i be with you to keep you safe and to give you salvation from his hand . and i will have mercy on you so that he may have mercy on you and let you go back to your land . but if you say we have no desire to go on living in this land and do not give ear to the voice of the lord your god say no but we will go into the land of egypt where we will not see war or be hear the sound of the horn or be in need of food there we will make our live place then give ear now to the word of the lord o you last of judah the lord of army the god of israel have say if your mind be fix on go into egypt and stop there then it will come about that the sword which be the cause of your fear will overtake you there in the land of egypt and need of food which you be fear will go after you there in egypt and there death will come to you . such will be the fate of all the men whose mind be fix on go into egypt and stop there they will come to their end by the sword by be short of food and by disease not one of them will keep his life or get away from the evil which i will send on them . for this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say a my wrath and passion have be let loose on the people of jerusalem so will my passion be let loose on you when you go into egypt and you will become an oath and a cause of wonder and a curse and a name of shame and you will never see this place again . the lord have say about you o last of judah go not into egypt be certain that i have give witness to you this day . for you have be act with deceit in your heart for you send me to the lord your god say make prayer for u to the lord our god and give u word of everything he may say and we will do it . and this day i have make it clear to you and you have not give ear to the voice of the lord your god in anything for which he have send me to you . and now be certain that you will come to your end by the sword and by be short of food and by disease in the place to which you be pleased to go for a living place .and it come about that when jeremiah have come to the end of give all the people the word of the lord their god which the lord their god have send him to say to them even all these word then azariah the son of hoshaiah and johanan the son of kareah and all the men of pride say to jeremiah you have say what be false the lord our god have not send you to say you be not to go into the land of egypt and make your live place there but baruch the son of neriah be move you against u to give u up into the hand of the chaldaean so that they may put u to death and take u away prisoner into babylon . so johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force and all the people do not give ear to the order of the lord that they be to go on living in the land of judah . but johanan the son of kareah and all the captain of the force take all the rest of judah who have come back into the land of judah from all the nation where they have be force to go the men and the woman and the child and the king 's daughter and every person whom nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men have put under the care of gedaliah the son of ahikam the son of shaphan and jeremiah the prophet and baruch the son of neriah and they come into the land of egypt for they do not give ear to the voice of the lord and they come to tahpanhes . then the word of the lord come to jeremiah in tahpanhes say take in your hand some great stone and put them in a safe place in the paste in the brickwork which be at the way into pharaoh 's house in tahpanhes before the eye of the men of judah and say to them this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say see i will send and take nebuchadrezzar the king of babylon my servant and he will put the seat of his kingdom on these stone which have be put in a safe place here by you and his tent will be stretch over them . and he will come and overcome the land of egypt those who be for death will be put to death those who be to be prisoner will be make prisoner and those who be for the sword will be give to the sword . and he will put a fire in the house of the god of egypt and they will be burn by him and he will make egypt clean a a keeper of sheep make clean his clothing and he will go out from there in peace . and the stone pillar of beth shemesh in the land of egypt will be break by him and the house of the god of egypt burn with fire .the word which come to jeremiah about all the jew who be live in the land of egypt in migdol and at tahpanhes and at noph and in the country of pathros say the lord of army the god of israel have say you have see all the evil which i have send on jerusalem and on all the town of judah and now this day they be waste and unpeopled because of the evil which they have do move me to wrath by burn perfume in worship to other god who be not their god or yours or the god of their father . and i send all my servant the prophet to you get up early and send them say do not do this disgust thing which be hat by me . but they give no attention and their ear be not open so that they might be turn from their evil do and from burn perfume to other god . because of this my passion and my wrath be let loose burning in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem and they be waste and unpeopled as at this day . so now the lord the god of army the god of israel have say why be you do this great evil against yourselves cause every man and woman little child and baby at the breast among you in judah to be cut off till not one be still live move me to wrath with the work of your hand burn perfume to other god in the land of egypt where you have go to make a place for yourselves so that you may become a curse and a name of shame among all the nation of the earth ? have you no memory of the evil do of your father and the evil do of the king of judah and the evil do of their wife and the evil which you yourselves have do and the evil which your wife have do in the land of judah and in the street of jerusalem ? even to this day their heart be not break and they have no fear and have not go in the way of my law or of my rule which i give to you and to your father . so this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say see my face will be turn against you for evil for the cut off of all judah and i will take the last of judah whose mind be fix on go into the land of egypt and stopping there and they will all come to their end fall in the land of egypt by the sword and by be short of food and by disease death will overtake them from the least to the great death by the sword and by need of food they will become an oath and a cause of wonder and a curse and a name of shame . for i will send punishment on those who be live in the land of egypt a i have send punishment on jerusalem by the sword and by need of food and by disease so that not one of the rest of judah who have go into the land of egypt and be live there will get away or keep his life to come back to the land of judah where they be hop to come back and be live again for not one will come back but only those who be able to get away . then all the men who have knowledge that their wife be burn perfume to other god and all the woman who be present a great meeting answer jeremiah say a for the word which you have say to u in the name of the lord we will not give ear to you . but we will certainly do every word which have go out of our mouth burn perfume to the queen of heaven and drain out drink offering to her a we do we and our father and our king and our ruler in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem for then we have food enough and do well and saw no evil . but from the time when we give up burn perfume to the queen of heaven and drain out drink offering to her we have be in need of all thing and have be waste by the sword and by need of food . and the woman say when we be burn perfume to the queen of heaven and drain out drink offering to her do we make cake in her image and give her our drink offering without the knowledge of our husband ? then jeremiah say to all the people to the men and woman and all the people who have give him that answer the perfume which you have be burn in the town of judah and in the street of jerusalem you and your father and your king and your ruler and the people of the land have the lord no memory of them and do he not keep them in mind ? and the lord be no longer able to put up with the evil of your doings and the disgusting thing you do and because of this your land have become a waste and a cause of wonder and a curse with no one living in it a at this day . because you have be burn perfume and sin against the lord and have not give ear to the voice of the lord or go in the way of his law or his rule or his order for this reason this evil have come on you a it be today . far jeremiah say to all the people and all the woman give ear to the word of the lord all those of judah who be live in egypt this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say you woman have say with your mouth and with your hand you have do what you say we will certainly give effect to the oath we have make to have perfume burn to the queen of heaven and drink offering drain out to her then give effect to your oath and do them . and now give ear to the word of the lord all you of judah who be live in the land of egypt truly i have take an oath by my great name say the lord that my name be no long to be name in the mouth of any man of judah in all the land of egypt say by the life of the lord god . see i be watch over them for evil and not for good all the men of judah who be in the land of egypt will be waste by the sword and by need of food till there be an end of them . and those who get away safe from the sword will come back from the land of egypt to the land of judah a very small number and all the rest of judah who have go into the land of egypt and be live there will see whose word have effect mine or theirs . and this will be the sign to you say the lord that i will give you punishment in this place so that you may see that my word will certainly have effect against you for evil the lord have say see i will give up pharaoh hophra king of egypt into the hand of those who be fight against him and desire to take his life a i give zedekiah king of judah into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon his hater who have design against his life .the word which jeremiah the prophet say to baruch the son of neriah when he put these word down in a book from the mouth of jeremiah in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah he say this be what the lord the god of israel have say of you o baruch you say sorrow be mine ! for the lord have give me sorrow in addition to my pain i be tire with the sound of my sorrow and i get no rest . this be what you be to say to him the lord have say truly the building which i put up will be break down and that which be plant by me will be uprooted and this through all the land and a for you be you look for great thing for yourself ? have no desire for them for truly i will send evil on all flesh say the lord but your life i will keep safe from attack wherever you go .the word of the lord which come to jeremiah the prophet about the nation . of egypt about the army of pharaoh neco king of egypt which be by the river euphrates in carchemish which nebuchadrezzar king of babylon overcame in the fourth year of jehoiakim the son of josiah king of judah . get out the breastplate and body cover and come together to the fight . make the horse ready and get up you horseman and take your place with your head dress make the spear sharp and put on the breastplate . what have i see ? they be overcome with fear and turn back their men of war be break and have go in flight not look back fear be on every side say the lord . let not the quick foot go in flight or the man of war get away on the north by the river euphrates they be slip and fall . who be this come up like the nile whose water be lift their head like the river ? egypt be come up like the nile and his water be lift their head like the river and he say i will go up cover the earth i will send destruction on the town and it people . go up you horse go rush on you carriage of war go out you men of war cush and put grip the body cover and the ludim with bent bow . but that day be the day of the lord the lord of army a day of punishment when he will take payment from his hater and the sword will have all it desire drink their blood in full measure for there be an offering to the lord the lord of army in the north country by the river euphrates . go up to gilead and take sweet oil o virgin daughter of egypt there be no help in all your medical art nothing will make you well . your shame have come to the ear of the nation and the earth be full of your cry for the strong man be fall against the strong they have come down together . the word which the lord say to jeremiah the prophet of how nebuchadrezzar king of babylon would come and make war on the land of egypt . give the news in migdol make it public in noph say take up your position and make yourselves ready for on every side of you the sword have make destruction . why have apis your strong one go in flight ? he be not able to keep his place because the lord be force him down with strength . ... be stop in their go they be fall and they say one to another let u get up and go back to our people to the land of our birth away from the cruel sword . give a name to pharaoh king of egypt a noise who have let the time go by . by my life say the king whose name be the lord of army truly like tabor among the mountain and like carmel by the sea so will he come . o daughter living in egypt make ready the vessel of a prisoner for noph will become a waste it will be burn up and become unpeopled . egypt be a fair young cow but a biting insect have come on her out of the north . and those who be her fighter for payment be like fat ox for they be turn back they have go in flight together they do not keep their place for the day of their fate have come on them the time of their punishment . she make a sound like the hiss of a snake when they come on with strength they go against her with ax like wood cutter . they will be cut down her wood for they may not be search out because they be like locust more than may be number . the daughter of egypt will be put to shame she will be give up into the hand of the people of the north . the lord of army the god of israel have say see i will send punishment on amon of no and on pharaoh and on those who put their faith in him and i will give them up into the hand of those who will take their life and into the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon and into the hand of his servant and late it will be people a in the past say the lord . but have no fear o jacob my servant and do not be trouble o israel for see i will make you come back from far away and your seed from the land where they be prisoner and jacob will come back and will be quiet and in peace and no one will give him cause for fear . have no fear o jacob my servant say the lord for i be with you for i will put an end to all the nation where i have send you but i will not put an end to you completely though with wise purpose i will put right your error and will not let you go quite without punishment .the word of the lord which come to jeremiah the prophet about the philistine before pharaoh 's attack on gaza . this be what the lord have say see water be come up out of the north and will become an overflowing stream overflow the land and everything in it the town and those who be live in it and men will give a cry and all the people of the land will be cry out in pain . at the noise of the stamping of the foot of his war horse at the rushing of his carriage and the thunder of his wheels father will give no thought to their child because their hand be feeble because of the day which be come with destruction on all the philistine cut off from tyre and zidon the last of their helper for the lord will send destruction on the philistine the rest of the sea land of caphtor . the hair be cut off from the head of gaza ashkelon have come to nothing the last of the anakim be deeply wound themselves . o sword of the lord how long will you have no rest ? put yourself back into your cover be at peace be quiet . how be it possible for it to be quiet see that the lord have give it order ? against ashkelon and against the sea land he have give it direction .of moab . the lord of army the god of israel have say sorrow on nebo for it have be make waste kiriathaim have be put to shame and be take the strong place be put to shame and break down . the praise of moab have come to an end a for heshbon evil have be design against her come let u put an end to her a a nation . but your mouth will be shut o madman the sword will go after you . there be the sound of cry from horonaim wasting and great destruction moab be break her cry have go out to zoar . for by the slope of luhith they will go up weep all the way for on the way down to horonaim the cry of destruction have come to their ear . go in flight get away with your life and let your face be turn to aroer in the arabah . for because you have put your faith in your strong place you even you will be take and chemosh will go out a a prisoner his priest and his ruler together . and the attacker will come against every town not one will be safe and the valley will be make waste and destruction will come to the lowland a the lord have say . put up a pillar for moab for she will come to a complete end and her town will become a waste without anyone living in them . let him be curse who do the lord 's work half heartedly let him be curse who keep back his sword from blood . from his early day moab have be live in comfort like wine long store he have not be drain from vessel to vessel he have never go away a a prisoner so his taste be still in him his smell be unchanged . so truly the day be come say the lord when i will send to him men who will have him turn over till there be no more wine in his vessel and his wine skin will be completely break . and moab will be sham on account of chemosh a the child of israel be sham on account of beth el their hope . how say you we be men of war and strong fighter ? he who make moab waste have go up against her and the best of her young men have go down to their death say the king whose name be the lord of army . the fate of moab be near and trouble be come on him very quickly . all you who be round about him give sign of grief for him and all you who have knowledge of his name say how be the strong rod break even the beautiful branch ! come down from your glory o people of dibon and take your seat in the place of the waste for the attacker of moab have go up against you send destruction on your strong place . o daughter of aroer take your station by the way on the watch question him who be in flight and her who have get away safe say what have be do ? moab have be put to shame she be broken make loud sound of grief cry out for help give the news in arnon that moab have be make waste . and punishment have come on the lowland on holon and jahzah and on mephaath and on dibon and on nebo and on beth diblathaim and on kiriathaim and on beth gamul and on beth meon and on kerioth and on bozrah and on all the town of the land of moab far and near . the horn of moab be cut off and his arm be break say the lord . make him full of wine for his heart have be lift up against the lord and moab will be roll in the food he be not able to keep down and everyone will be make sport of him . for do you not make sport of israel ? be he take among thief ? for whenever you be talk about him you be shake your head over him . o people of moab go away from the town and take cover in the rock be like the dove of the arabah which make her live place in hole . we have have word of the pride of moab how great it be how he be lift up in pride and his great opinion of himself and that his heart be lift up . i have knowledge of his wrath say the lord that it be nothing his high sounding word have do nothing . for this cause i will give cry of grief for moab cry out for moab even for all of it i will be sorrow for the men of kir here . my weep for you o vine of sibmah will be more than the weeping of jazer your branch have go over the sea stretch even to jazer destruction have come down on your summer fruit and your cut grape . all joy be go no longer be they glad for the fertile field and for the land of moab i have make the wine come to an end from the crushing vessels no longer will the grape be crush with the sound of glad voice . the cry of heshbon come even to elealeh to jahaz their voice be sound from zoar even to horonaim and to eglath shelishiyah for the water of nimrim will become dry . and i will put an end in moab say the lord to him who be make offering in the high place and burn perfume to his god . so my heart be sound for moab like the sound of pipe and my heart be sound like pipe for the men of kir here for the wealth he have get for himself have come to an end . for everywhere the hair of the head and the hair of the face be cut off on every hand there be wound and haircloth on every body . on all the house top of moab and in it street there be weep everywhere for moab have be break like a vessel in which there be no pleasure say the lord . how be it broken down ! how be moab 's back turn in shame ! so moab will be a cause of sport and of fear to everyone round about him . for the lord have say see he will come like an eagle in flight stretch out his wing against moab . kerioth be take and the strong place have be force and the heart of moab 's men of war in that day will be like the heart of a woman in birth pain . and moab will come to an end a a people because he have be lift himself up against the lord . fear and death and the net have come on you o people of moab say the lord . he who go in flight from the fear will be overtake by death and he who get free from death will be take in the net for i will make this come on moab even the year of their punishment say the lord . those who go in flight from the fear be wait under the shade of heshbon for a fire have go out from heshbon and a flame from the house of sihon burn up the pride of moab and the crown of the head of the violent one . sorrow be yours o moab ! the people of chemosh be overcome for your son have be take away a prisoner and your daughter make servant . but still i will let the fate of moab be change in the last day say the lord .about the child of ammon . these be the word of the lord have israel no son ? have he no one to take the heritage ? why then have milcom take gad for himself put his people in it town ? because of this see the day be come when i will have a cry of war sound against rabbah the town of the child of ammon it will become a waste of broken wall and her daughter town will be burn with fire then israel will take the heritage of those who take his heritage say the lord . make sound of grief o heshbon for ai be waste give loud cry o daughter of rabbah and put haircloth round you give yourselves to weep run here and there and wound yourselves for milcom will be take prisoner together with his ruler and his priest . why be you lift up in pride on account of your valley your flow valley o daughter ever turn away ? who put her faith in her wealth say who will come against me ? see i will send fear on you say the lord the lord of army from those who be round you on every side you will be force out every man straight before him and there will be no one to get together the wanderer . but after these thing i will let the fate of the child of ammon be change say the lord . about edom . this be what the lord of army have say . be there no more wisdom in teman ? have wise suggestion come to an end among men of good sense ? have their wisdom completely go ? go in flight go back take cover in deep place you who be live in dedan for i will send the fate of edom on him even the time of his punishment . if men come to get your grape would they not let some be uncut on the vine ? if thief come by night would they not make waste till they have enough ? i have have esau search out uncover his secret place so that he may not keep himself cover his seed be waste and have come to an end and there be no help from his neighbour . put in my care your child who have no father and i will keep them safe and let your widow put their faith in me . for the lord have say those for whom the cup be not make ready will certainly be force to take of it and be you to go without punishment ? you will not be without punishment but will certainly be force to take from the cup . for i have take an oath by myself say the lord that bozrah will become a cause of wonder a name of shame a waste and a curse and all it town will be waste place for ever . word have come to me from the lord and a representative have be send to the nation to say come together and go up against her and take your place for the fight . for see i have make you small among the nation look down on by men . ... the pride of your heart have be a false hope o you who be live in the crack of the rock keep your place on the top of the hill even if you make your living place as high a the eagle i would make you come down say the lord . and edom will become a cause of wonder everyone who go by will be overcome with wonder and make sound of fear at all her punishment . a at the downfall of sodom and gomorrah and their neighbouring town say the lord no man will be live in it no son of man will have a resting place there . see he will come up like a lion from the thick growth of jordan against the rest place of teman but i will suddenly make him go in flight from her and i will put over her the man of my selection for who be like me ? and who will put forward his cause against me ? and what keeper of sheep will be able to keep his place before me ? for this cause give ear to the decision of the lord which he have make against edom and to his purpose design against the people of teman truly they will be pull away by the small of the flock truly he will make waste their field with them . the earth be shake with the noise of their fall their cry be sound in the red sea . see he will come up like an eagle in flight stretch out his wing against bozrah and the heart of edom 's men of war on that day will be like the heart of a woman in birth pain . about damascus . hamath be put to shame and arpad for the word of evil have come to their ear their heart in it fear be turn to water it will not be quiet . damascus have become feeble she be turn to flight fear have take her in it grip pain and sorrow have come on her a on a woman in birth pain . how have the town of praise be waste the place of joy ! so her young men will be fall in her street and all the men of war will be cut off in that day say the lord of army . and i will have a fire light on the wall of damascus burn up the great house of ben hadad . about kedar and the kingdom of hazor which nebuchadrezzar king of babylon overcame . this be what the lord have say up ! go against kedar and make an attack on the child of the east . their tent and their flock they will take they will take away for themselves their curtain and all their vessel and their camel they will give a cry to them fear on every side . go in flight go wander far off take cover in deep place o people of hazor say the lord for nebuchadrezzar king of babylon have make a design against you he have a purpose against you in mind . up ! go against a nation which be live in comfort and without fear of danger say the lord without door or lock live by themselves . and their camel will be take from them by force and their great herd will come into the hand of their attacker those who have the end of their hair cut i will send in flight to all the wind and i will send their fate on them from every side say the lord . and hazor will be a hole for jackal a waste for ever no one will be live in it and no son of man will have a resting place there . the word of the lord which come to jeremiah the prophet about elam when zedekiah first become king of judah say this be what the lord of army have say see i will have the bow of elam their chief strength broken . and i will send on elam four wind from the four quarter of heaven drive them out to all those wind there will be no nation into which the wanderer from elam do not come . and i will let elam be break before their hater and before those who be make design against their life i will send evil on them even my burn wrath say the lord and i will send the sword after them till i have put an end to them i will put the seat of my power in elam and in elam i will put an end to king and ruler say the lord . but it will come about that in the last day i will let the fate of elam be change say the lord .the word which the lord say about babylon about the land of the chaldaean by jeremiah the prophet . give it out among the nation make it public and let the flag be lift up give the word and keep nothing back say babylon be take bel be put to shame merodach be break her image be put to shame her god be break . for out of the north a nation be come up against her which will make her land waste and unpeopled they be in flight man and beast be go . in those day and in that time say the lord the child of israel will come they and the child of judah together they will go on their way weeping and make prayer to the lord their god . they will be question about the way to zion with their face turn in it direction say come and be unite to the lord in an eternal agreement which will be keep in mind for ever . my people have be wander sheep their keeper have make them go out of the right way turn them loose on the mountain they have go from mountain to hill have no memory of their resting place . they have be attack by all those who come across them and their attacker say we be do no wrong because they have do evil against the lord in whom be righteousness against the lord the hope of their father . go in flight out of babylon go out of the land of the chaldaean and be like he goats before the flock . for see i be move and send up against babylon a band of great nation from the north country and they will put their army in position against her and from there she will be take their arrow will be like those of an expert man of war not one will come back without get it mark . and the wealth of chaldaea will come into the hand of her attacker all those who take her wealth will have enough say the lord . because you be glad because you be lift up with pride you waster of my heritage because you be play like a young cow put out to grass and you make a noise like strong horse your mother will be put to shame she who give you birth will be look down on see she will be the last of the nation a waste place a dry and unwatered land . because of the wrath of the lord no one will be live in it and it will be quite unpeopled everyone who go by babylon will be overcome with wonder and make sound of fear at all her punishment . put your army in position against babylon on every side all you bowmen let loose your arrow at her not keep any back for she have do evil against the lord . give a loud cry against her on every side she have give herself up her support be overturn her wall be break down for it be the payment take by the lord give her payment a she have do so do to her . let the planter of seed be cut off from babylon and everyone use the curve blade at the time of the grain cutting for fear of the cruel sword everyone will be turn to his people everyone will go in flight to his land . israel be a wander sheep the lion have be drive him away first he be attack by the king of assyria and now his bone have be break by nebuchadrezzar king of babylon . so this be what the lord of army the god of israel have say see i will send punishment on the king of babylon and on his land a i have give punishment to the king of assyria . and i will make israel come back to his rest place and he will get his food on carmel and bashan and have his desire in full measure on the hill of ephraim and in gilead . in those day and in that time say the lord when the evil do of israel be look for there will be nothing and in judah no sin will be see for i will have forgiveness for those whom i will keep safe . go up against the land of merathaim even against it and against the people of pekod put them to death and send destruction after them say the lord and do everything i have give you order to do . there be a sound of war in the land and of great destruction . how be the hammer of all the earth cut in two and break ! how have babylon become a waste among the nation ! i have put a net for you and you have be take o babylon without your knowledge you have be uncover and take because you be fight against the lord . from his store house the lord have take the instrument of his wrath for the lord the lord of army have a work to do in the land of the chaldaean . come up against her one and all let her store house be break open make her into a mass of stone give her to the curse till there be nothing of her to be see . put all her ox to the sword let them go down to death sorrow be theirs for their day have come the time of their punishment . the voice of those who be in flight who have get away safe from the land of babylon to give news in zion of punishment from the lord our god even payment for his temple . send for the archer to come together against babylon all the bowman put up your tent against her on every side let no one get away give her the reward of her work a she have do so do to her for she have be uplift in pride against the lord against the holy one of israel . for this cause her young men will be fall in her street and all her men of war will be cut off in that day say the lord . see i be against you o pride say the lord the lord of army for your day have come the time when i will send punishment on you . and pride will go with uncertain step and have a fall and there will be no one to come to his help and i will put a fire in his town burn up everything round about him . this be what the lord of army have say the child of israel and the child of judah be crush down together all those who take them prisoner keep them in a tight grip they will not let them go . their saviour be strong the lord of army be his name he will certainly take up their cause so that he may give rest to the earth and trouble to the people of babylon . a sword be on the chaldaean say the lord and on the people of babylon and on her ruler and on her wise men . a sword be on the men of pride and they will become foolish a sword be on her men of war and they will be break . a sword be on all the mixed people in her and they will become like woman a sword be on her store house and they will be take by her attacker . a sword be on her water dry them up for it be a land of image and their mind be fix on false god . for this reason the beast of the waste land with the wolf will make their hole there and the ostrich will be live in it never again will men be live there it will be unpeopled from generation to generation . a when sodom and gomorrah and their neighbouring town be overturn by god say the lord so no man will be live in it and no son of man will have a resting place there . see a people be come from the north a great nation and a number of king will be put in motion from the inmost part of the earth . bow and spear be in their hand they be cruel and have no mercy their voice be like the thunder of the sea and they go on horse everyone in his place like men go to the fight against you o daughter of babylon . the king of babylon have have news of them and his hand have become feeble trouble have come on him and pain like the pain of a woman in childbirth . see he will come up like a lion from the thick growth of jordan against the rest place of teman but i will suddenly make them go in flight from her and i will put over her the man of my selection for who be like me ? and who will put forward his cause against me ? and what keeper of sheep will keep his place before me ? so give ear to the decision of the lord which he have make against babylon and to his purpose design against the land of the chaldaean truly they will be pull away by the small of the flock truly he will make waste their field with them . at the cry babylon be take ! the earth be shake and the cry come to the ear of the nation .the lord have say see i will make a wind of destruction come up against babylon and against those who be live in chaldaea and i will send men to babylon to make her clean and get her land clear for in the day of trouble they will put up their tent against her on every side . against her the bow of the archer be bent and he put on his coat of metal have no mercy on her young men give all her army up to the curse . and the dead will be stretch out in the land of the chaldaean and the wounded in her street . for israel have not be give up or judah by his god by the lord of army for their land be full of sin against the holy one of israel . go in flight out of babylon so that every man may keep his life do not be cut off in her evil do for it be the time of the lord 's punishment he will give her her reward . babylon have be a gold cup in the hand of the lord which have make all the earth overcome with wine the nation have take of her wine and for this cause the nation have go off their head . sudden be the downfall of babylon and her destruction make cry of grief for her take sweet oil for her pain if it be possible for her to be make well . we would have make babylon well but she be not make well give her up and let u go everyone to his country for her punishment be stretch up to heaven and lift up even to the sky . the lord have make clear our righteousness come and let u give an account in zion of the work of the lord our god . make bright the arrow take up the body cover the lord have be move the spirit of the king of the medes because his design against babylon be it destruction for it be the punishment from the lord the payment for his temple . let the flag be lift up against the wall of babylon make the watch strong put the watchman in their place make ready a surprise attack for it be the lord 's purpose and he have do what he say about the people of babylon . o you whose live place be by the wide water whose store be great your end be come your evil profit be end . the lord of army have take an oath by himself say truly i will make you full with men a with locust and their voice will be loud against you . he have make the earth by his power he have make the world strong in it place by his wisdom and by his wise design the heaven have be stretch out at the sound of his voice there be a massing of the water in the heaven and he make the mist go up from the end of the earth he make the thunder flame for the rain and send out the wind from his store house . then every man become like a beast without knowledge every gold worker be put to shame by the image he have make for his metal image be deceit and there be no breath in them . they be nothing a work of error in the time of their punishment destruction will overtake them . the heritage of jacob be not like these for the maker of all thing be his heritage the lord of army be his name . you be my fight axe and my instrument of war with you the nation will be break with you kingdoms will be break with you the horse and the horseman will be break with you the war carriage and he who go in it will be break with you man and woman will be break with you the old man and the boy will be break with you the young man and the virgin will be break with you the keeper of sheep with his flock will be break and with you the farmer and his ox will be break and with you captain and ruler will be break . and i will give to babylon and to all the people of chaldaea their reward for all the evil they have do in zion before your eye say the lord . see i be against you say the lord o mountain of destruction cause the destruction of all the earth and my hand will be stretch out on you roll you down from the rock and make you a burn mountain . and they will not take from you a stone for the angle of a wall or the base of a building but you will be a waste place for ever say the lord . let a flag be lift up in the land let the horn be sound among the nation make the nation ready against her get the kingdom of ararat minni and ashkenaz together against her make ready a scribe against her let the horse come up against her like massed locust . make the nation ready for war against her the king of the medes and his ruler and all his captain and all the land under his rule . and the land be shake and in pain for the purpose of the lord be fix to make the land of babylon an unpeopled waste . babylon 's men of war have keep back from the fight wait in their strong place their strength have give way they have become like woman her house have be put on fire her lock be break . one man run will give word to another and one who go with news will be hand it on to another to give word to the king of babylon that his town have be take from every quarter and the way across the river have be take and the water hole ... burn with fire and the men of war be in the grip of fear . for these be the word of the lord of army the god of israel the daughter of babylon be like a grain floor when it be stamp down before long the time of her grain cutting will come . nebuchadrezzar king of babylon have make a meal of me violently crush me he have make me a vessel with nothing in it he have take me in his mouth like a dragon he have make his stomach full with my delicate flesh crush me with his teeth . may the violent thing do to me and my downfall come on babylon the daughter of zion will say and may my blood be on the people of chaldaea jerusalem will say . for this reason the lord have say see i will give support to your cause and take payment for what you have undergo i will make her sea dry and her fountain without water . and babylon will become a mass of broken wall a hole for jackal a cause of wonder and surprise without a living man in it . they will be cry out together like lion their voice will be like the voice of young lion . when they be heat i will make a feast for them and overcome them with wine so that they may become unconscious sleep an eternal sleep without awake say the lord . i will make them go down to death like lamb like he goats together . how be babylon take ! and the praise of all the earth surprise ! how have babylon become a cause of wonder among the nation ! the sea have come up over babylon she be cover with the mass of it wave . her town have become a waste a dry and unwatered land where no man have his living place and no son of man go by . and i will send punishment on bel in babylon and take out of his mouth what go into it no longer will the nation be flow together to him truly the wall of babylon will come down . my people go out from her and let every man get away safe from the burn wrath of the lord . so that your heart may not become feeble and full of fear because of the news which will go about in the land for a story will go about one year and after that in another year another story and violent act in the land ruler against ruler . for this cause truly the day be come when i will send punishment on the image of babylon and all her land will be sham and her dead will be fall down in her . and the heaven and the earth and everything in them will make a song of joy over babylon for those who make her waste will come from the north say the lord . a babylon have the dead of israel put to the sword so in babylon the dead of all the land will be stretch out . you who have get away safe from the sword go wait for nothing have the lord in memory when you be far away and keep jerusalem in mind . we be sham because bitter word have come to our ear our face be cover with shame for men from strange land have come into the holy place of the lord 's house . for this reason see the day be come say the lord when i will send punishment on her image and through all her land the wound will be cry out in pain . even if babylon be lift up to heaven even if she have the high place of her strength shut in with wall still i would send against her those who will make her waste say the lord . there be the sound of a cry from babylon and of a great destruction from the land of the chaldaean for the lord be make babylon waste and put an end to the great voice come out of her and her wave be thunder like great water their voice be sound loud for the waster have come on her even on babylon and her men of war be take their bow be break for the lord be a rewarding god and he will certainly give payment . and i will make her chief and her wise men her ruler and her captain and her men of war overcome with wine their sleep will be an eternal sleep without awake say the king the lord of army be his name . the lord of army have say the wide wall of babylon will be completely uncovered and her high doorway will be burn with fire so peoples keep on work for nothing and the weariness of nation come to an end in the smoke . the order which jeremiah the prophet give to seraiah the son of neriah the son of mahseiah when he go with zedekiah the king of judah to babylon in the fourth year of his rule . now seraiah be the chief controller of the house . and jeremiah put in a book all the evil which be to come on babylon . and jeremiah say to seraiah when you come to babylon see that you give them all these word and after read them say o lord you have say about this place that it be to be cut off so that no one will be live in it not a man or a beast but it will be unpeopled for ever . and it will be that when you have come to an end of read this book you be to have a stone fix to it and have it drop into the euphrates and you be to say so babylon will go down never to be lift up again because of the evil which i will send on her and weariness will overcome them . so far these be the word of jeremiah .zedekiah be twenty one year old when he become king he be king for eleven year in jerusalem and his mother 's name be hamutal the daughter of jeremiah of libnah . and he do evil in the eye of the lord a jehoiakim have do . and because of the wrath of the lord this come about in jerusalem and judah till he have send them away from before him and zedekiah take up arm against the king of babylon . and in the ninth year of his rule on the tenth day of the tenth month nebuchadrezzar king of babylon come against jerusalem with all his army and take up his position before it build earthworks all round it . so the town be shut in by their force till the eleventh year of king zedekiah . in the fourth month on the ninth day of the month the store of food in the town be almost go so that there be no food for the people of the land . then an opening be make in the wall of the town and all the men of war go in flight out of the town by night through the doorway between the two wall which be by the king 's garden now the chaldaean be station round the town and they go by the way of the arabah . and the chaldaean army go after king zedekiah and overtake him on the other side of jericho and all his army go in flight from him in every direction . then they make the king a prisoner and take him up to the king of babylon to riblah in the land of hamath to be judge . and the king of babylon put the son of zedekiah to death before his eye and he put to death all the ruler of judah in riblah . and he put out zedekiah 's eye and the king of babylon chain him in iron band take him to babylon and put him in prison till the day of his death . now in the fifth month on the tenth day of the month in the nineteenth year of king nebuchadrezzar king of babylon nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men a servant of the king of babylon come into jerusalem . and he have the house of the lord and the king 's house and all the house of jerusalem even every great house burn with fire and the wall round jerusalem be break down by the chaldaean army which be with the captain . then nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take away a prisoner the rest of the people who be still in the town and those who have give themselves up to the king of babylon and the rest of the workman . but nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men let the poor of the land go on living there to take care of the vine and the field . and the brass pillar which be in the house of the lord and the wheeled base and the great brass water vessel in the house of the lord be break up by the chaldaean who take all the brass away to babylon . and the pot and the spade and the scissors for the light and the spoon and all the brass vessel use in the lord 's house they take away . and the cup and the fire tray and the basin and the pot and the support for the light and the spoon and the wide basins the gold of the gold vessel and the silver of the silver vessels the captain of the arm men take away . the two pillar the great water vessel and the twelve brass ox which be under it and the ten wheel base which king solomon have make for the house of the lord the brass of all these vessel be without weight . and a for the pillar one pillar be eighteen cubit high and twelve cubit measure all round and it be as thick a a man 's hand it be hollow . and there be a crown of brass on it the crown be five cubit high circle with a network and apples all of brass and the second pillar have the same . there be ninety six apple on the outside the number of apple all round the network be a hundred . and the captain of the arm men take seraiah the chief priest and zephaniah the second priest and the three door keeper and from the town he take the unsexed servant who be over the men of war and seven of the king 's near friend who be in the town and the scribe of the captain of the army who be responsible for get the people of the land together in military order and sixty men of the people of the land who be in the town . these nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take with him to the king of babylon at riblah . and the king of babylon put them to death at riblah in the land of hamath . so judah be take prisoner away from his land . these be the people whom nebuchadrezzar take away prisoner in the seventh year three thousand and twenty three jew and in the eighteenth year of nebuchadrezzar he take away a prisoner from jerusalem eight hundred and thirty two person in the twenty third year of nebuchadrezzar nebuzaradan the captain of the arm men take away a prisoner seven hundred and forty five of the jew all the person be four thousand and six hundred . and in the thirty seventh year after jehoiachin king of judah have be take prisoner in the twelfth month on the twenty fifth day of the month evil merodach king of babylon in the first year after he become king take jehoiachin king of judah out of prison . and he say kind word to him and put his seat high than the seat of the other king who be with him in babylon . and his prison clothing be change and he be a guest at the king 's table every day for the rest of his life . and for his food the king give him a regular amount every day till the day of his death for the rest of his life .see her seat by herself the town which be full of people ! she who be great among the nation have become like a widow ! she who be a princess among the country have come under the yoke of forced work ! she be sorrow bitterly in the night and her face be wet with weep among all her lover she have no comforter all her friend have be false to her they have become her hater . judah have be take away a a prisoner because of trouble and hard work her living place be among the nation there be no rest for her all her attacker have overtake her in a narrow place . the way of zion be sad because no one come to the holy meeting all her doorway be make waste her priest be breathe out sorrow her virgin be troubled and it be bitter for her . those who be against her have become the head everything go well for her hater for the lord have send sorrow on her because of the great number of her sin her young child have go away a prisoner before the attacker . and all her glory have go from the daughter of zion her ruler have become like hart with no place for food and they have go in flight without strength before the attacker . jerusalem keep in mind in the day of her sorrow and of her wandering all the desire thing which be hers in day go by when her people come into the power of her hater and she have no helper her attacker saw their desire effect on her and make sport of her destruction . great be the sin of jerusalem for this cause she have become an unclean thing all those who give her honour be look down on her because they have see her shame now truly breathe out grief she be turn back . in her skirt be her unclean way she give no thought to her end and her fall have be a wonder she have no comforter see her sorrow o lord for the attacker be lift up . the hand of her hater be stretch out over all her desired thing for she have see that the nation have come into her holy place about whom you give order that they be not to come into the meeting of your people . breathe out grief all her people be look for bread they have give their desired thing for food to give them life see o lord and take note for she have become a thing of shame . come to me all you who go by ! keep your eye on me and see if there be any pain like the pain of my wound which the lord have send on me in the day of his burn wrath . from on high he have send fire into my bone and it have overcome them his net be stretch out for my foot i be turn back by him he have make me waste and feeble all the day . a watch be keep on my sin they be join together by his hand they have come on to my neck he have make my strength give way the lord have give me up into the hand of those against whom i have no power . the lord have make sport of all my men of war in me he have get men together against me to send destruction on my young men the virgin daughter of judah have be crush like grape under the foot of the lord . for these thing i be weep my eye be stream with water because the comforter who might give me new life be far from me my child be make waste because the hater be strong . zion 's hand be outstretched she have no comforter the lord have give order to the attacker of jacob round about him jerusalem have become like an unclean thing among them . the lord be upright for i have go against his order give ear now all you people and see my pain my virgin and my young men have go away a prisoner . i send for my lover but they be false to me my priest and my responsible men be breathe their last breath in the town while they be look for food to give them new life . see o lord for i be in trouble the inmost part of my body be deeply move my heart be turn in me for i have be uncontrolled outside the child be put to the sword and in the house there be death . give ear to the voice of my grief i have no comforter all my hater have news of my trouble they be glad because you have do it let the day of fate come when they will be like me . let all their evil do come before you do to them a you have do to me for all my sin for loud be the sound of my grief and the strength of my heart be go .how have the daughter of zion be cover with a cloud by the lord in his wrath ! he have send down from heaven to earth the glory of israel and have not keep in memory the rest place of his foot in the day of his wrath . the lord have give up to destruction all the living place of jacob without pity pull down in his wrath the strong place of the daughter of judah stretch out on the earth the wounded even her king and her ruler . in his burning wrath every horn of israel have be cut off his right hand have be turn back before the attacker he have put a fire in jacob cause destruction round about . his bow have be bend for the attack he have take his place with his hand ready in his hate he have put to death all who be please to the eye on the tent of the daughter of zion he have let loose his passion like fire . the lord have become like one fight against her send destruction on israel he have send destruction on all her great house make waste his strong place increase the grief and the sorrow of the daughter of judah . and he have violently take away his tent a from a garden he have make waste his meeting place the lord have take away the memory of feast and sabbath in zion and in the passion of his wrath he be against king and priest . the lord have give up his altar and have be turn in hate from his holy place he have give up into the hand of the attacker the wall of her great house their voice have be loud in the house of the lord a in the day of a holy meeting . it be the lord 's purpose to make waste the wall of the daughter of zion his line have be stretch out he have not keep back his hand from destruction he have send sorrow on tower and wall they have become feeble together . her door have go down into the earth he have send destruction on her lock her king and her prince be among the nation where the law be not even her prophet have have no vision from the lord . the responsible men of the daughter of zion be seat on the earth without a word they have put dust on their head they be clothe in haircloth the head of the virgin of jerusalem be bent down to the earth . my eye be waste with weep the inmost part of my body be deeply move my inner part be drain out on the earth for the destruction of the daughter of my people because of the young child and baby at the breast who be fall without strength in the open square of the town . they say to their mother where be grain and wine ? when they be fall like the wound in the open square of the town when their life be drain out on their mother 's breast . what example be i to give you ? what comparison be i to make for you o daughter of jerusalem ? what be i to make equal to you so that i may give you comfort o virgin daughter of zion ? for your destruction be great like the sea who be able to make you well ? the vision which your prophet have see for you be false and foolish they have not make clear to you your sin so that your fate might be change but they have see for you false word drive you away . all who go by make a noise with their hand at you they make hiss shake their head at the daughter of jerusalem and say be this the town which be the crown of everything beautiful the joy of all the earth ? all your hater be open their mouth wide against you make hiss and whistle through their teeth they say we have make a meal of her certainly this be the day we have be look for it have come we have see it . the lord have do that which be his purpose he have put into force the order which he give in the day which be past pull down without pity he have make your hater glad over you lift up the horn of those who be against you . let your cry go up to the lord o wall of the daughter of zion let your weep be flow down like a stream day and night give yourself no rest let not your eye keep back the drop of sorrow . up ! give cry in the night at the starting of the night watch let your heart be flow out like water before the face of the lord lift up your hand to him for the life of your young child who be fall down feeble for need of food at the top of every street . look ! o lord see to whom you have do this ! be the woman to take a their food the fruit of their body the child who be fold in their arm ? be the priest and the prophet to be put to death in the holy place of the lord ? the young men and the old be stretch on the earth in the street my virgin and my young men have be put to the sword you have send death on them in the day of your wrath cause death without pity . a in the day of a holy meeting you have make fear come round me on every side and no one get away or be keep safe in the day of the lord 's wrath those who be fold in my arm whom i take care of have be send to their destruction by my hater .i be the man who have see trouble by the rod of his wrath . by him i have be make to go in the dark where there be no light . truly against me his hand have be turn again and again all the day . my flesh and my skin have be use up by him and my bone broken . he have put up a wall against me shut me in with bitter sorrow . he have keep me in dark place like those who have be long dead . he have put a wall round me so that i be not able to go out he have make great the weight of my chain . even when i send up a cry for help he keep my prayer shut out . he have put up a wall of cut stone about my way he have make my road twist . he be like a bear waiting for me like a lion in secret place . by him my way have be turn on one side and i have be pull in bit he have make me waste . with his bow bent he have make me the mark for his arrow . he have let loose his arrow into the inmost part of my body . i have become the sport of all the people i be their song all the day . he have make my life nothing but pain he have give me the bitter root in full measure . by him my teeth have be break with crushed stone and i be bent low in the dust . my soul be send far away from peace i have no more memory of good . and i say my strength be cut off and my hope from the lord . keep in mind my trouble and my wander the bitter root and the poison . my soul still keep the memory of them and be bent down in me . this i keep in mind and because of this i have hope . it be through the lord 's love that we have not come to destruction because his mercy have no limit . they be new every morning great be your good faith . i say to myself the lord be my heritage and because of this i will have hope in him . the lord be good to those who be wait for him to the soul which be look for him . it be good to go on hoping and quietly wait for the salvation of the lord . it be good for a man to undergo the yoke when he be young . let him be seat by himself say nothing because he have put it on him . let him put his mouth in the dust if by chance there may be hope . let his face be turn to him who give him blow let him be full of shame . for the lord do not give a man up for ever . for though he send grief still he will have pity in the full measure of his love . for he have no pleasure in trouble and cause grief to the child of men . in a man 's crush under his foot all the prisoner of the earth in his turn away the right of a man before the face of the most high . in his do wrong to a man in his cause the lord have no pleasure . who be able to say a thing and give effect to it if it have not be order by the lord ? do not evil and good come from the mouth of the most high ? what protest may a living man make even a man about the punishment of his sin ? let u make search and put our way to the test turn again to the lord lift up our heart with our hand to god in the heaven . we have do wrong and go against your law we have not have your forgiveness . cover yourself with wrath you have go after u cut u off without pity cover yourself with a cloud so that prayer may not get through . you have make u like waste and that for which there be no use among the people . the mouth of all our hater be open wide against u . fear and deep water have come on u waste and destruction . river of water be run down from my eye for the destruction of the daughter of my people . my eye be stream without stop they have no rest till the lord 's eye be turn on me till he see my trouble from heaven . the lord be unkind to my soul more than all the daughter of my town . they who be against me without cause have go hard after me a if i be a bird they have put an end to my life in the prison stone me with stone . water be flow over my head i say i be cut off . i be make prayer to your name o lord out of the low prison . my voice come to you let not your ear be shut to my breathing to my cry . you come near in the day when i make my prayer to you you say have no fear . o lord you have take up the cause of my soul you have make my life safe . o lord you have see my wrong be judge in my cause . you have see all the evil reward they have send on me and all their design against me . their bitter word have come to your ear o lord and all their design against me the lip of those who come up against me and their thought against me all the day . take note of them when they be seat and when they get up i be their song . you will give them their reward o lord answer to the work of their hand . you will let their heart be cover over with your curse on them . you will go after them in wrath and put an end to them from under the heaven of the lord .how dark have the gold become ! how change the best gold ! the stone of the holy place be drop out at the top of every street . the valued son of zion whose price be the best gold be look on a vessel of earth the work of the hand of the potter ! even the beast of the waste land have full breast they give milk to their young one the daughter of my people have become cruel like the ostrich in the waste land . the tongue of the child at the breast be fix to the roof of his mouth for need of drink the young child be cry out for bread and no man give it to them . those who be use to feast on delicate food be waste in the street those who a child be dress in purple be stretch out on the dust . for the punishment of the daughter of my people be great than the punishment of sodom which be overturn suddenly without any hand fall on her . her holy one be clean than snow they be white than milk their body be red than coral their form be a the sapphire their face be black than night in the street no one have knowledge of them their skin be hang on their bone they be dry they have become like wood . those who have be put to the sword be good off than those whose death be cause by need of food for these come to death slowly burn up like the fruit of the field . the hand of kind hearted woman have be boil their child they be their food in the destruction of the daughter of my people . the lord have give full effect to his passion he have let loose his burn wrath he have make a fire in zion cause the destruction of it base . to the king of the earth and to all the people of the world it do not seem possible that the attacker and the hater would go into the door of jerusalem . it be because of the sin of her prophet and the evil do of her priest by whom the blood of the upright have be drain out in her . they be wander like blind men in the street they be make unclean with blood so that their robe may not be touch by men . away ! unclean ! they be cry out to them away ! away ! let there be no touch when they go away in flight and wander men say among the nation there be no further rest place for them . the face of the lord have send them in all direction he will no longer take care of them they have no respect for the priest they give no honour to the old men . our eye be still waste away in look for our false help we have be watch for a nation unable to give salvation . they go after our step so that we may not go in our street our end be near our day be number for our end have come . those who go after u be quick than the eagle of the heaven drive u before them on the mountain wait secretly for u in the waste land . our breath of life he on whom the holy oil be put be take in their hole of whom we say under his shade we will be live among the nation . have joy and be glad o daughter of edom living in the land of uz the cup will be give to you in your turn and you will be overcome with wine and your shame will be see . the punishment of your evil do be complete o daughter of zion never again will he take you away a a prisoner he will give you the reward of your evil do o daughter of edom he will let your sin be uncover .keep in mind o lord what have come to u take note and see our shame . our heritage be give up to men of strange land our house to those who be not our countryman . we be child without father our mother be like widow . we give money for a drink of water we get our wood for a price . our attacker be on our neck overcome with weariness we have no rest . we have give our hand to the egyptian and to the assyrian so that we might have enough bread . our father be sinner and be dead and the weight of their evil do be on u . servant be rule over u and there be no one to make u free from their hand . we put our life in danger to get our bread because of the sword of the waste land . our skin be heat like an oven because of our burn heat from need of food . they take by force the woman in zion the virgin in the town of judah . their hand put prince to death by hang the face of old men be not honour . the young men be crush the grain and the boy be fall under the wood . the old men be no longer seat in the doorway and the music of the young men have come to an end . the joy of our heart be end our dancing be change into sorrow . the crown have be take from our head sorrow be ours for we be sinner . because of this our heart be feeble for these thing our eye be dark because of the mountain of zion which be a waste jackal go over it . you o lord be seat a king for ever the seat of your power be eternal . why have we go from your memory for ever ? why have you be turn away from u for so long ? make u come back to you o lord and let u be turn make our day new again a in the past . but you have quite give u up you be full of wrath against u .now it come about in the thirtieth year in the fourth month on the fifth day of the month while i be by the river chebar among those who have be make prisoner that the heaven be make open and i saw vision of god . on the fifth day of the month in the fifth year after king jehoiachin have be make a prisoner the word of the lord come to me ezekiel the priest the son of buzi in the land of the chaldaean by the river chebar and the hand of the lord be on me there . and look i saw a storm wind come out of the north a great cloud with flame of fire come after one another and a bright light shin round about it and in the heart of it be something colour like electrum . and in the heart of it be the form of four living being . and this be what they be like they have the form of a man . and every one have four face and every one of them have four wing . and their foot be straight foot and the under side of their foot be like the foot of ox and they be shin like polished brass . and they have the hand of a man under their wing the four of them have face on their four side . they go without turn every one go straight forward . a for the form of their face they have the face of a man and the four of them have the face of a lion on the right side and the four of them have the face of an ox on the left side and the four of them have the face of an eagle . and their wing be separate at the top two of the wing of every one be join one to another and two be cover their body . every one of them go straight forward wherever the spirit be to go they go they go on without turn . and between the living being it be like burn coal of fire a if flame be go one after the other between the living being and the fire be bright and out of the fire go thunder flame . and the living being go out and come back as quickly a a thunder flame . now while i be look at the four living being i saw one wheel on the earth by the side of the living being for the four of them . the form of the wheel and their work be like a beryl the four of them have the same form and design and they be like a wheel inside a wheel . the four of them go straight forward without turn to one side . and i saw that they have edge and their edge even of the four be full of eye round about . and when the living being go on the wheel go by their side and when the living being be lift up from the earth the wheel be lift up . wherever the spirit be to go they go and the wheel be lift up by their side for the spirit of the living being be in the wheel . when these go on the others go and when these come to rest the others come to rest and when these be lift up from the earth the wheel be lift up by their side for the spirit of the living being be in the wheel . and over the head of the living being there be the form of an arch look like ice stretch out over their head on high . under the arch their wing be straight one stretch out to another every one have two wing cover their body on this side and two cover their body on that side . and when they go the sound of their wing be like the sound of great water to my ear like the voice of the ruler of all a sound like the rushing of an army when they come to rest they let down their wing . and there be a voice from the top of the arch which be over their head when they come to rest they let down their wing . and on the top of the arch which be over their head be the form of a king 's seat like a sapphire stone and on the form of the seat be the form of a man seat on it on high . and i saw it colour like electrum with the look of fire in it and round it go up from what seem to be the middle of his body and go down from what seem to be the middle of his body i saw what be like fire and there be a bright light shin round him . like the bow in the cloud on a day of rain so be the light shin round him . and this be what the glory of the lord be like . and when i saw it i go down on my face and the voice of one talk come to my ear .and he say to me son of man get up on your foot so that i may say word to you . and at his word the spirit come into me and put me on my foot and his voice come to my ear . and he say to me son of man i be send you to the child of israel to an uncontrolled nation which have go against me they and their father have be sinner against me even to this very day . and the child be hard and stiff hearted i be send you to them and you be to say to them these be the word of the lord . and they if they give ear to you or if they do not give ear for they be an uncontrolled people will see that there have be a prophet among them . and you son of man have no fear of them or of their word even if sharp thorn be round you and you be live among scorpion have no fear of their word and do not be overcome by their look for they be an uncontrolled people . and you be to give them my word if they give ear to you or if they do not for they be uncontrolled . but you son of man give ear to what i say to you and do not be uncontrolled like that uncontrolled people let your mouth be open and take what i give you . and look i saw a hand stretch out to me and i saw the roll of a book in it and he put it open before me and it have write on the front and on the back word of grief and sorrow and trouble be record in it .and he say to me son of man take this roll for your food and go and say my word to the child of israel . and on my open my mouth he make me take the roll a food . and he say to me son of man let your stomach make a meal of it and let your inside be full of this roll which i be give you . then i take it and it be sweet a honey in my mouth . and he say to me son of man go now to the child of israel and say my word to them . for you be not send to a people whose talk be strange and whose language be hard but to the child of israel not to a number of people whose talk be strange and whose language be hard and whose word be not clear to you . truly if i send you to them they would give ear to you . but the child of israel will not give ear to you for they have no mind to give ear to me for all the child of israel have a hard brow and a stiff heart . see i have make your face hard against their face and your brow hard against their brow . like a diamond harder than rock i have make your brow have no fear of them and do not be overcome by their look for they be an uncontrolled people . then he say to me son of man take into your heart all my word which i be about to say to you and let your ear be open to them . and go now to those who have be take away a prisoner to the child of your people and say to them this be what the lord have say if they give ear or if they do not . then i be lift up by the wind and at my back the sound of a great rushing come to my ear when the glory of the lord be lift up from his place . and there be the sound of the wing of the living being touch one another and the sound of the wheel at their side the sound of a great rushing . and the wind lift me up take me away and i go in the heat of my spirit and the hand of the lord be strong on me . then i come to those who have be take away a prisoner who be at telabib by the river chebar and i be seat among them full of wonder for seven day . and at the end of seven day the word of the lord come to me say son of man i have make you a watchman for the child of israel so give ear to the word of my mouth and give them word from me of their danger . when i say to the evil doer death will certainly be your fate and you give him no word of it and say nothing to make clear to the evil doer the danger of his evil way so that he may be safe that same evil man will come to death in his evil do but i will make you responsible for his blood . but if you give the evil doer word of his danger and he be not turn from his sin or from his evil way death will overtake him in his evil do but your life will be safe . again when an upright man turn away from his righteousness do evil and i put a cause of fall in his way death will overtake him because you have give him no word of his danger death will overtake him in his evil do and there will be no memory of the upright act which he have do but i will make you responsible for his blood . but if you say to the upright man that he be not to do evil he will certainly keep his life because he take note of your word and your life will be safe . and the hand of the lord be on me there and he say get up and go out into the valley and there i will have talk with you . then i get up and go out into the valley and i saw the glory of the lord rest there a i have see it by the river chebar and i go down on my face . then the spirit come into me and put me on my foot and he have talk with me and say to me go and keep yourself shut up inside your house . but see o son of man i will put band on you prisoning you in them and you will not go out among them and i will make your tongue fix to the roof of your mouth so that you have no voice and may not make protest to them for they be an uncontrolled people . but when i have talk with you i will make your mouth open and you be to say to them this be what the lord have say let the hearer give ear and a for him who will not let him keep his ear shut for they be an uncontrolled people .and you son of man take a back and put it before you and on it make a picture of a town even jerusalem . and make an attack on it shut it in build strong place against it and make high an earthwork against it and put up tent against it place engine all round it for smash down it wall . and take a flat iron plate and put it for a wall of iron between you and the town and let your face be turn to it and it will be shut in and you will make an attack on it . this will be a sign to the child of israel . then stretch yourself out on your left side take the sin of the child of israel on yourself for as long a you be stretch out so long will the sin of the child of israel be on you . for i have have the year of their sin measure for you by a number of day even three hundred and ninety day and you will take on yourself the sin of the child of israel . and when these day be end turn on your right side you be to take on yourself the sin of the child of judah forty day a day for a year i have have it fix for you . and let your face be turn to where jerusalem be shut in with your arm uncover and be a prophet against it . and see i will put band on you and you will be stretch out without turn from one side to the other till the day of your attack be end . and take for yourself wheat and barley and different sort of grain and put them in one vessel and make bread for yourself from them all the day when you be stretch on your side it will be your food . and you be to take your food by weight twenty shekel a day you be to take it at regular time . and you be to take water by measure the sixth part of a hin you be to take it at regular time . and let your food be barley cake cook it before their eye with the waste which come out of a man . and the lord say even so the child of israel will have unclean bread for their food among the nation where i be drive them . then i say ah lord ! see my soul have never be unclean and i have never take a my food anything which have come to a natural death or have be break by beast from the time when i be young even till now no disgusting flesh have ever come into my mouth . then he say to me see i have give you cow 's waste in place of man 's waste and you will make your bread ready on it . and he say to me son of man see i will take away from jerusalem her necessary bread they will take their bread by weight and with care measure out their drinking water with fear and wonder so that they may be in need of bread and water and be wonder at one another waste away in their sin .and you son of man take a sharp sword use it like a haircutter 's blade and make it go over your head and the hair of your chin and take scale for separate the hair by weight . you be to have a third part burn with fire inside the town when the day of the attack be end and a third part you be to take and give blow with the sword round about it and give a third part for the wind to take away and let loose a sword after them . and take from them a small number of hair fold them in your skirt . and again take some of these and put them in the fire burn them up in the fire and say to all the child of israel this be what the lord have say this be jerusalem i have put her among the nation and country be round her on every side and she have go against my order by do evil more than the nation and against my rule more than the country round her for they have give up my order and a for my rule they have not go in the way of them . for this cause the lord have say because you have be more uncontrolled than the nation round about you and have not be guide by my rule or keep my order but have keep the order of the nation round about you for this cause the lord have say see i even i be against you and i will be judge among you before the eye of the nation . and i will do in you what i have not do and will not do again because of all your disgusting way . for this cause father will take their son for food among you and son will make a meal of their father and i will be judge among you and all the rest of you i will send away to every wind . for this cause by my life say the lord because you have make my holy place unclean with all your hat thing and all your disgusting way you will become disgust to me my eye will have no mercy and i will have no pity . a third of you will come to death from disease waste away among you through need of food a third will be put to the sword round about you and a third i will send away to every wind let loose a sword after them . so my wrath will be complete and my passion will come to rest on them and they will be certain that i the lord have give the word of decision when my wrath against them be complete . and i will make you a waste and a name of shame among the nation round about you in the eye of everyone who go by . and you will be a name of shame and a cause of bitter word an example and a wonder to the nation round about you when i give effect to my judging among you in wrath and in passion and in burn protest i the lord have say it when i send on you the evil arrow of disease cause destruction which i will send to put an end to you and further i will take away your necessary food . and i will send on you need of food and evil beast and they will be a cause of loss to you and disease and violent death will go through you and i will send the sword on you i the lord have say it .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to the mountain of israel and be a prophet to them and say you mountain of israel give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say to the mountain and the hill to the waterway and the valley see i even i be send on you a sword for the destruction of your high place . and your altar will be make waste and your sun image will be break and i will have your dead men place before your image . and i will put the dead body of the child of israel in front of their image send your bone in all direction about your altar . in all your living place the town will become broken wall and the high place make waste so that your altar may be break down and make waste and your image break and end and so that your sun image may be cut down and your work rub out . and the dead will be fall down among you and you will be certain that i be the lord . but still i will keep a small band safe from the sword among the nation when you be sent wandering among the country . and those of you who be keep safe will have me in mind among the nation where they have be take away a prisoner how i send punishment on their heart which be untrue to me and on their eye which be turn to their false god and they will be full of hate for themselves because of the evil thing which they have do in all their disgusting way . and they will be certain that i be the lord not for nothing do i say that i would do this evil to them . this be what the lord have say give blow with your hand stamp with your foot and say o sorrow ! because of all the evil and disgust way of the child of israel for death will overtake them by the sword and through need of food and by disease . he who be far away will come to his death by disease he who be near will be put to the sword he who be shut up will come to his death through need of food and i will give full effect to my passion against them . and you will be certain that i be the lord when their dead men be stretch among their image round about their altar on every high hill on all the top of the mountain and under every branching tree and under every thick oak tree the place where they make sweet smell to all their image . and my hand will be stretch out against them make the land waste and unpeopled from the waste land to riblah through all their living place and they will be certain that i be the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say and you son of man say this be what the lord have say to the land of israel an end have come the end have come on the four quarter of the land . now the end have come on you and i will send my wrath on you judge you for your way i will send punishment on you for all your disgusting act . my eye will not have mercy on you and i will have no pity but i will send the punishment of your way on you and your disgusting work will be among you and you will be certain that i be the lord . this be what the lord have say an evil even one evil see it be come . an end have come the end have come see it be come on you . the crowning time have come on you o people of the land the time have come the day be near the day will not be slow in come it will not keep back . now in a little time i will let loose my passion on you and give full effect to my wrath against you judge you for your way and send punishment on you for all your disgusting work . my eye will not have mercy and i will have no pity i will send on you the punishment of your way and your disgusting work will be among you and you will see that i be the lord who give punishment . see the day see it be come the crowning time have go out the twisted way be flower pride have put out bud . violent behaviour have be lift up into a rod of evil it will not be slow in come it will not keep back . the time have come the day be near let not him who give a price for good be glad or him who get the price have sorrow for the trader will not go back to the thing for which he have his price even while he be still living and he who have give a price for good will not get them for my wrath be on all of them . outside be the sword and inside disease and need of food he who be in the open country will be put to the sword he who be in the town will come to his end through need of food and disease . and those of them who get away safely will go and be in the secret place like the dove of the valley all of them will come to death every one in his sin . all hand will be feeble and all knee without strength like water . and they will put haircloth round them and deep fear will be cover them and shame will be on all face and the hair go from all their head . they will put out their silver into the street and their gold will be a an unclean thing their silver and their gold will not be able to keep them safe in the day of the wrath of the lord they will not get their desire or have food for their need because it have be the cause of their fall into sin . a for their beautiful ornament they have put it on high and have make the image of their disgusting and hated thing in it for this cause i have make it an unclean thing to them . and i will give it into the hand of men from strange land who will take it by force and to the evil doer of the earth to have for themselves and they will make it unholy . and my face will be turn away from them and they will make my secret place unholy violent men will go into it and make it unholy . make the chain for the land be full of crime of blood and the town be full of violent act . for this reason i will send the bad of the nation and they will take their house for themselves i will make the pride of their strength come to an end and their holy place will be make unclean . shake fear be come and they will be look for peace and there will be no peace . destruction will come on destruction and one story after another and the vision of the prophet will be sham and knowledge of the law will come to an end among the priest and wisdom among the old . the king will give himself up to sorrow and the ruler will be clothe with wonder and the hand of the people of the land will be trouble i will give them punishment for their way judge them a it be right for them to be judge and they will be certain that i be the lord .now in the sixth year in the sixth month on the fifth day of the month when i be in my house and the responsible men of judah be seat before me the hand of the lord come on me there . and look i saw a form like fire from the middle of his body and down there be fire and up from the middle of his body a sort of shin like electrum . and he put out the form of a hand and take me by the hair of my head and the wind lift me up between the earth and the heaven take me in the vision of god to jerusalem to the way into the inner door face to the north where be the seat of the image of envy . and i saw the glory of the lord there a in the vision which i saw in the valley . then he say to me son of man now let your eye be lift up in the direction of the north and on look in the direction of the north to the north of the doorway of the altar i saw this image of envy by the way in . and he say to me son of man do you see what they be do ? even the very disgusting thing which the child of israel be do here cause me to go far away from my holy place ? but you will see other most disgusting thing . and he take me to the door of the open place and look i saw a hole in the wall . and he say to me son of man make a hole in the wall and after make a hole in the wall i saw a door . and he say to me go in and see the evil and disgust thing which they be do here . so i go in and saw and there every sort of living thing which go flat on the earth and unclean beast and all the image of the child of israel be picture round about on the wall . and before them seventy of the responsible men of the child of israel have take their place every man with a vessel for burn perfume in his hand and in the middle of them be jaazaniah the son of shaphan and a cloud of smoke go up from the burning perfume . and he say to me son of man have you see what the responsible men of the child of israel do in the dark every man in his room of pictured image ? for they say the lord do not see u the lord have go away from the land . then he say to me you will see even more disgusting thing which they do . then he take me to the door of the way into the lord 's house look to the north and there woman be seat weep for tammuz . then he say to me have you see this o son of man ? you will see even more disgusting thing than these . and he take me into the inner square of the lord 's house and at the door of the temple of the lord between the covered way and the altar there be about twenty five men with their back turn to the temple of the lord and their face turn to the east and they be worship the sun turn to the east . then he say to me have you see this o son of man ? be it a small thing to the child of judah that they do the disgusting thing which they be do here ? for they have make the land full of violent behaviour make me angry again and again and see they put the branch to my nose . for this reason i will let loose my wrath my eye will not have mercy and i will have no pity .then cry out in my hearing in a loud voice he say let the overseer of the town come near every man arm . and six men come from the way of the high doorway look to the north every man with his axe in his hand and one man among them be clothe in linen with a writer 's inkpot at his side . and they go in and take their place by the brass altar . and the glory of the god of israel have go up from the wing one on which it be rest to the doorstep of the house . and cry out to the man clothe in linen who have the writer 's inkpot at his side the lord say to him go through the town through the middle of jerusalem and put a mark on the brow of the men who be sorrow and cry for all the disgust thing which be do in it . and to these he say in my hearing go through the town after him use your ax do not let your eye have mercy and have no pity give up to destruction old men and young men and virgin little child and woman but do not come near any man who have the mark on him and make a start at my holy place . so they make a start with the old men who be before the house . and he say to them make the house unclean make the open place full of dead go forward and send destruction on the town . now while they be do so and i be untouched i go down on my face and cry out i say ah lord ! will you give all the rest of israel to destruction in let loose your wrath on jerusalem ? then he say to me the sin of the child of israel and judah be very very great and the land be full of blood and the town full of evil way for they say the lord have go away from the land and the lord do not see . and a for me my eye will not have mercy and i will have no pity but i will send the punishment of their way on their head . then the man clothe in linen who have the inkpot at his side come back and say i have do what you give me order to do .then look i saw that on the arch which be over the head of the winged one there be see over them what seem like a sapphire stone have the form of a king 's seat . and he say to the man clothe in linen go in between the wheel under the winged one and get your two hand full of burn coal from between the winged one and send them in a shower over the town . and he go in before my eye . now the wing one be station on the right side of the house when the man go in and the inner square be full of the cloud . and the glory of the lord go up from the wing one and come to rest over the doorstep of the house and the house be full of the cloud and the open square be full of the shining of the lord 's glory . and the sound of the wing of the winged one be clear even in the outer square like the voice of the ruler of all . and when he give order to the man clothe in linen say take fire from between the wheel from between the winged one then he go in and take his place at the side of a wheel . and stretch out his hand to the fire which be between the winged one he take some of it and go out . and i saw the form of a man 's hand among the winged one under their wing . and look i saw four wheel by the side of the winged one one wheel by the side of a winged one and another wheel by the side of another and the wheel be like the colour of a beryl stone to the eye . in form the four of them be all the same they seem like a wheel inside a wheel . when they be move they go on their four side without turn they go after the head in the direction in which it be look they go without turn . and the edge of the four wheel be full of eye round about . a for the wheel they be name in my hear the circling wheel . and every one have four face the first face be the face of a winged one and the second be the face of a man and the third the face of a lion and the fourth the face of an eagle . and the winged one go up on high this be the living be which i saw by the river chebar . and when the wing one go the wheel go by their side and when their wing be lift to take them up from the earth the wheel be not turn from their side . when they be at rest in their place these be at rest when they be lift up these go up with them for the spirit of life be in them . then the glory of the lord go out from the doorstep of the house and come to rest over the winged one . and the winged one lift up their wing go up from the earth before my eye with the wheel by their side and they come to rest at the east doorway of the lord 's house and the glory of the god of israel be over them on high . this be the living be which i saw under the god of israel by the river chebar and it be clear to me that they be the winged one . every one have four face and every one have four wing and hand like a man 's hand be under their wing . a for the form of their face they be the face whose form i saw by the river chebar when they go every one of them go straight forward .and the wind lift me up take me to the east doorway of the lord 's house look to the east and at the door i saw twenty five men and among them i saw jaazaniah the son of azzur and pelatiah the son of benaiah ruler of the people . then he say to me son of man these be the men who be design evil who be teach evil way in this town who say this be not the time for building house this town be the cooking pot and we be the flesh . for this cause be a prophet against them be a prophet o son of man . and the spirit of the lord come on me and he say to me say these be the word of the lord this be what you have say o child of israel what come into your mind be clear to me . you have make great the number of your dead in this town you have make it street full of dead men . for this reason the lord have say your dead whom you have put down in it street they be the flesh and this town be the cooking pot but i will make you come out from inside it . you have be fear the sword and i will send the sword on you say the lord . i will make you come out from inside the town and will give you up into the hand of men from other land and will be judge among you . you will come to your death by the sword and i will be your judge in the land of israel and you will be certain that i be the lord . this town will not be your cook pot and you will not be the flesh inside it i will be your judge at the limit of the land of israel and you will be certain that i be the lord for you have not be guide by my rule or give effect to my order but you have be live by the order of the nation round about you . now while i be say these thing death come to pelatiah the son of benaiah . then fall down on my face and cry out with a loud voice i say ah lord ! will you put an end to all the rest of israel ? and the word of the lord come to me say son of man your countryman your relation and all the child of israel all of them be those to whom the people of jerusalem have say go far from the lord this land be give to u for a heritage for this reason say this be what the lord have say though i have have them move far off among the nation and though i have send them wander among the country still i have be a safe place for them for a little time in the country where they have come . then say this be what the lord have say i will get you together from the people and make you come out of the country where you have be send in flight and i will give you the land of israel . and they will come there and take away all the hat and disgust thing from it . and i will give them a new heart and i will put a new spirit in them and i will take the heart of stone out of their flesh and give them a heart of flesh so that they may be guide by my rule and keep my order and do them and they will be to me a people and i will be to them a god . but a for those whose heart go after their hated and disgusting thing i will send on their head the punishment of their way say the lord . then the wing of the winged one be lift up and the wheel be by their side and the glory of the god of israel be over them on high . and the glory of the lord go up from inside the town and come to rest on the mountain on the east side of the town . and the wind lift me up take me in the vision of god into chaldaea to those who have be take away a prisoner . so the vision which i have see go away from me . then i give an account to those who have be take prisoner of all the thing which the lord have make me see .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man you be live among an uncontrolled people who have eye to see but see not and ear for hear but they do not give ear for they be an uncontrolled people . and you o son of man by day before their eye get ready the vessel of one who be take away and go away from your place to another place before their eye it may be that they will see though they be an uncontrolled people . by day before their eye take out your vessel like those of one who be take away and go out in the evening before their eye like those who be take away a prisoner . make a hole in the wall before their eye and go out through it . and before their eye take your good on your back and go out in the dark go with your face cover for i have make you a sign to the child of israel . and i do a i be order i take out my vessel by day like those of one who be take away and in the evening i make a hole through the wall with a tent pin and in the dark i go out take my thing on my back before their eye . and in the morning the word of the lord come to me say son of man have not israel the uncontrolled people say to you what be you do ? you be to say to them this be what the lord have say this word have to do with the ruler in jerusalem and all the child of israel in it . say i be your sign a i have do so will it be do to them they will go away a prisoner . and the ruler who be among them will take his good on his back in the dark and go out he will make a hole in the wall through which to go out he will have his face cover so that he may not be see . and my net will be stretch out on him and he will be take in my cord and i will take him to babylon to the land of the chaldaean but he will not see it and there death will come to him . and all his helper round about him and all his army i will send in flight to every wind and i will let loose a sword after them . and they will be certain that i be the lord when i send them in flight among the nation drive them out through the country . but a small number of them i will keep from the sword from the need of food and from disease so that they may make clear all their disgusting way among the nation where they come and they will be certain that i be the lord . then the word of the lord come to me say son of man take your food with shake fear and your water with trouble and care and say to the people of the land this be what the lord have say about the people of jerusalem and the land of israel they will take their food with care and their drink with wonder so that all the wealth of their land may be take from it because of the violent way of the people live in it . and the peopled town will be make waste and the land will become a wonder and you will be certain that i be the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man what be this say which you have about the land of israel the time be long and every vision come to nothing ? for this cause say to them this be what the lord have say i have make this say come to an end and it will no longer be use a a common say in israel but say to them the day be near and the effect of every vision . for there will be no more false vision or smooth use of secret art in israel . for i be the lord i will say the word and what i say i will do it will not be put off for in your day o uncontrolled people i will say the word and do it say the lord . again the word of the lord come to me say son of man see the child of israel say the vision which he see be for the day which be a long way off and his word be of time still far away . say to them then this be what the lord have say not one of my word will be put off any longer but what i say i will do say the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man be a prophet against the prophet of israel and say to those prophet whose word be the invention of their heart give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say a curse on the foolish prophet who go after the spirit which be in them and have see nothing ! o israel your prophet have be like jackal in the waste place . you have not go up into the broken place or make up the wall for the child of israel to take your place in the fight in the day of the lord . they have see vision without substance and make use of secret art who say the lord have say and the lord have not send them hop that the word would have effect . have you not see a vision without substance and have you not falsely make use of secret art when you say the lord have say though i have say nothing ? so this be what the lord have say because your word be without substance and your vision be false see i be against you say the lord . and my hand will be against the prophet who see vision without substance and who make false use of secret art they will not be in the secret of my people and they will not be record in the list of the child of israel and they will not come into the land of israel and it will be clear to you that i be the lord . because even because they have be guide my people into error say peace when there be no peace and in the building of a division wall they put whitewash on it say to those who put whitewash on it there will be an overflow shower and you o ice drop will come rain down and it will be break in two by the storm wind . and when the wall have come down will they not say to you where be the whitewash which you put on it ? for this reason the lord have say i will have it break in two by a storm wind in my passion and there will be an overflow shower in my wrath and you o ice drop will come rain angrily down . so i will let the wall which you be cover with whitewash be break down i will have it level to the earth so that it base be uncover it will come down and destruction will come on you with it and it will be clear to you that i be the lord . so i will let loose my passion on the wall in full measure and on those who put whitewash on it and i will say to you where be the wall and where be those who put whitewash on it ? even the prophet of israel who say word to jerusalem who see vision of peace for her when there be no peace say the lord . and you son of man let your face be turn against the daughter of your people who be act the part of prophet at their pleasure be a prophet against them and say this be what the lord have say a curse be on the woman who be stitch band on all arm and put veil on the head of those of every size so that they may go after soul ! will you go after the soul of my people and keep yourselves safe from death ? and you have put me to shame among my people for a little barley and some bit of bread send death on soul for whom there be no cause of death and keep those soul live who have no right to life by the false word you say to my people who give ear to what be false . for this cause the lord have say see i be against your band with which you go after soul and i will violently take them off their arm and i will let loose the soul even the soul whom you go after freely . and i will have your veil violently part in two and will make my people free from your hand and they will no longer be in your power for you to go after them and you will be certain that i be the lord . because with your false word you have give pain to the heart of the upright man when i have not make him sad in order to make strong the hand of the evil doer so that he may not be turn from his evil way and get life for this cause you will see no more foolish vision or make false use of secret art and i will make my people free from your power and you will be certain that i be the lord .then certain of the responsible men of israel come to me and take their seat before me . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man these men have take their false god into their heart and put before their face the sin which be the cause of their fall be i to give ear when they come to me for direction ? for this cause say to them these be the word of the lord every man of israel who have take his false god into his heart and put before his face the sin which be the cause of his fall and come to the prophet i the lord will give him an answer by myself in agreement with the number of his false god so a to take the child of israel in the thought of their heart because they have become strange to me through their false god . for this cause say to the child of israel these be the word of the lord come back and give up your false god and let your face be turn from your disgust thing . when any one of the men of israel or of those from other land who be live in israel who have become strange to me and take his false god into his heart and put before his face the sin which be the cause of his fall come to the prophet to get direction from me i the lord will give him an answer by myself and my face will be turn against that man and i will make him a sign and a common say cut him off from among my people and you will be certain that i be the lord . and if the prophet trick by deceit say anything it be i the lord by whom he have be trick and i will put out my hand against him and he will be cut off from among my people israel . and the punishment of their sin will be on them the sin of the prophet will be the same a the sin of him who go to him for direction so that the child of israel may no longer go wander away from me or make themselves unclean with all their wrongdoing but they will be my people and i will be their god say the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man when a land sin against me do wrong and my hand be stretch out against it and the support of it bread be break and i make it short of food cut off man and beast from it even if these three men noah daniel and job be in it only themselves would they keep safe by their righteousness say the lord . or if i send evil beast through the land cause destruction and make it waste so that no man may go through because of the beast even if these three men be in it by my life say the lord they would not keep safe their son or daughter but only themselves and the land would be make waste . or if i send a sword against that land and say sword go through the land cut off from it man and beast even if these three men be in it by my life say the lord they would not keep safe their son or daughter but only themselves . or if i send disease into that land let loose my wrath on it in blood cut off from it man and beast even if noah daniel and job be in it by my life say the lord they would not keep son or daughter safe only themselves would they keep safe through their righteousness . for this be what the lord have say how much more when i send my four bitter punishment on jerusalem the sword and need of food and evil beast and disease cut off from it man and beast ? but truly there will still be a small band who will be safe even son and daughter and they will come out to you and you will see their way and their doings and you will be comfort about the evil which i have send on jerusalem even about everything i have send on it . they will give you comfort when you see their way and their doings and you will be certain that not for nothing have i do all the thing i have do in it say the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man what be the vine tree more than any branching tree which be among the tree of the wood ? will it wood be use for any work ? do men make of it a pin for hang any vessel on ? see it be put into the fire for burn the fire have make a meal of it two end and the middle part of it be burn be it good for any work ? truly before it be cut down it be not use for any purpose how much less when the fire have make a meal of it and it be burn will it be make into anything ? for this cause the lord have say like the vine tree among the tree of the wood which i have give to the fire for burn so will i give the people of jerusalem . and my face will be turn against them and though they have come out of the fire they will be burn up by it and it will be clear to you that i be the lord when my face be turn against them . and i will make the land a waste because they have do evil say the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man make clear to jerusalem her disgust way and say this be what the lord have say to jerusalem your start and your birth be from the land of the canaanite an amorite be your father and your mother be a hittite . a for your birth on the day of your birth your cord be not cut and you be not wash in water to make you clean you be not salt or fold in linen band . no eye have pity on you to do any of these thing to you or to be kind to you but you be put out into the open country because your life be hat at the time of your birth . and when i go past you and saw you stretch out in your blood i say to you though you be stretch out in your blood have life and be increase in number like the bud of the field and you be increase and become great and you come to the time of love your breast be form and your hair be long but you be uncover and without clothing . now when i go past you look at you i saw that your time be the time of love and i put my skirt over you cover your unclothed body and i give you my oath and make an agreement with you say the lord and you become mine . then i have you wash with water wash away all your blood and rub you with oil . and i have you clothe with needlework and put leather shoe on your foot fold fair linen about you and cover you with silk . and i make you fair with ornament and put jewel on your hand and a chain on your neck . and i put a ring in your nose and ear ring in your ear and a beautiful crown on your head . so you be make beautiful with gold and silver and your clothing be of the best linen and silk and needlework your food be the best meal and honey and oil and you be very beautiful . you be so beautiful that the story of you go out into all nation you be completely beautiful because of my glory which i have put on you say the lord . but you put your faith in the fact that you be beautiful act like a loose woman because you be widely talk of and offer your cheap love to everyone who go by whoever it might be . and you take your robe and make high place for yourself ornament with every colour act like a loose woman on them without shame or fear . and you take the fair jewel my silver and gold which i have give to you and make for yourself male image act like a loose woman with them and you take your robe of needlework for their clothing and put my oil and my perfume before them . and my bread which i give you the best meal and oil and honey which i give you for your food you put it before them for a sweet smell say the lord . and you take your son and your daughter whom i have by you offer even these to them to be their food . be your loose behaviour so small a thing that you put my child to death and give them up to go through the fire to them ? and in all your disgusting and false behaviour you have no memory of your early day when you be uncover and without clothing stretch out in your blood . and it come about after all your evil do say the lord that you make for yourself an arched room in every open place . you put up your high place at the top of every street and make the grace of your form a disgusting thing open your foot to everyone who go by increase your loose way . and you go with the egyptian your neighbour great of flesh increase your loose way move me to wrath . now then my hand be stretch out against you cut down your fixed amount and i have give you up to the desire of your hater the daughter of the philistine who be sham by your loose way . and you go with the assyrian because of your desire which be without measure you be act like a loose woman with them and still you have not enough . and you go on in your loose way even as far a the land of chaldaea and still you have not enough . how feeble be your heart say the lord see that you do all these thing the work of a loose and overrule woman for you have make your arched room at the top of every street and your high place in every open place though you be not like a loose woman in get together your payment . the untrue wife who take strange lover in place of her husband ! they give payment to all loose woman but you give reward to your lover offer them payment so that they may come to you on every side for your cheap love . and in your loose behaviour you be different from other woman for no one go after you to make love to you and because you give payment and no payment be give to you in this you be different from them . for this cause o loose woman give ear to the voice of the lord this be what the lord have say because your unclean behaviour be let loose and your body uncover in your loose way with your lover and with your disgusting image and for the blood of your child which you give to them for this cause i will get together all your lover with whom you have take your pleasure and all those to whom you have give your love with all those who be hat by you i will even make them come together against you on every side and i will have you uncover before them so that they may see your shame . and you will be judge by me a woman be judge who have be untrue to their husband and have take life and i will let loose against you passion and bitter feeling . i will give you into their hand and your arched room will be overturn and your high place break down they will take your clothing off you and take away your fair jewel and when they have do you will be uncover and sham . and they will get together a meeting against you stone you with stone and wound you with their sword . and they will have you burn with fire send punishment on you before the eye of great number of woman and i will put an end to your loose way and you will no longer give payment . and the heat of my wrath against you will have an end and my bitter feeling will be turn away from you and i will be quiet and will be angry no longer . because you have not keep in mind the day when you be young but have be trouble me with all these thing for this reason i will make the punishment of your way come on your head say the lord because you have do this evil thing in addition to all your disgusting act . see in every common say about you it will be say a the mother be so be her daughter . you be the daughter of your mother whose soul be turn in disgust from her husband and her child and you be the sister of your sister who be turn in disgust from their husband and their child your mother be a hittite and your father an amorite . your old sister be samaria live at your left hand she and her daughter and your young sister live at your right hand be sodom and her daughter . still you have not go in their way or do the disgusting thing which they have do but a if that be only a little thing you have go deeper in evil than they in all your way . by my life say the lord sodom your sister never do she or her daughter what you and your daughter have do . truly this be the sin of your sister sodom pride a full measure of food and the comfort of wealth in peace be see in her and her daughter and she give no help to the poor or to those in need . they be full of pride and do what be disgust to me and so i take them away a you have see . and samaria have not do half your sin but you have make the number of your disgust act great than theirs make your sister seem more upright than you by all the disgust thing which you have do . and you yourself will be put to shame in that you have give the decision for your sister through your sin which be more disgusting than theirs they be more upright than you truly you will be sham and make low for you have make your sister seem upright . and i will let their fate be change the fate of sodom and her daughter and the fate of samaria and her daughter and your fate with theirs . so that you will be sham and make low because of all you have do when i have mercy on you . and your sister sodom and her daughter will go back to their first condition and samaria and her daughter will go back to their first condition and you and your daughter will go back to your first condition . be not your sister sodom an oath in your mouth in the day of your pride before your shame be uncover ? now you have become like her a word of shame to the daughter of edom and all who be round about you the daughter of the philistine who put shame on you round about . the reward of your evil design and your disgusting way have come on you say the lord . for this be what the lord have say i will do to you a you have do you who put the oath on one side have let the agreement be break . but still i will keep in mind the agreement make with you in the day when you be young and i will make with you an eternal agreement . then at the memory of your way you will be overcome with shame when i take your sister the old and the young and give them to you for daughter but not by your agreement . and i will make my agreement with you and you will be certain that i be the lord so that at the memory of these thing you may be at a loss never open your mouth because of your shame when you have my forgiveness for all you have do say the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man give out a dark say and make a comparison for the child of israel and say this be what the lord have say a great eagle with great wing full of long feather of different colour come to lebanon and take the top of the cedar bite off the high of it young branch he take it to the land of canaan and put it in a town of trader . and he take some of the seed of the land plant it in fertile earth place it by great water he put it in like a willow tree . and it growth go on and it become a vine low and widely stretch whose branch be turn to him and it root be under him so it become a vine put out branch and young leaf . and there be another eagle with great wing and thick feather and now this vine push out it root to him send out it branch in his direction from the bed where it be plant so that he might give it water . he have it plant in a good field by great water so that it might put out branch and have fruit and be a strong vine . say this be what the lord have say will it do well ? will he not have it root pull up and it branch cut off so that all it young leaf may become dry and it may be pull up by it root ? and if it be plant will it do well ? will it not become quite dry at the touch of the east wind dry up in the bed where it be plant ? then the word of the lord come to me say say now to this uncontrolled people be these thing not clear to you ? say to them see the king of babylon come to jerusalem and take it king and it ruler away with him to babylon and he take one of the son of the king and make an agreement with him and he put him under an oath and take away the great men of the land so that the kingdom might be make low with no power of lift itself up but might keep his agreement to be his servant . but he go against his authority in send representative to egypt to get from them horse and a great army . will he do well ? will he be safe who do such thing ? if the agreement be break will he be safe ? by my life say the lord truly in the place of the king who make him king whose oath he put on one side and let his agreement with him be break even in babylon he will come to his death . and pharaoh with his strong army and great force will be no help to him in the war when they put up earthwork and make strong wall for the cut off of life for he put his oath on one side in let the agreement be break and though he have give his hand to it he do all these thing he will not get away safe . and so the lord have say by my life truly for my oath which he put on one side and my agreement which have be break i will send punishment on his head . my net will be stretch out over him and he will be take in my cord and i will send him to babylon and there i will be his judge for the wrong which he have do against me . all his best fight men will be put to the sword and the rest will be send away to every wind and you will be certain that i the lord have say it . this be what the lord have say far i will take the high top of the cedar and put it in the earth cut off from the high of his young branch a soft one i will have it plant on a high and great mountain it will be plant on the high mountain of israel it will put out branch and have fruit and be a fair cedar under it all bird of every sort will make their living place rest in the shade of it branch . and it will be clear to all the tree of the field that i the lord have make low the high tree and make high the low tree dry up the green tree and make the dry tree full of growth i the lord have say it and have do it .the word of the lord come to me again say why do you make use of this say about the land of israel the father have be taste bitter grape and the child 's teeth be on edge ? by my life say the lord you will no longer have this say in israel . see all soul be mine a the soul of the father so the soul of the son be mine death will be the fate of the sinner 's soul . but if a man be upright live rightly and do righteousness and have not take flesh with the blood for food or give worship to the image of the child of israel if he have not have connection with his neighbour 's wife or come near to a woman at the time when she be unclean and have do no wrong to any but have give back to the debtor what be his and have take no one 's good by force and have give food to him who be in need of it and clothe to him who be without it and have not give his money out at interest or take great profit and turn his hand from evil do have keep faith between man and man and have be guide by my rule and have keep my law and do them he be upright life will certainly be his say the lord . if he have a son who be a thief a taker of life who do any of these thing who have take flesh with the blood a food and have have connection with his neighbour 's wife have do wrong to the poor and to him who be in need and take property by force and have not give back to one in his debt what be his and have give worship to image and have do disgust thing and have give out his money at interest and take great profit he will certainly not go on living he have do all these disgust thing death will certainly be his fate his blood will be on him . now if he have a son who see all his father 's sin which he have do and in fear do not do the same who have not take the flesh with the blood for food or give worship to the image of the child of israel and have not have connection with his neighbour 's wife or do wrong to any or take anything from one in his debt or take good by force but have give food to him who be in need of it and clothe to him who be without it who have keep his hand from evil do and have not take interest or great profit who have do my order and be guide by my rule he will certainly not be put to death for the evil do of his father life will certainly be his . a for his father because he be cruel take good by force and do what be not good among his people truly death will overtake him in his evil do . but you say why do not the son undergo punishment for the evil do of the father ? when the son have do what be order and right and have keep my rule and do them life will certainly be his . the soul which do sin will be put to death the son will not be make responsible for the evil do of the father or the father for the evil do of the son the righteousness of the upright will be on himself and the evil do of the evil doer on himself . but if the evil doer turn away from all the sin which he have do keep my rule and do what be order and right life will certainly be his death will not be his fate . not one of the sin which he have do will be keep in memory against him in the righteousness which he have do he will have life . have i any pleasure in the death of the evil doer ? say the lord be i not pleased if he be turn from his way so that he may have life ? but when the upright man turn away from his righteousness do evil like all the disgust thing which the evil man do will he have life ? not one of his upright act will be keep in memory in the wrong which he have do and in his sin death will overtake him . but you say the way of the lord be not equal . give ear now o child of israel be my way not equal ? be not your way unequal ? when the upright man turn away from his righteousness do evil death will overtake him in the evil which he have do death will overtake him . again when the evil doer turn away from the evil he have do do what be order and right he will have life for his soul . because he have fear and be turn away from all the wrong which he have do life will certainly be his death will not be his fate . but still the child of israel say the way of the lord be not equal . o child of israel be my way not equal ? be not your way unequal ? for this cause i will be your judge o child of israel judging every man by his way say the lord . come back and be turn from all your sin so that they may not be the cause of your fall into evil . put away all your evil do in which you have do sin and make for yourselves a new heart and a new spirit why be you desire death o child of israel ? for i have no pleasure in the death of him on whom death come say the lord be turn back then and have life .take up now a song of grief for the ruler of israel and say what be your mother ? like a she lion among lion stretch out among the young lion she give food to her little one . and one of her little one come to growth under her care and become a young lion learning to go after beast for his food and he take men for his meat . and the nation have news of him he be take in the hole they have make and pull him with hook they take him into the land of egypt . now when she saw that her hope be make foolish and go she take another of her little one and make him into a young lion . and he go up and down among the lion and become a young lion learning to go after beast for his food and he take men for his meat . and he send destruction on their widow and make waste their town and the land and everything in it become waste because of the loud sound of his voice . then the nation come against him from the kingdom round about their net be stretch over him and he be take in the hole they have make . they make him a prisoner with hook and take him to the king of babylon they put him in the strong place so that his voice might be sound no longer on the mountain of israel . your mother be in comparison like a vine plant by the water she be fertile and full of branch because of the great water . and she have a strong rod for a rod of authority for the ruler and it become tall among the cloud and it be see lift up among the number of it branch . but she be uproot in burn wrath and make low on the earth the east wind come dry her up and her branch be break off her strong rod become dry the fire make a meal of it . and now she be plant in the waste land in a dry and unwatered country . and fire have go out from her rod cause the destruction of her branch so that there be no strong rod in her to be the ruler 's rod of authority . this be a song of grief and it be for a song of grief .now it come about in the seventh year in the fifth month on the tenth day of the month that certain of the responsible men of israel come to get direction from the lord and be seat before me . then the word of the lord come to me say son of man say to the responsible men of israel this be what the lord have say have you come to get direction from me ? by my life say the lord you will get no direction from me . will you be their judge o son of man will you be their judge ? make clear to them the disgust way of their father and say to them this be what the lord have say in the day when i take israel for myself when i make an oath to the seed of the family of jacob and i give them knowledge of myself in the land of egypt say to them with an oath i be the lord your god in that day i give my oath to take them out of the land of egypt into a land which i have be search out for them a land flow with milk and honey the glory of all land and i say to them let every man among you put away the disgusting thing to which his eye be turn and do not make yourselves unclean with the image of egypt i be the lord your god . but they would not be control by me and do not give ear to me they do not put away the disgust thing to which their eye be turn or give up the image of egypt then i say i would let loose my passion on them to give full effect to my wrath against them in the land of egypt . and i be act for the honour of my name so that it might not be make unclean before the eye of the nation among whom they be and before whose eye i give them knowledge of myself by take them out of the land of egypt . so i make them go out of the land of egypt and take them into the waste land . and i give them my rule and make clear to them my order which if a man keep them will be life to him . and further i give them my sabbath to be a sign between me and them so that it might be clear that i who make them holy be the lord . but the child of israel would not be control by me in the waste land they be not guide by my rule and they be turn away from my order which if a man do them will be life to him and they have no respect for my sabbath then i say that i would let loose my passion on them in the waste land and put an end to them . and i be act for the honour of my name so that it might not be make unclean in the eye of the nation before whose eye i have take them out . and further i give my oath to them in the waste land that i would not take them into the land which i have give them a land flow with milk and honey the glory of all land because they be turn away from my order and be not guide by my rule and have no respect for my sabbath for their heart go after their image . but still my eye have pity on them and i keep them from destruction and do not put an end to them completely in the waste land . and i say to their child in the waste land do not be guide by the rule of your father or keep their order or make yourselves unclean with their image i be the lord your god be guide by my rule and keep my order and do them and keep my sabbaths holy and they will be a sign between me and you so that it may be clear to you that i be the lord your god . but the child would not be control by me they be not guide by my rule and they do not keep and do my order which if a man do them will be life to him and they have no respect for my sabbath then i say i would let loose my passion on them to give full effect to my wrath against them in the waste land . and i be act for the honour of my name so that it might not be make unclean in the eye of the nation before whose eye i have take them out . further i give my oath to them in the waste land that i would send them wander among the nation drive them out among the country because they have not do my order but have be turn away from my rule and have not give respect to my sabbath and their eye be turn to the image of their father . and further i give them rule which be not good and order in which there be no life for them i make them unclean in the offering they give cause them to make every first child go through the fire so that i might put an end to them . for this cause son of man say to the child of israel this be what the lord have say in this your father have further put shame on my name by do wrong against me . for when i have take them into the land which i make an oath to give to them then they saw every high hill and every branching tree and make their offering there move me to wrath by their offering and there the sweet smell of their offering go up and their drink offering be drain out . then i say to them what be this high place where you go to no purpose ? and it be name bamah to this day . for this cause say to the child of israel this be what the lord have say be you make yourselves unclean a your father do ? be you be untrue to me by go after their disgusting work ? and when you give your offering cause your son to go through the fire you make yourselves unclean with all your image to this day and will you come to me for direction o child of israel ? by my life say the lord you will get no direction from me . and that which come into your mind will never take place when you say we will be like the nation like the family of the country servant of wood and stone by my life say the lord truly with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with burn wrath let loose i will be king over you and i will take you out from the people and get you together out of the country where you be wander with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with burn wrath let loose and i will take you into the waste land of the people and there i will take up the cause with you face to face . a i take up the cause with your father in the waste land of the land of egypt so will i take up the cause with you say the lord . and i will make you go under the rod and will make you small in number clear out from among you all those who be uncontrolled and who be sin against me i will take them out of the land where they be live but they will not come into the land of israel and you will be certain that i be the lord . a for you o child of israel the lord have say let every man completely put away his image and give ear to me and let my holy name no longer be sham by your offering and your image . for in my holy mountain in the high mountain of israel say the lord there all the child of israel all of them will be my servant in the land there i will take pleasure in them and there i will be worship with your offering and the first fruit of the thing you give and with all your holy thing . i will take pleasure in you a in a sweet smell when i take you out from the people and get you together from the country where you have be send in flight and i will make myself holy in you before the eye of the nation . and you will be certain that i be the lord when i take you into the land of israel into the country which i make an oath to give to your father . and there at the memory of your way and of all the thing you do to make yourselves unclean you will have bitter hate for yourselves because of all the evil thing you have do . and you will be certain that i be the lord when i take you in hand for the honour of my name and not for your evil way or your unclean doings o child of israel say the lord . then the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to the south let your word be drop to the south and be a prophet against the woodland of the south and say to the woodland of the south give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say see i will have a fire light in you for the destruction of every green tree in you and every dry tree the flaming flame will not be put out and all face from the south to the north will be burn by it . and all flesh will see that i the lord have have it light it will not be put out . then i say ah lord ! they say of me be he not a maker of story ?and the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to jerusalem let your word be drop in the direction of her holy place and be a prophet against the land of israel and say to the land of israel these be the word of the lord see i be against you and i will take my sword out of it cover cut off from you the upright and the evil . because i be go to have the upright and the evil cut off from you for this cause my sword will go out from it cover against all flesh from the south to the north and all flesh will see that i the lord have take my sword out of it cover and it will never go back . make sound of grief son of man with body bent and a bitter heart make sound of grief before their eye . and when they say to you why be you make sound of grief ? then say because of the news for it be come and every heart will become soft and all hand will be feeble and every spirit will be burn low and all knee will be turn to water see it be come and it will be do say the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man say a a prophet these be the word of the lord say a sword a sword which have be make sharp and polish it have be make sharp to give death it be polish so that it may be like a thunder flame ... and i have give it to the polisher so that it may be take in the hand he have make the sword sharp he have have it polish to put it into the hand of him who give death . give loud cry and make sound of grief o son of man for it have come on my people it have come on all the ruler of israel fear of the sword have come on my people for this cause give sign of grief . ... so then son of man be a prophet and put your hand together with a loud sound and give two blow with the sword and even three it be the sword of those who be wound even the sword of the wound the great sword which go round about them . in order that hearts may become soft and the number of those who be fall may be increase i have send death by the sword against all their door you be make like a flame you be polish for death . be point to the right to the leave wherever your edge be order . and i will put my hand together with a loud sound and i will let my wrath have rest i the lord have say it . and the word of the lord come to me again say and you son of man have two way mark out so that the sword of the king of babylon may come let the two of them come out of one land and let there be a pillar at the top of the road put a pillar at the top of the road for the sword to come to rabbah in the land of the child of ammon and to judah and to jerusalem in the middle of her . for the king of babylon take his place at the parting of the way at the top of the two road to make use of secret art shake the arrow this way and that he put question to the image of his god he take note of the inner part of dead beast . at his right hand be the fate of jerusalem to give order for destruction to send up the war cry to put engine of war against the door lift up earthwork build wall . and this answer give by secret art will seem false to those who have give their oath and have let them be break but he will keep the memory of evil do so that they may be take . for this cause the lord have say because you have make your evil do come to mind by the uncovering of your wrongdoing cause your sin to be see in all your evil doings because you have come to mind you will be take in them . and you o evil one wound to death o ruler of israel whose day have come in the time of the last punishment this be what the lord have say take away the holy head dress take off the crown this will not be again let that which be low be lift up and that which be high be make low . i will let it be overturn overturned overturn this will not be again till he come whose right it be and i will give it to him . and you son of man say a a prophet this be what the lord have say about the child of ammon and about their shame say a sword even a sword let loose polish for death to make it shin so that it may be like a flame your vision be to no purpose your use of secret art give a false answer to put it on the neck of evil doer who be wound to death whose day have come in the time of the last punishment . go back into your cover . in the place where you be make in the land from which you be take i will be your judge . and i will let loose my burn passion on you breathe out on you the fire of my wrath and i will give you up into the hand of men like beast train to destruction . you will be food for the fire your blood will be drain out in the land there will be no more memory of you for i the lord have say it .and the word of the lord come to me say and you son of man will you be a judge will you be a judge of the town of blood ? then make clear to her all her disgusting way . and you be to say this be what the lord have say a town cause blood to be drain out in her street so that her time may come and make image in her to make her unclean ! you be responsible for the blood drain out by you and you be unclean through the image which you have make and you have make your day come near and the time of your judging have come for this cause i have make you a name of shame to the nation and a cause of laugh to all country . those who be near and those who be far from you will make sport of you your name be unclean you be full of sound of fear . see the ruler of israel every one in his family have be cause death in you . in you they have have no respect for father and mother in you they have be cruel to the man from a strange land in you they have do wrong to the child without a father and to the widow . you have make little of my holy thing and have make my sabbaths unclean . in you there be men who say evil of others cause death in you they have take the flesh with the blood for food in your street they have put evil design into effect . in you they have let the shame of their father be see in you they have do wrong to a woman at the time when she be unclean . and in you one man have do what be disgust with his neighbour 's wife and another have make his daughter in law unclean and another have do wrong to his sister his father 's daughter . in you they have take reward a the price of blood you have take interest and great profit and you have take away your neighbour ' good by force and have not keep me in mind say the lord . see then i have make my hand come together in wrath against your taking of good by force and against the blood which have be flow in you . will your heart be high or your hand strong in the day when i take you in hand ? i the lord have say it and will do it . and i will send you in flight among the nation and wander among the country and i will completely take away out of you everything which be unclean . and you will be make low before the eye of the nation and it will be clear to you that i be the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man the child of israel have become like the poor sort of waste metal to me they be all silver and brass and tin and iron and lead mixed with waste . for this cause the lord have say because you have all become waste metal see i will get you together inside jerusalem . a they put silver and brass and iron and lead and tin together inside the oven heat up the fire on it to make it soft so will i get you together in my wrath and in my passion and heat the fire with my breath will make you soft . yes i will take you breathe on you the fire of my wrath and you will become soft in it . a silver becomes soft in the oven so you will become soft in it and you will be certain that i the lord have let loose my passion on you . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man say to her you be a land on which no rain or thunderstorm have come in the day of wrath . her ruler in her be like a loud voice lion violently take his food they have make a meal of soul they have take wealth and value property they have make great the number of widow in her . her priest have be act violently against my law they have make my holy thing unclean they have make no division between what be holy and what be common and they have not make it clear that the unclean be different from the clean and their eye have be shut to my sabbath and i be not honour among them . her ruler in her be like wolf violently take their food put men to death and cause the destruction of soul so that they may get their profit . and her prophet have be use whitewash see foolish vision and make false use of secret art say this be what the lord have say when the lord have say nothing . the people of the land have be act cruelly take men 's good by force they have be hard on the poor and those in need and have do wrong to the man from a strange land . and i be look for a man among them who would make up the wall and take his station in the broken place before me for the land so that i might not send destruction on it but there be no one . and i let loose my passion on them and have put an end to them in the fire of my wrath i have make the punishment of their way come on their head say the lord .the word of the lord come to me again say son of man there be two woman daughter of one mother they be act like loose woman in egypt when they be young their behaviour be loose there their breast be crush even the point of their young breast be crush . their name be oholah the old and oholibah her sister and they become mine and give birth to son and daughter . a for their name samaria be oholah and jerusalem oholibah . and oholah be untrue to me when she be mine she be full of desire for her lover even for the assyrian her neighbour who be clothe in blue captain and ruler all of them young men to be desire horseman seat on horse . and she give her unclean love to them all of them the noble men of assyria and she make herself unclean with the image of all who be desire by her . and she have not give up her loose way from the time when she be in egypt for when she be young they be her lover and by them her young breast be crush and they let loose on her their unclean desire . for this cause i give her up into the hand of her lover into the hand of the assyrian on whom her desire be fix . by these her shame be uncover they take her son and daughter and put her to death with the sword and she become a cause of wonder to woman for they give her the punishment which be right . and her sister oholibah saw this but her desire be even more unmeasured and her loose behaviour be bad than that of her sister . she be full of desire for the assyrian captain and ruler her neighbour clothe in blue horseman go on horse all of them young men to be desire . and i saw that she have become unclean the two of them go the same way . and her loose behaviour become bad for she saw men picture on a wall picture of the chaldaean paint in bright red with band round their body and with head dress hang round their head all of them look like ruler like the babylonian the land of whose birth be chaldaea . and when she saw them she be full of desire for them and send servant to them in chaldaea . and the babylonian come to her into the bed of love and make her unclean with their loose desire and she become unclean with them and her soul be turn from them . so her loose behaviour be clearly see and her shame uncovered then my soul be turn from her a it have be turn from her sister . but still she go on the more with her loose behaviour keep in mind the early day when she have be a loose woman in the land of egypt . and she be full of desire for her lover whose flesh be like the flesh of ass and whose seed be like the seed of horse . and she make the memory of the loose way of her early year come back to mind when her young breast be crush by the egyptian . for this cause o oholibah this be what the lord have say see i will make your lover come up against you even those from whom your soul be turn away in disgust and i will make them come up against you on every side the babylonian and all the chaldaean pekod and shoa and koa and all the assyrian with them young men to be desire captain and ruler all of them and chiefs her neighbour all of them on horseback . and they will come against you from the north on horseback with war carriage and a great band of people they will put themselves in order against you with breastplate and body cover and metal head dress round about you and i will make them your judge and they will give their decision against you a seem right to them . and my bitter feeling will be work against you and they will take you in hand with passion they will take away your nose and your ear and the rest of you will be put to the sword they will take your son and daughter and the rest of you will be burn up in the fire . and they will take all your clothing off you and take away your ornament . so i will put an end to your evil way and your loose behaviour which come from the land of egypt and your eye will never be lift up to them again and you will have no more memory of egypt . for this be what the lord have say see i will give you up into the hand of those who be hat by you into the hand of those from whom your soul be turn away in disgust and they will take you in hand with hate and take away all the fruit of your work and let you be unveil and without clothing and the shame of your loose behaviour will be uncover your evil design and your loose way . they will do these thing to you because you have be untrue to me and have go after the nation and have become unclean with their image . you have go in the way of your sister and i will give her cup into your hand . this be what the lord have say you will take a drink from your sister 's cup which be deep and wide you will be laugh at and look down on more than you be able to undergo . you will be break and full of sorrow with the cup of wonder and destruction with the cup of your sister samaria . and after drink it and drain it out you will take the last drop of it to the end pull off your breast for i have say it say the lord . so this be what the lord have say because you have not keep me in your memory and because your back have be turn to me you will even undergo the punishment of your evil design and your loose way . then the lord say to me son of man will you be the judge of oholibah ? then make clear to her the disgusting thing she have do . for she have be false to me and blood be on her hand and with her image she have be untrue and more than this she make her son whom she have by me go through the fire to them to be burn up . far this be what she have do to me she have make my holy place unclean and have make my sabbaths unclean . for when she have make an offering of her child to her image she come into my holy place to make it unclean see this be what she have do inside my house . and she even send for men to come from far away to whom a servant be send and they come for whom she be wash her body and paint her eye and make herself fair with ornament . and she take her seat on a great bed with a table put ready before it on which she put my perfume and my oil . ... and they put jewel on her hand and beautiful crown on her head . then i say ... now she will go on with her loose way . and they go in to her a men go to a loose woman so they go in to oholibah the loose woman . and upright men will be her judge judge her a false wife and woman who take life be judge because she have be untrue to me and blood be on her hand . for this be what the lord have say i will make a great meeting of the people come together against her and will send on her shake fear and take everything from her . and the meeting after stone her with stone will put an end to her with their sword they will put her son and daughter to death and have her house burn up with fire . and i will put an end to evil in all the land teach all woman not to do a you have do . and i will send on you the punishment of your evil way and you will be reward for your sin with your image and you will be certain that i be the lord .and the word of the lord come to me in the ninth year in the tenth month on the tenth day of the month say son of man put down in write this very day the king of babylon let loose the weight of his attack against jerusalem on this very day . and make a comparison for this uncontrolled people and say to them this be what the lord have say put on the cooking pot put it on the fire and put water in it and get the bit together the fat tail every good part the leg and the top part of it make it full of the best bone . take the best of the flock put much wood under it see that it bit be boil well let the bone be cook inside it . for this be what the lord have say a curse be on the town of blood the cooking pot which be unclean inside which have never be make clean ! take out it bit it fate be still to come on it . for her blood be in her she have put it on the open rock not drain it on to the earth so that it might be cover with dust in order that it might make wrath come up to give punishment she have put her blood on the open rock so that it may not be cover . for this cause the lord have say a curse be on the town of blood ! and i will make great the burn mass . put on much wood heat up the fire boil the flesh well and make the soup thick and let the bone be burn . and i will put her on the coal so that she may be heat and her brass burn so that what be unclean in her may become soft and her waste be completely take away . i have make myself tire to no purpose still all the waste which be in her have not come out it have an evil smell . a for your unclean purpose because i have be attempt to make you clean but you have not be make clean from it you will not be make clean till i have let loose my passion on you in full measure . i the lord have say the word and i will do it i will not go back or have mercy and my purpose will not be change in the measure of your way and of your evil doings you will be judge say the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man see i be take away the desire of your eye by disease but let there be no sorrow or weeping or drop run from your eye . let there be no sound of sorrow make no weep for your dead put on your head dress and your shoe on your foot let not your lip be cover and do not take the food of those in grief . so in the morning i be teach the people and in the evening death take my wife and in the morning i do what i have be order to do . and the people say to me will you not make clear to u the sense of these thing be it for u you do them ? then i say to them the word of the lord come to me say say to the people of israel the lord have say see i will make my holy place unclean the pride of your strength the pleasure of your eye and the desire of your soul and your son and daughter who do not come with you here will be put to the sword . and you will do a i have do not cover your lip or take the food of those in grief . and your head dress will be on your head and your shoe on your foot there will be no sorrow or weep but you will be waste away in the punishment of your evil do and you will be look at one another in wonder . and ezekiel will be a sign to you everything he have do you will do when this take place you will be certain that i be the lord . and a for you son of man your mouth will be shut in the day when i take from them their strength the joy of their glory the desire of their eye and that on which their heart be fix and their son and daughter . in that day one who have get away safe will come to you to give you news of it . in that day your mouth will be open to him who have get away safe and you will say word to him and your lip will no longer be shut so you will be a sign to them and they will be certain that i be the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to the child of ammon and be a prophet against them and say to the child of ammon give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say because you say aha ! against my holy place when it be make unclean and against the land of israel when it be make waste and against the people of judah when they be take away a prisoner for this cause i will give you up to the child of the east for their heritage and they will put their tent circle in you and make their house in you they will take your fruit for their food and your milk for their drink . and i will make rabbah a place for housing camel and the child of ammon a resting place for flock and you will be certain that i be the lord . for the lord have say because you have make sound of joy with your hand stamp your foot and have be glad put shame with all your soul on the land of israel for this cause my hand have be stretch out against you and i will give up your good to be take by the nation i will have you cut off from the people and will put an end to you among the country i will give you up to destruction and you will be certain that i be the lord . this be what the lord have say because moab and seir be say see the people of judah be like all the nation for this cause i will let the side of moab be uncover and his town on every side the glory of the land beth jeshimoth baal meon and as far a kiriathaim . to the child of the east i have give her for a heritage as well a the child of ammon so that there may be no memory of her among the nation and i will be the judge of moab and they will see that i be the lord . this be what the lord have say because edom have take his payment from the people of judah and have do great wrong in take payment from them the lord have say my hand will be stretch out against edom cut off from it man and beast and i will make it waste from teman even as far a dedan they will be put to the sword . i will take payment from edom because of my people israel and i will take edom in hand in my wrath and in my passion and they will have experience of my reward say the lord . this be what the lord have say because the philistine have take payment with the purpose of cause shame and destruction with unending hate the lord have say see my hand will be stretch out against the philistine cut off the cherethites and send destruction on the rest of the sea land . and i will take great payment from them with act of wrath and they will be certain that i be the lord when i send my punishment on them .now in the eleventh year on the first day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man because tyre have say against jerusalem aha she who be the doorway of the people be broken she be turn over to them she who be full be make waste for this cause the lord have say see i be against you o tyre and will send up a number of nation against you a the sea send up it wave . and they will give the wall of tyre to destruction and have it tower break and i will take even her dust away from her and make her an uncovered rock she will be a place for the stretch out of net in the middle of the sea for i have say it say the lord and her good will be give over to the nation . and her daughter in the open country will be put to the sword and they will be certain that i be the lord . for this be what the lord have say see i will send up from the north nebuchadrezzar king of babylon king of king against tyre with horse and war carriage and with an army and great number of people . he will put to the sword your daughter in the open country he will make strong wall against you and put up an earthwork against you arm himself for war against you . he will put up his engine of war against your wall and your tower will be break down by his ax . because of the number of his horse you will be cover with their dust your wall will be shake at the noise of the horseman and of the wheel and of the war carriage when he come through your doorway a into a town which have be break open . your street will be stamp down by the foot of his horse he will put your people to the sword and will send down the pillar of your strength to the earth . they will take by force all your wealth and go off with the good with which you do trade they will have your wall break down and all the house of your desire give up to destruction they will put your stone and your wood and your dust deep in the water . i will put an end to the noise of your song and the sound of your instrument of music will be go for ever . i will make you an uncovered rock you will be a place for the stretch out of net there will be no building you up again for i the lord have say it say the lord . this be what the lord have say to tyre will not the sea land be shake at the sound of your fall when the wounded give cry of pain when men be put to the sword in you ? then all the ruler of the sea will come down from their high seat and put away their robe and take off their clothing of needlework they will put on the clothing of grief they will take their seat on the earth shake with fear every minute and overcome with wonder at you . and they will send up a song of grief for you and say to you what destruction have come on you how be you cut off from the sea the note town which be strong in the sea she and her people cause the fear of them to come on all the dry land ! now the sea land will be shake in the day of your fall and all the ship on the sea will be overcome with fear at your go . for this be what the lord have say i will make you a waste town like the town which be unpeopled when i make the deep come upon you cover you with great water . then i will make you go down with those who go down into the underworld to the people of the past causing your live place to be in the deep part of the earth in place long unpeopled with those who go down into the deep so that there will be no one living in you and you will have no glory in the land of the living . i will make you a thing of fear and you will come to an end even if you be look for you will not be see again for ever say the lord .the word of the lord come to me again say and you son of man make a song of grief for tyre and say to tyre o you who be seat at the doorway of the sea trading for the people with the great sea land these be the word of the lord you o tyre have say i be a ship completely beautiful . your builder have make your outline in the heart of the sea they have make you completely beautiful . they have make all your board of fir tree from senir they have take cedar from lebanon to make the support for your sail . of oak tree from bashan they have make your drive blade they have make your floor of ivory and boxwood from the sea land of kittim . the best linen with needlework from egypt be your sail stretch out to be a flag for you blue and purple from the sea land of elishah give you shade . the people of zidon and arvad be your boatman the wise men of zemer be in you they be guide your ship the responsible men of gebal and it wise men be in you make your board watertight all the ship of the sea with their seaman be in you trading in your good . cush and lud and put be in your army your men of war hang up their body cover and head dress of war in you they give you your glory . the men of arvad in your army be on your wall and be watchman in your tower hang up their arm on your wall round about they make you completely beautiful . tarshish do business with you because of the great amount of your wealth they give silver iron tin and lead for your good . javan tubal and meshech be your trader they give live men and brass vessel for your good . the people of togarmah give horse and war horse and transport beast for your good . the men of rodan be your trader a great number of sea land do business with you they give you horn of ivory and ebony a an offering . edom do business with you because of the great number of thing which you make they give emerald purple and needlework and the best linen and coral and ruby for your good . judah and the land of israel be your trader they give grain of minnith and sweet cake and honey and oil and perfume for your good . damascus do business with you because of the great amount of your wealth with wine of helbon and white wool . ... for your good they give polish iron and spice for your good . dedan do trade with you in cloth for the back of horse . arabia and all the ruler of kedar do business with you in lamb and sheep and goat in these they do business with you . the trader of sheba and raamah do trade with you they give the best of all sort of spice and all sort of stone of great price and gold for your good . haran and canneh and eden the trader of asshur and all the medes these be your trader in beautiful robe in roll of blue and needlework and in chest of coloured cloth cord with cord and make of cedar wood in them they do trade with you . tarshish ship do business for you in your good and you be make full and great be your glory in the heart of the sea . your boatman have take you into great water you have be break by the east wind in the heart of the sea . your wealth and your good the thing in which you do trade your seaman and those guide your ship those who make your board watertight and those who do business with your good and all your men of war who be in you with all who have come together in you will go down into the heart of the sea in the day of your downfall . at the sound of the cry of your ship ' guide the board of the ship will be shake . and all the boatman the seaman and those who be expert at guide a ship through the sea will come down from their ship and take their place on the land and their voice will be sound over you and cry bitterly they will put dust on their head roll themselves in the dust and they will have the hair of their head cut off because of you and will put haircloth on their body weep for you with bitter grief in their soul even with bitter sorrow . and in their weeping they will make a song of grief for you sorrow over you and say who be like tyre who have come to an end in the deep sea ? when your good go out over the sea you make number of people full the wealth of the king of the earth be increase with your great wealth and all your good . now that you be break by the sea in the deep water your good and all your people will go down with you . all the people of the sea land be overcome with wonder at you and their king be full of fear their face be trouble . those who do business among the people make sound of surprise at you you have become a thing of fear you have come to an end for ever .the word of the lord come to me again say son of man say to the ruler of tyre this be what the lord have say because your heart have be lift up and you have say i be a god i be seat on the seat of god in the heart of the sea but you be man and not god though you have make your heart a the heart of god see you be wise than daniel there be no secret which be deep than your knowledge by your wisdom and deep knowledge you have get power for yourself and put silver and gold in your store house by your great wisdom and by your trade your power be increase and your heart be lift up because of your power for this cause the lord have say because you have make your heart a the heart of god see i be send against you strange men fear among the nation they will let loose their sword against your bright wisdom they will make your glory a common thing . they will send you down to the underworld and your death will be the death of those who be put to the sword in the heart of the sea . will you say in the face of those who be take your life i be god ? but you be man and not god in the hand of those who be wound you . your death will be the death of those who be without circumcision by the hand of men from strange land for i have say it say the lord . then the word of the lord come to me say son of man make a song of grief for the king of tyre and say to him this be what the lord have say you be all wise and completely beautiful you be in eden the garden of god every stone of great price be your clothe the sardius the topaz and the diamond the beryl the onyx and the jasper the emerald and the carbuncle your store house be full of gold and thing of great price be in you in the day when you be make they be get ready . i give you your place with the winged one i put you on the mountain of god you go up and down among the stone of fire . there have be no evil in your way from the day when you be make till sin be see in you . through all your trading you have become full of violent way and have do evil so i sent you out sham from the mountain of god the winged one put an end to you from among the stone of fire . your heart be lift up because you be beautiful you make your wisdom evil through your sin i have send you down even to the earth i have make you low before king so that they may see you . by all your sin even by your evil trading you have make your holy place unclean so i will make a fire come out from you it will make a meal of you and i will make you a dust on the earth before the eye of all who see you . all who have knowledge of you among the people will be overcome with wonder at you you have become a thing of fear and you will never be see again . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to zidon and be a prophet against it and say these be the word of the lord see i be against you o zidon and i will get glory for myself in you and they will be certain that i be the lord when i send my punishment on her and i will be see to be holy in her . and i will send on her disease and blood in her street and the wound will be fall in the middle of her and the sword will be against her on every side and they will be certain that i be the lord . and there will no longer be a plant with sharp point wound the child of israel or a thorn trouble them among any who be round about them who put shame on them and they will be certain that i be the lord . this be what the lord have say when i have get together the child of israel from the people among whom they be wander and have be make holy among them before the eye of the nation then they will have rest in the land which be theirs which i give to my servant jacob and they will be safe there building house and plant vine garden and live without fear when i have send my punishment on all those who put shame on them round about them and they will be certain that i be the lord their god .in the tenth year in the tenth month on the twelfth day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn against pharaoh king of egypt and be a prophet against him and against all egypt say to them these be the word of the lord see i be against you pharaoh king of egypt the great river beast stretch out among his nile stream who have say the nile be mine and i have make it for myself . and i will put hook in your mouth and the fish of your stream will be hang from your skin and i will make you come up out of your stream with all the fish of your stream hang from your skin . and i will let you be in the waste land you and all the fish of your stream you will go down on the face of the land you will not be take up or put to rest in the earth i have give you for food to the beast of the field and the bird of the heaven . and it will be clear to all the people of egypt that i be the lord because you have be a false support to the child of israel . when they take a grip of you in their hand you be crush so that their arm be break and when they put their weight on you for support you be break and all their muscle give way . for this cause the lord have say see i be send a sword on you cut off from you man and beast . and the land of egypt will be an unpeopled waste and they will be certain that i be the lord because he have say the nile be mine and i make it . see then i be against you and against your stream and i will make the land of egypt an unpeopled waste from migdol to syene even as far a the edge of ethiopia . no foot of man will go through it and no foot of beast and it will be unpeopled for forty year . i will make the land of egypt a waste among the country which be make waste and her town will be unpeopled among the town which have be make waste for forty year and i will send the egyptian in flight among the nation and wander through the country . for this be what the lord have say at the end of forty year i will get the egyptian together from the people where they have go in flight i will let the fate of egypt be change and will make them come back into the land of pathros into the land from which they come and there they will be an unimportant kingdom . it will be the low of the kingdom and never again will it be lift up over the nation i will make them small so that they may not have rule over the nation . and egypt will no longer be the hope of the child of israel cause sin to come to mind when their eye be turn to them and they will be certain that i be the lord . now in the twenty seventh year in the first month on the first day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man nebuchadrezzar king of babylon make his army do hard work against tyre and the hair come off every head and every arm be rub smooth but he and his army get no payment out of tyre for the hard work which he have do against it . for this cause the lord have say see i be give the land of egypt to nebuchadrezzar king of babylon he will take away her wealth and take her good by force and everything which be there and this will be the payment for his army . i have give him the land of egypt a the reward for his hard work because they be work for me say the lord . in that day i will make a horn put out bud for the child of israel and i will let your word come freely among them and they will be certain that i be the lord .the word of the lord come to me again say son of man be a prophet and say these be the word of the lord give a cry aha for the day ! for the day be near the day of the lord be near a day of cloud it will be the time of the nation . and a sword will come on egypt and cruel pain will be in ethiopia when they be fall by the sword in egypt and they will take away her wealth and her base will be break down . ethiopia and put and lud and all the mixed people and libya and the child of the land of the cherethites will all be put to death with them by the sword . this be what the lord have say the supporter of egypt will have a fall and the pride of her power will come down from migdol to syene they will be put to the sword in it say the lord . and she will be make waste among the country which have be make waste and her town will be among the town which be unpeopled . and they will be certain that i be the lord when i have put a fire in egypt and all her helper be break . in that day men will go out quickly to take the news cause fear in untroubled ethiopia and bitter pain will come on them a in the day of egypt for see it be come . this be what the lord have say i will put an end to great number of the people of egypt by the hand of nebuchadrezzar king of babylon . he and the people with him cause fear among the nation will be send for the destruction of the land their sword will be let loose against egypt and the land will be full of dead . and i will make the nile stream dry and will give the land into the hand of evil men cause the land and everything in it to be waste by the hand of men from a strange country i the lord have say it . this be what the lord have say in addition to this i will give up the image to destruction and put an end to the false god in noph never again will there be a ruler in the land of egypt and i will put a fear in the land of egypt . and i will make pathros a waste and put a fire in zoan and send my punishment on no . i will let loose my wrath on sin the strong place of egypt cut off the mass of the people of no . and i will put a fire in egypt syene will be twist in pain and no will be break into a by the onrush of water . the young men of on and pi beseth will be put to the sword and these town will be take away prisoner . and at tehaphnehes the day will become dark when the yoke of egypt be break there and the pride of her power come to an end a for her she will be cover with a cloud and her daughter will be take away prisoner . and i will send my punishment on egypt and they will be certain that i be the lord . now in the eleventh year in the first month on the seventh day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man the arm of pharaoh king of egypt have be break by me and no band have be put round it to make it well no band have be twist round it to make it strong for grip the sword . for this cause the lord have say see i be against pharaoh king of egypt and by me his strong arm will be break and i will make the sword go out of his hand . and i will send the egyptian in flight among the nation and wander through the country . and i will make the arm of the king of babylon strong and will put my sword in his hand but pharaoh 's arm will be break and he will give cry of pain before him like the cry of a man wound to death . and i will make the arm of the king of babylon strong and the arm of pharaoh will be hang down and they will be certain that i be the lord when i put my sword into the hand of the king of babylon and it be stretch out against the land of egypt . and i will send the egyptian in flight among the nation and wander through the country and they will be certain that i be the lord .now in the eleventh year in the third month on the first day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man say to pharaoh king of egypt and to his people whom be you like in your great power ? see a pine tree with beautiful branch and thick growth give shade and very tall and it top be among the cloud . it get strength from the water and the deep make it tall it stream go round about it planted land and it send out it waterway to all the tree of the field . in this way it become tall than all the tree of the field and it branch be increase and it arm become long because of the great water . in it branch all the bird of heaven come to rest and under it arm all the beast of the field give birth to their young and great nation be live in it shade . so it be beautiful be so tall and it branch so long for it root be by great water . no cedar be equal to it in the garden of god the fir tree be not like it branch and plane tree be a nothing in comparison with it arm no tree in the garden of god be so beautiful . i make it beautiful with it mass of branch so that all the tree in the garden of god be full of envy of it . for this cause the lord have say because he be tall and have put his top among the cloud and his heart be full of pride because he be so high i have give him up into the hand of a strong one of the nation he will certainly give him the reward of his sin drive him out . and men from strange land who be to be fear among the nation after cut him off have let him be on the mountain and in all the valley his branch have come down his arm be break by all the waterway of the land all the people of the earth have go from his shade and have let him be . all the bird of heaven have come to rest on his broken stem where it be stretch on the earth and all the beast of the field will be on his branch in order that no tree by the water may be lift up in their growth put their top among the cloud and that no tree which be water may take their place on high for they be all give up to death to the low part of the earth among the child of men with those who go down to the underworld . this be what the lord have say the day when he go down to the underworld i will make the deep full of grief for him i will keep back her stream and the great water will be stop i will make lebanon dark for him and all the tree of the field will be feeble because of him . i will send shake on the nation at the sound of his fall when i send him down to the underworld with those who go down into the deep and on earth they will be comfort themselves all the tree of eden the best of lebanon even all the watered one . and they will go down with him to the underworld to those who have be put to the sword even those who be his helper live under his shade among the nation whom then be you like ? for you will be send down with the tree of eden into the low part of the earth there you will be stretch out among those without circumcision with those who be put to the sword . this be pharaoh and all his people say the lord .and it come about in the twelfth year in the twelfth month on the first day of the month that the word of the lord come to me say son of man make a song of grief for pharaoh king of egypt and say to him young lion of the nation destruction have come on you and you be like a sea beast in the sea send out burst of water trouble the water with your foot make their stream dirty . this be what the lord have say my net will be stretch out over you and i will take you up in my fishing net . and i will let you be stretch on the land i will send you out violently into the open field i will let all the bird of heaven come to rest on you and will make the beast of all the earth full of you . and i will put your flesh on the mountain and make the valley full of your blood . and the land will be water with your blood and the waterway will be full of you . and when i put out your life the heaven will be cover and it star make dark i will let the sun be cover with a cloud and the moon will not give her light . all the bright light of heaven i will make dark over you and put dark night on your land say the lord . and the heart of number of people will be trouble when i send your prisoner among the nation into a country which be strange to you . and i will make a number of people overcome with wonder at you and their king will be full of fear because of you when my sword be wave before them they will be shake every minute every man fear for his life in the day of your fall . for this be what the lord have say the sword of the king of babylon will come on you . i will let the sword of the strong be the cause of the fall of your people all of them men to be fear among the nation and they will make waste the pride of egypt and all it people will come to destruction . and i will put an end to all her beast which be by the great water and they will never again be trouble by the foot of man or by the foot of beast . then i will make their water clear and their river will be flow like oil say the lord . when i make egypt an unpeopled waste cut off from the land all the thing in it when i send punishment on all those live in it then it will be clear to them that i be the lord . it be a song of grief and people will give voice to it the daughter of the nation will give voice to it even for egypt and all her people say the lord . and in the twelfth year on the fifteenth day of the month the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your voice be loud in sorrow for the people of egypt and send them down even you and the daughter of the nation i will send them down into the low part of the earth with those who go down into the underworld . be you more beautiful than any ? go down and take your rest among those without circumcision among those who have be put to the sword they will give a rest place with them to all their people . the strong among the great one will say to him from the underworld be you more beautiful than any ? go down you and your helper and take your rest among those without circumcision and those who have be put to the sword . there be asshur and all her army round about her last resting place all of them put to death by the sword whose resting place be in the inmost part of the underworld who be a cause of fear in the land of the living . there be elam and all her people round about her last resting place all of them put to death by the sword who have go down without circumcision into the low part of the earth who be a cause of fear in the land of the living and be put to shame with those who go down to the underworld they have make a bed for her among the dead and all her people be round about her rest place all of them without circumcision put to death with the sword for they be a cause of fear in the land of the living and be put to shame with those who go down to the underworld they have be give a place among those who have be put to the sword . there be meshech tubal and all her people round about her last resting place all of them without circumcision put to death by the sword for they be a cause of fear in the land of the living . and they have be put to rest with the fight men who come to their end in day long past who go down to the underworld with their instrument of war place their sword under their head and their body cover be over their bone for their strength be a cause of fear in the land of the living . but you will have your bed among those without circumcision and will be put to rest with those who have be put to death with the sword . there be edom her king and all her prince who have be give a rest place with those who be put to the sword they will be rest among those without circumcision even with those who go down to the underworld . there be the chief of the north all of them and all the zidonians who have go down with those who have be put to the sword they be sham on account of all the fear cause by their strength they be rest there without circumcision among those who have be put to the sword and be put to shame with those who go down to the underworld . pharaoh will see them and be comfort on account of all his people even pharaoh and all his army put to death by the sword say the lord . for he put his fear in the land of the living and he will be put to rest among those without circumcision with those who have be put to death with the sword even pharaoh and all his people say the lord .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man give a word to the child of your people and say to them when i make the sword come on a land if the people of the land take a man from among their number and make him their watchman if when he see the sword come on the land by sound the horn he give the people news of their danger then anyone who hear the sound of the horn do not take note of it will himself be responsible for his death if the sword come and take him away . on hear the sound of the horn he do not take note his blood will be on him for if he have take note his life would have be safe . but if the watchman see the sword come and do not give a note on the horn and the people have no word of the danger and the sword come and take any person from among them he will be take away in his sin but i will make the watchman responsible for his blood . so you son of man i have make you a watchman for the child of israel and you be to give ear to the word of my mouth and give them news from me of their danger . when i say to the evil doer death will certainly overtake you and you say nothing to make clear to the evil doer the danger of his way death will overtake that evil man in his evil do but i will make you responsible for his blood . but if you make clear to the evil doer the danger of his way for the purpose of turn him from it and he be not turn from his way death will overtake him in his evil do but your life will be safe . and you son of man say to the child of israel you say our wrongdoing and our sin be on u and we be waste away in them how then may we have life ? say to them by my life say the lord i have no pleasure in the death of the evil doer it be more please to me if he be turn from his way and have life be turn be turn from your evil way why be you look for death o child of israel ? and you son of man say to the child of your people the righteousness of the upright man will not make him safe in the day when he do wrong and the evil do of the evil man will not be the cause of his fall in the day when he be turn from his evil do and the upright man will not have life because of his righteousness in the day when he do evil . when i say to the upright that life will certainly be his if he put his faith in his righteousness and do evil not one of his upright act will be keep in memory but in the evil he have do death will overtake him . and when i say to the evil doer death will certainly be your fate if he be turn from his sin and do what be order and right if the evil doer let one who be in his debt have back what be his and give back what he have take by force and be guide by the rule of life do no evil life will certainly be his death will not overtake him . not one of the sin which he have do will be keep in mind against him he have do what be order and right life will certainly be his . but the child of your people say the way of the lord be not equal when it be they whose way be not equal . when the upright man turn away from his righteousness do evil death will overtake him in it . and when the evil man turn away from his evil do do what be order and right he will get life by it . and still you say the way of the lord be not equal . o child of israel i will be your judge give to everyone the reward of his way . now in the twelfth year after we have be take away prisoner in the tenth month on the fifth day of the month one who have get away in flight from jerusalem come to me say the town have be take . now the hand of the lord have be on me in the evening before the man who have get away come to me and he make my mouth open ready for his come to me in the morning and my mouth be open and i be no longer without voice . and the word of the lord come to me say son of man those who be live in these waste place in the land of israel say abraham be but one and he have land for his heritage but we be a great number the land be give to u for our heritage . for this cause say to them this be what the lord have say you take your meat with the blood your eye be lift up to your image and you be taker of life be you to have the land for your heritage ? you put your faith in your sword you do disgust thing everyone take his neighbour 's wife be you to have the land for your heritage ? this be what you be to say to them the lord have say by my life truly those who be in the waste place will be put to the sword and him who be in the open field i will give to the beast for their food and those who be in the strong place and in hole in the rock will come to their death by disease . and i will make the land a waste and a cause of wonder and the pride of her strength will come to an end and the mountain of israel will be make waste so that no one will go through . then they will be certain that i be the lord when i have make the land a waste and a cause of wonder because of all the disgust thing which they have do and a for you son of man the child of your people be talk together about you by the wall and in the doorway of the house say to one another come now give ear to the word which come from the lord . and they come to you a my people come and be seat before you a my people hear your word but do them not for deceit be in their mouth and their heart go after profit for themselves . and truly you be to them like a love song by one who have a very pleasing voice and be an expert player on an instrument for they give ear to your word but do them not . and when this come about see it be come then it will be clear to them that a prophet have be among them .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man be a prophet against the keeper of the flock of israel and say to them o keeper of the sheep ! this be the word of the lord a curse be on the keeper of the flock of israel who take the food for themselves ! be it not right for the keeper to give the food to the sheep ? you take the milk and be clothe with the wool you put the fat beast to death but you give the sheep no food . you have not make the diseased one strong or make well that which be ill you have not put band on the broken or get back that which have be send away or make search for the wandering one and the strong you have be rule cruelly . and they be wander in every direction because there be no keeper and they become food for all the beast of the field . and my sheep go out of the way wander through all the mountain and on every high hill my sheep go here and there over all the face of the earth and no one be trouble about them or go in search of them . for this cause o keeper of the flock give ear to the word of the lord by my life say the lord truly because my sheep have be take away and my sheep become food for all the beast of the field because there be no keeper and my keeper do not go in search of the sheep but the keeper take food for themselves and give my sheep no food for this reason o you keeper of the flock give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say see i be against the keeper of the flock and i will make search and see what they have do with my sheep and will let them be keeper of my sheep no longer and the keeper will no longer get food for themselves i will take my sheep out of their mouth so that they may not be food for them . for this be what the lord have say truly i even i will go searching and look for my sheep . a the keeper go look for his flock when he be among his wander sheep so i will go look for my sheep and will get them safely out of all the place where they have be send wander in the day of cloud and black night . and i will take them out from among the people and get them together from the country and will take them into their land and i will give them food on the mountain of israel by the water stream and wherever men be live in the country . i will give them good grass land for their food and their safe place will be the mountain of the high place of israel there they will take their rest in a good place and on fat grass land they will take their food on the mountain of israel . i myself will give food to my flock and i will give them rest say the lord . i will go in search of that which have go wander from the way and will get back that which have be send in flight and will put band on that which be break and give strength to that which be ill but the fat and the strong i will give up to destruction i will give them for their food the punishment which be theirs by right . and a for you o my flock say the lord truly i will be judge between sheep and sheep the he sheep and the he goats . do it seem a small thing to you to have take your food on good grass land while the rest of your grass land be stamp down under your foot ? and that after drink from clear water you make the rest of the water dirty with your foot ? and a for my sheep their food be the grass which have be stamp on by your foot and their drink the water which have be make dirty by your foot . for this reason the lord have say to them truly i even i will be judge between the fat sheep and the thin sheep . because you have be push with side and leg push the diseased with your horn till they be send away in every direction i will make my flock safe and they will no longer be take away and i will be judge between sheep and sheep . and i will put over them one keeper and he will give them food even my servant david he will give them food and be their keeper . and i the lord will be their god and my servant david their ruler i the lord have say it . and i will make with them an agreement of peace and will put an end to evil beast through all the land and they will be live safely in the waste land sleep in the wood . and i will give the rain at the right time and i will make the shower come down at the right time there will be shower of blessing . and the tree of the field will give it fruit and the earth will give it increase and they will be safe in their land and they will be certain that i be the lord when i have have their yoke break and have give them salvation from the hand of those who make them servant . and their good will no longer be take by the nation and they will not again be food for the beast of the earth but they will be live safely and no one will be a cause of fear to them . and i will give them plant place of peace and they will no longer be waste from need of food or put to shame by the nation . and they will be certain that i the lord their god be with them and that they the child of israel be my people say the lord . and you be my sheep the sheep of my grass land and i be your god say the lord .then the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn to mount seir and be a prophet against it and say to it this be what the lord have say see i be against you o mount seir and my hand will be stretch out against you and i will make you a waste and a cause for wonder . i will make your town unpeopled and you will be a waste and you will be certain that i be the lord . because yours have be a hate without end and you have give up the child of israel to the power of the sword in the time of their trouble in the time of the punishment of the end for this cause by my life say the lord because you have be sin through blood blood will come after you . and i will make mount seir a cause for wonder and a waste cut off from it all coming and going . i will make his mountain full of those who have be put to death in your valley and in all your water stream men will be fall by the sword . i will make you waste for ever and your town will be unpeopled and you will be certain that i be the lord . because you have say the two nation and the two country be to be mine and we will take them for our heritage though the lord be there for this cause by my life say the lord i will do to you a you have do in your wrath and in your envy which you have make clear in your hate for them and i will make clear to you who i be when you be judge by me . and you will see that i the lord have have knowledge of all the bitter thing which you have say against the mountain of israel say they have be make waste they be give to u to take for our heritage . and you have make yourselves great against me with your mouth increase your word against me and it have come to my ear . this be what the lord have say because you be glad over my land when it be a waste so will i do to you you will become a waste o mount seir and all edom even all of it and you will be certain that i be the lord .and you son of man be a prophet about the mountain of israel and say you mountain of israel give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say because your hater have say against you aha ! and the old waste place be our heritage we have take them for this cause be a prophet and say this be what the lord have say because even because they have be glad over you and put you to shame on every side because you have become a heritage for the rest of the nation and you be take up on the lip of talker and in the evil talk of the people for this reason you mountain of israel give ear to the word of the lord this be what the lord have say to the mountain and to the hill to the stream and to the valley to the unpeopled waste and to the town where no one be live from which the good have be take and which have be put to shame by the rest of the nation who be round about for this cause the lord have say truly in the heat of my bitter feeling i have say thing against the rest of the nation and against all edom who have take my land a a heritage for themselves with the joy of all their heart and with bitter envy of soul have make attack on it for this cause be a prophet about the land of israel and say to the mountain and to the hill to the stream and to the valley this be what the lord have say truly in my bitter feeling and in my wrath i have say these thing because you have undergo the shame of the nation for this cause the lord have say see i have take an oath that the nation which be round about you be themselves to undergo the shame which they have put on you . but you o mountain of israel will put out your branch and give your fruit to my people israel for they be ready to come . for truly i be for you and i will be turn to you and you will be plough and plant and i will let your number be increase all the child of israel even all of them and the town will be people and the waste place will have building man and beast will be increase in you and they will have offspring and be fertile i will make you thickly people a you be before and will do more for you than at the first and you will be certain that i be the lord . yes i will have you walk on by the foot of men even my people israel they will have you for a heritage and you will be theirs and never again will you take their child from them . this be what the lord have say because they say to you you o land be the destruction of men cause loss of child to your nation for this reason you will no longer take the life of men and will never again be the cause of loss of child to your nation say the lord . and i will not let the shaming of the nation come to your ear and no long will you be look down on by the people say the lord . then the word of the lord come to me say son of man when the child of israel be live in their land they make it unclean by their way and their act their way before me be a when a woman be unclean at the time when she be kept separate . so i let loose my wrath on them because of those whom they have violently put to death in the land and because they have make it unclean with their image and i send them in flight among the nation and wander through the country i be their judge reward them for their way and their act . and when they come among the nation wherever they go they make my holy name unclean when it be say of them these be the people of the lord who have go out from his land . but i have pity for my holy name which the child of israel have make unclean wherever they go . for this cause say to the child of israel this be what the lord have say i be do this not because of you o child of israel but because of my holy name which you have make unclean among the nation wherever you go . and i will make holy my great name which have be make unclean among the nation which you have make unclean among them and it will be clear to the nation that i be the lord say the lord when i make myself holy in you before their eye . for i will take you out from among the nation and get you together from all the country and take you into your land . and i will put clean water on you so that you may be clean from all your unclean way and from all your image i will make you clean . and i will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you i will take away the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh . and i will put my spirit in you cause you to be guide by my rule and you will keep my order and do them . so that you may go on living in the land which i give to your father and you will be to me a people and i will be to you a god . and i will make you free from all your unclean way and at my voice the grain will come up and be increase and i will not let you be short of food . and i will make the tree give more fruit and the field fuller produce and no long will you be sham among the nation for need of food . and at the memory of your evil way and your wrongdoing you will have bitter hate for yourselves because of your evil doings and your disgusting way o child of israel . not because of you be i do it say the lord let it be clear to you and be sham and make low because of your way o child of israel . this be what the lord have say in the day when i make you clean from all your evil doings i will let the town be people and there will be build on the waste place . and the land which be waste will be farm in place of be a waste in the eye of everyone who go by . and they will say this land which be waste have become like the garden of eden and the town which be unpeopled and wasted and pull down be walled and people . then the rest of the nation round about you will be certain that i the lord be the builder of the place which be pull down and the planter of that which be waste i the lord have say it and i will do it . this be what the lord have say the child of israel will again make prayer to me for this that i may do it for them i will make them increase with men like a flock . like sheep for the offering like the sheep of jerusalem at her fixed feast so the unpeopled town will be make full of men and they will be certain that i be the lord .the hand of the lord have be on me and he take me out in the spirit of the lord and put me down in the middle of the valley and it be full of bone and he make me go past them round about and i saw that there be a very great number of them on the face of the wide valley and they be very dry . and he say to me son of man be it possible for these bone to come to life ? and i make answer and say it be for you to say o lord . and again he say to me be a prophet to these bone and say to them o you dry bone give ear to the word of the lord . this be what the lord have say to these bone see i will make breath come into you so that you may come to life and i will put muscle on you and make flesh come on you and put skin over you and breath into you so that you may have life and you will be certain that i be the lord . so i give the word a i be order and at my word there be a shaking of the earth and the bone come together bone to bone . and look i saw that there be muscle on them and flesh come up and they be cover with skin but there be no breath in them . and he say to me be a prophet to the wind be a prophet son of man and say to the wind the lord have say come from the four wind o wind breathe on these dead so that they may come to life . and i give the word at his order and breath come into them and they come to life and get up on their foot a very great army . then he say to me son of man these bone be all the child of israel and see they be say our bone have become dry our hope be go we be cut off completely . for this cause be a prophet to them and say this be what the lord have say see i be open the rest place of your dead and i will make you come up out of your rest place o my people and i will take you into the land of israel . and you will be certain that i be the lord by my open the rest place of your dead and make you come up out of your rest place o my people . and i will put my spirit in you so that you may come to life and i will give you a rest in your land and you will be certain that i the lord have say it and have do it say the lord . and the word of the lord come to me say and you son of man take one stick write on it for judah and for the child of israel who be in his company then take another stick write on it for joseph the stick of ephraim and all the child of israel who be in his company then join them one to another make them one stick so that they may be one in your hand . and when the child of your people say to you will you not make clear to u what these thing have to do with u ? then say to them this be what the lord have say see i be take the stick of joseph which be in the hand of ephraim and the tribe of israel who be in his company and i will put it on the stick of judah and make them one stick and they will be one in my hand . and the stick with your write on them will be in your hand before their eye . and say to them these be the word of the lord see i be take the child of israel from among the nation where they have go and will get them together on every side and take them into their land and i will make them one nation in the land on the mountain of israel and one king will be king over them all and they will no longer be two nation and will no longer be part into two kingdom and they will no longer make themselves unclean with their image or with their hated thing or with any of their sin but i will give them salvation from all their turn away in which they have do evil and will make them clean and they will be to me a people and i will be to them a god . and my servant david will be king over them and they will all have one keeper and they will be guide by my order and will keep my rule and do them . and they will be live in the land which i give to jacob my servant in which your father be live and they will go on living there they and their child and their child 's child for ever and david my servant will be their ruler for ever . and i will make an agreement of peace with them it will be an eternal agreement with them and i will have mercy on them and make their number great and will put my holy place among them for ever . and my house will be over them and i will be to them a god and they will be to me a people . and the nation will be certain that i who make israel holy be the lord when my holy place be among them for ever .and the word of the lord come to me say son of man let your face be turn against gog of the land of magog the ruler of rosh meshech and tubal and be a prophet against him and say this be what the lord have say see i be against you o gog ruler of rosh meshech and tubal and turn you round i will put hook in your mouth and make you come out with all your army horse and horseman all of them in full war dress a great force with breastplate and body cover all of them arm with sword persia cush and put with them all of them with body cover and metal head dress gomer and all her force the people of togarmah in the inmost part of the north with all his force a great number of people with you . be ready make yourself ready you and all the force who be with you and be ready for my order . after a long time you will get your order in the last year you will come into the land which have be give back from the sword which have be get together out of a great number of people on the mountain of israel which have ever be a waste but it have be take out from the people and they will be live all of them without fear of danger . and you will go up you will come like a storm you will be like a cloud cover the land you and all your force and a great number of people with you . this be what the lord have say in that day it will come about that thing will come into your mind and you will have thought of an evil design and you will say i will go up to the land of small unwalled town i will go to those who be quiet live all of them without fear of danger without wall or lock or door to take their property by force and go off with their good turn your hand against the waste place which now be people and against the people who have be get together out of the nation who have get cattle and good for themselves who be live in the middle of the earth . sheba and dedan and her trader tarshish with all her trader will say to you have you come to take our good ? have you get your army together to take away our property by force ? to take away silver and gold cattle and good to go off with great wealth ? for this cause son of man be a prophet and say to gog these be the word of the lord in that day when my people israel be live without fear of danger will you not be move against them ? and you will come from your place in the inmost part of the north you and a great number of people with you all of them on horseback a great force and a strong army and you will come up against my people israel like a cloud cover the land and it will come about in the last day that i will make you come against my land so that the nation may have knowledge of me when i make myself holy in you o gog before their eye . this be what the lord have say you be he of whom i give them word in early time by my servant the prophet of israel who in those day go on say year after year that i would make you come up against them . and it will come about in that day when gog come up against the land of israel say the lord that my wrath will come up and my passion and my bitter feeling . for in the fire of my wrath i have say truly in that day there will be a great shaking in the land of israel so that the fish of the sea and the bird of heaven and the beast of the field and everything move on the earth and all the men who be on the face of the earth will be shake before me and the mountain will be overturn and the high place will come down and every wall will come fall down to the earth . and i will send to all my mountain for a sword against him say the lord every man 's sword will be against his brother . and i will take up my cause against him with disease and with blood and i will send down on him and on his force and on the people who be with him an overflow shower and great ice drop fire and burning . and i will make my name great and make myself holy and i will make myself clear to a number of nation and they will be certain that i be the lord .and you son of man be a prophet against gog and say these be the word of the lord see i be against you o gog ruler of rosh meshech and tubal and turn you round i will be your guide and make you come up from the inmost part of the north i will make you come on to the mountain of israel and with a blow i will send your bow out of your left hand and your arrow fall from your right hand . on the mountain of israel you will come down you and all your force and the people who be with you i will give you to cruel bird of every sort and to the beast of the field to be their food . you will come down in the open field for i have say it say the lord . and i will send a fire on magog and on those who be live in the sea land without fear and they will be certain that i be the lord . and i will make clear my holy name among my people israel i will no longer let my holy name be make unclean and the nation will be certain that i be the lord the holy one in israel . see it be come and it will be do say the lord this be the day of which i have give word . and those who be live in the town of israel will go out and make fire of the instrument of war burn the body cover and the breastplate the bow and the arrow and the stick and the spear and for seven year they will make fire of them and they will take no wood out of the field or have any cut down in the wood for they will make their fire of the instrument of war and they will take by force the property of those who take their property and go off with the good of those who take their good say the lord . and it will come about in those day that i will give to gog a last resting place there in israel in the valley of abarim on the east of the sea and those who go through will be stop and there gog and all his people will be put to rest and the place will be name the valley of hamon gog . and the child of israel will be seven month put them in the earth so a to make the land clean . and all the people of the land will put them in the earth and it will be to their honour in the day when i let my glory be see say the lord . and they will put on one side men to do no other work but to go through the land and put in the earth the rest of those who be still on the face of the land to make it clean after seven month be end they be to make a search . and while they go through the land if anyone see a man 's bone he be to put up a sign by the place till those who be do the work have put it in the earth in the valley of hamon gog . and there they will put all the army of gog in the earth . so they will make the land clean . and you son of man this be what the lord have say say to the bird of every sort and to all the beast of the field get together and come come together on every side to the offering which i be put to death for you a great offering on the mountain of israel so that you may have flesh for your food and blood for your drink . the flesh of the men of war will be your food and your drink the blood of the prince of the earth of sheep and lamb of he goats of oxen all of them fat beast of bashan . you will go on feast on the fat till you be full and drink the blood till you be overcome with it of my offering which i have put to death for you . at my table you will have food in full measure horse and war carriage great men and all the men of war say the lord . and i will put my glory among the nation and all the nation will see my punishment which i have put into effect and my hand which i have put on them . so the child of israel will be certain that i be the lord their god from that day and for the future . and it will be clear to the nation that the child of israel be take away prisoner for their evil do because they do wrong against me and my face be cover from them so i give them up into the hand of their attacker and they all come to their end by the sword . in the measure of their unclean way and their sin so i do to them and i keep my face cover from them . for this cause the lord have say now i will let the fate of jacob be change and i will have mercy on all the child of israel and will take care of the honour of my holy name . and they will be conscious of their shame and of all the wrong which they have do against me when they be live in their land with no sense of danger and with no one to be a cause of fear to them when i have take them back from among the people and get them together out of the land of their hater and have make myself holy in them before the eye of a great number of nation . and they will be certain that i be the lord their god because i send them away a prisoner among the nation and have take them together back to their land and i have not let one of them be there any long . and my face will no longer be cover from them for i have send the out flowing of my spirit on the child of israel say the lord .in the twenty fifth year after we have be take away prisoner in the first month of the year on the tenth day of the month in the fourteenth year after the town be take on the very same day the hand of the lord be on me and he take me there . in the vision of god he take me into the land of israel and put me down on a very high mountain on which there be a it seem a building like a town opposite me . he take me there and i saw a man look like brass with a linen cord in his hand and a measuring rod and he be station in the doorway . and the man say to me son of man see with your eye and give hearing with your ear and take to heart everything i be go to let you see for in order that i might let you see them you have come here and give an account of all you see to the child of israel . and there be a wall on the outside of the house all round and in the man 's hand there be a measuring rod six cubit long by a cubit and a hand 's measure so he take the measure of the building from side to side one rod and from base to top one rod . then he come to the doorway look to the east and go up by it step and he take the measure of the doorstep one rod wide . and the watchman 's room be one rod long and one rod wide and the space between the room be five cubit the doorstep of the doorway by the covered way of the doorway inside be one rod . and he take the measure of the covered way of the doorway inside eight cubit and it upright two cubit the covered way of the doorway be inside . and the room of the doorway on the east be three on this side and three on that all three be of the same size and the upright on this side and on that be of the same size . and he take the measure of the opening of the doorway ten cubit wide and the way down the doorway be thirteen cubit and the space in front of the room a cubit on this side and a cubit on that side and the room six cubit on this side and six cubit on that . and he take the measure of the doorway from the back of one room to the back of the other twenty five cubit across from door to door . and he take the measure of the covered way twenty cubit and open from the covered way of the doorway be the open square round about . and from before the opening of the doorway to before the inner cover way of the doorway be fifty cubit . and the room and their upright have slop window inside the doorway all round and in the same way the covered way have window all round on the inside and on every upright there be palm tree . then he take me into the outer square and there be room and a stone floor make for the open square all round there be thirty room on the stone floor . and the stone floor be by the side of the doorway and be as wide a the doorway be long even the low floor . then he take the measure of the square across from before the low doorway inside to before the inner doorway outside one hundred cubit . and he take me in the direction of the north and there be a doorway to the outer square look to the north and he take the measure of it to see how wide and how long it be . and it have three room on this side of it and three on that it upright and it covered way be the same size a those of the first doorway it be fifty cubit long and twenty five cubit wide . and it window and the window of it covered way and it palm tree be the same a those of the doorway look to the east and there be seven step up to it and the covered way go inside . and there be a doorway to the inner square opposite the doorway on the north like the doorway on the east and he take the measure from doorway to doorway a hundred cubit . and he take me to the south and i saw a doorway look to the south and he take the measure of it room and it upright and it cover way by these measure . and there be window in it and in the covered way all round like the other window it be fifty cubit long and twenty five cubit wide . and there be seven step up to it and it covered way go inside and it have palm tree one on this side and one on that on it upright . and there be a doorway to the inner square look to the south he take the measure from doorway to doorway to the south a hundred cubit . then he take me to the inner square by the south doorway and he take the measure of the south doorway by these measure and the room in it and the upright and the covered way by these measure and there be window in it and in the covered way all round it be fifty cubit long and twenty five cubit wide . the covered way be on the side nearest the outer square and there be palm tree on the upright and there be eight step go up to it . and he take me into the inner square face the east and he take the measure of the doorway by these measure and of the room in it and it upright and it cover way by these measure and there be window in it and in the covered way round about it be fifty cubit long and twenty five cubit wide . and the covered way be on the side nearest the outer square there be palm tree on the upright on this side and on that and there be eight step go up to it . and he take me to the north doorway and he take the measure of it by these measure it room it upright and it covered way have the same measure and it covered way have window all round it be fifty cubit long and twenty five cubit wide . it upright be on the side near to the outer square there be palm tree on the upright on this side and on that and there be eight step go up to it . and there be a room with a door in the covered way of the doorway where the burned offering be wash . and in the covered way of the doorway there be two table on this side and two table on that side on which the burn offering and the sin offering and the offering for error be put to death on the out side to the north a one go up to the opening of the doorway be two table . there be four table on one side and four table on the other by the side of the doorway eight table on which they put to death the beast for the offering . and there be four table for the burned offering make of cut stone one and a half cubit long one and a half cubit wide and a cubit high where the instrument be place which be use for put to death the burn offering and the beast for the offering . and they have edge all round as wide a a man 's hand and on the table be the flesh of the offering . and he take me into the inner square and there be two room in the inner square one at the side of the north doorway face south and one at the side of the south doorway face north . and he say to me this room face south be for the priest who have the care of the house . and the room face north be for the priest who have the care of the altar these be the son of zadok who from among the son of levi come near to the lord to do the work of his house . and he take the measure of the open square a hundred cubit long and a hundred cubit wide be square and the altar be in front of the house . then he take me to the covered way before the house and take the measure of it upright five cubit on one side and five cubit on the other and the doorway be fourteen cubit wide and the side wall of the doorway be three cubit on one side and three cubit on the other . the covered way be twenty cubit long and twelve cubit wide and they go up to it by ten step and there be pillar by the upright one on one side and one on the other .and he take me to the temple and take the measure of the upright six cubit wide on one side and six cubit wide on the other . and the door opening be ten cubit wide and the side wall of the door opening be five cubit on one side and five cubit on the other and it be forty cubit long and twenty cubit wide . and he go inside and take the measure of the upright of the door open two cubit and the door open six cubit and the side wall of the door opening be seven cubit on one side and seven cubit on the other . and by his measure it be twenty cubit long and twenty cubit wide in front of the temple and he say to me this be the most holy place . then he take the measure of the wall of the house which be six cubit and of the side room round the house which be four cubit wide . and the side room room over room be three time thirty there be inlet in the wall of the house for the side room round about for support in the wall of the house . the side room become wider a they go high up the house by the amount of the space let into the wall up round about the house because of the inlet in the house and one go up from the low floor by step to the middle and from the middle to the upper floor . and i saw that the house have a stone floor all round the base of the side room be a full rod of six great cubit high . the wall support the side room on the outside be five cubit thick and there be a free space of five cubit between the side room of the house . and between the room be a space twenty cubit wide all round the house . and the free space have door open from the side room one door on the north and one door on the south and the free space be five cubit wide all round . and the building which be in front of the separate place at the side to the west be seventy cubit wide the wall of the building be five cubit thick all round and ninety cubit long . and he take the measure of the house it be a hundred cubit long and the separate place and the building with it wall be a hundred cubit long and the east front of the house and of the separate place be a hundred cubit wide . and he take the measure of the building in front of the separate place which be at the back of it and the pillared walk on one side and on the other side they be a hundred cubit long and the temple and the inner part and it outer cover way be cover in and the sloping window and the covered way round all three of them be of shakiph wood all round from the level of the earth up to the window and there be a roof over the doorway and as far a the inner house and to the outside and on the wall all round inside and outside . and it have picture form of winged being and palm tree a palm tree between two wing one and every wing one have two face so that there be the face of a man turn to the palm tree on one side and the face of a young lion on the other side so it be make all round the house . from earth level up to the window there be wing one and palm tree picture on the wall . ... the altar be make of wood and be three cubit high and two cubit long it have angle and it base and side be of wood and he say to me this be the table which be before the lord . the temple have two door . and the holy place have two door and the door have two turn leaf two for one and two for the other . and on them be picture winged one and palm tree a on the wall and a ... of wood be on the front of the covered way outside . and there be slop window and palm tree on one side and on the other on the side of the covered way and the side room of the house and the ...and he take me out into the inner square in the direction of the north and he take me into the room which be opposite the separate place and opposite the building to the north . on the north side it be a hundred cubit long and fifty cubit wide opposite the space of twenty cubit which be part of the inner square and opposite the stone floor of the outer square . there be cover way face one another on the third floor . and in front of the room be a walk ten cubit wide and a hundred cubit long and their door be face north . and the high room be short for the covered way take up more space from these than from the low and middle room . for they be on three floor and they have no pillar like the pillar of the outer square so the high be narrow than the low and middle floor from the earth level . and the wall which go outside by the side of the room in the direction of the outer square in front of the room be fifty cubit long . for the room in the outer square be fifty cubit long and in front of the temple be a space of a hundred cubit . and under these room be the way in from the east side a one go into them from the outer square at the head of the outer wall . and he take me to the south and in front of the separate place and in front of the building there be room . and there be a walk in front of them like that by the room on the north they be equally long and wide and the way out of them be the same in design and have the same sort of door . and under the room on the south be a door at the head of the outer wall in the direction of the east a one go in . and he say to me the north room and the south room in front of the separate place be the holy room where the priest who come near the lord take the most holy thing for their food there the most holy thing be place with the meal offering and the sin offering and the offering for error for the place be holy . when the priest go in they may not go out of the holy place into the outer square and there they be to put the robe in which they do the work of the lord 's house for they be holy and they have to put on other clothing before they come near that which have to do with the people . and when he have come to the end of measure the inner house he take me out to the doorway look to the east and take it measure all round . he go round and take the measure of it on the east side with the measure rod five hundred measure with the rod all round . and he go round and take the measure of it on the north side with the measure rod five hundred measure with the rod all round . and he go round and take the measure of it on the south side with the measure rod five hundred measure with the rod all round . and he go round and take the measure of it on the west side with the measure rod five hundred measure with the rod all round . he take it measure on the four side and it have a wall all round five hundred long and five hundred wide separate what be holy from what be common .and he take me to the doorway look to the east and there be the glory of the god of israel come from the way of the east and his voice be like the sound of great water and the earth be shin with his glory . and the vision which i saw be like the vision i have see when he come for the destruction of the town and like the vision which i saw by the river chebar and i go down on my face . and the glory of the lord come into the house by the way of the doorway look to the east . and the spirit lift me up take me into the inner square and i saw that the house be full of the glory of the lord . and the voice of one talk to me come to my ear from inside the house and the man be by my side . and he say to me son of man this be the place where the seat of my power be and the rest place of my foot where i will be among the child of israel for ever and no longer will the people of israel make my holy name unclean they or their king by their loose way and by the dead body of their king by put their doorstep by my doorstep and the pillar of their door by the pillar of my door with only a wall between me and them and they have make my holy name unclean by the disgusting thing which they have do so in my wrath i send destruction on them . now let them put their loose way and the dead body of their king far from me and i will be among them for ever . you son of man give the child of israel an account of this house so that they may be sham because of their evil do and let them see the vision of it and it image . and they will be sham by what they have do so give them the knowledge of the form of the house and it structure and the way out of it and into it and all it law and it rule write it down for them so that they may keep all it law and do them . this be the law of the house on the top of the mountain all the space round it on every side will be most holy . see this be the law of the house . and these be the measure of the altar in cubits the cubit be a cubit and a hand 's measure it hollow base be a cubit high and a cubit wide and it have an overhang edge as wide a a hand stretch all round it and from the base on the earth level to the low shelf the altar be two cubit high and a cubit wide and from the small shelf to the great shelf it be four cubit high and a cubit wide . and the fireplace be four cubit high and come up from the fireplace be the horn a cubit high . and the fireplace be twelve cubit long and twelve cubit wide square on it four side . and the shelf be fourteen cubit long and fourteen cubit wide on it four side the edge round it be half a cubit the base of it be a cubit all round and it step be face the east . and he say to me son of man the lord god have say these be the rule for the altar when they make it for the offering of burned offering on it and the drain out of the blood . you be to give to the priest the levite of the seed of zadok who come near to me say the lord god to do my work a young ox for a sin offering . you be to take some of it blood and put it on the four horn and on the four angle of the shelf and on the edge all round and you be to make it clean and free from sin . and you be to take the ox of the sin offering and have it burn in the special place order for it in the house outside the holy place . and on the second day you be to have a he goat without any mark on it offer for a sin offering and they be to make the altar clean a they do with the young ox . and after you have make it clean let a young ox without a mark be offer and a male sheep from the flock without a mark . and you be to take them before the lord and the priest will put salt on them offer them up for a burned offering to the lord . every day for seven day you be to give a goat for a sin offering and let them give in addition a young ox and a male sheep from the flock without any mark on them . for seven day they be to make offering to take away sin from the altar and to make it clean so they be to make it holy . and when these day have come to an end then on the eighth day and after the priest will make your burn offering on the altar and your peace offering and i will take pleasure in you say the lord .and he take me back to the out doorway of the holy place look to the east and it be shut . and the lord say to me this doorway be to be shut it be not to be open and no man be to go in by it because the lord the god of israel have go in by it and it be to be shut . but the ruler will be seat there to take his food before the lord he will go in by the covered way to the door and will come out by the same way . and he take me to the north doorway in front of the house and look i saw that the house of the lord be full of the glory of the lord and i go down on my face . and the lord say to me son of man take to heart and let your eye see and your ear be open to everything i say to you about all the rule of the house of the lord and all it law and take note of the way into the house and all the way out of the holy place . and say to the uncontrolled child of israel this be what the lord have say o you child of israel let it be enough for you among the disgusting thing which you have do to have let men from strange land without circumcision of heart or flesh come into my holy place make my house unclean and to have make the offering of my food even the fat and the blood and in addition to all your disgusting way you have let my agreement be break . and you have not take care of my holy thing but you have put them a keeper to take care of my work in my holy place . for this cause the lord have say no man from a strange land without circumcision of heart and flesh of all those who be live among the child of israel be to come into my holy place . but a for the levite who go far from me when israel go out of the right way turn away from me to go after their image their punishment will come on them . but they may be caretaker in my holy place and overseer at the door of the house do the work of the house they will put to death the burn offering and the beast offer for the people and they will take their place before them a their servant . because they do this work for them before their image and become a cause of sin to the child of israel for this cause my hand have be lift up against them say the lord and their punishment will be on them . and they will not come near me to do the work of priest to me or come near any of my holy thing or the thing which be most holy but their shame will be on them and the punishment for the disgusting thing which they have do . but i will make them responsible for the care of the house and all it work and everything which be do in it . but a for the priest the son of zadok who take care of my holy place when the child of israel be turn away from me they be to come near me to do my work they will take their place before me offer to me the fat and the blood say the lord they be to come into my holy place and they be to come near to my table to do my work and have the care of my house . and when they come in by the doorway of the inner square they be to be clothe in linen robe there be to be no wool on them while they be do my work in the doorway of the inner square and inside the house . they be to have linen head dress on their head and linen trouser on their leg and they be to have nothing round them to make their skin wet with heat . and when they go out into the outer square to the people they be to take off the robe in which they do the work of priest and put them away in the holy room and put on other clothing so that the people may not be make holy by their robe . they be not to have all the hair cut off their head and they be not to let their hair get long but they be to have the end of their hair cut . the priest be not to take wine when they go into the inner square . and they be not to take a wife any widow or woman whose husband have put her away but they may take virgin of the seed of israel or a widow who be the widow of a priest . and they be to make clear to my people the division between what be holy and what be common and to give them the knowledge of what be clean and what be unclean . in any cause they be to be in the position of judge judge in harmony with my decision they be to keep my law and my rule in all my fixed feast and they be to keep my sabbaths holy . they be not to come near any dead person so a to become unclean but for a father or mother or son or daughter or brother or for a sister who have no husband they may make themselves unclean . and after he have be make clean seven day be to be number for him . and on the day when he go into the inner square to do the work of the holy place he be to make his sin offering say the lord . and they be to have no heritage i be their heritage you be to give them no property in israel i be their property . their food be to be the meal offering and the sin offering and the offering for error and everything give specially to the lord in israel will be theirs . and the best of all the first fruit of everything and every offering which be lift up of all your offering will be for the priest and you be to give the priest the first of your bread make so cause a blessing to come on your house . the priest may not take for food any bird or beast which have come to a natural death or whose death have be cause by another animal .and when you be make a distribution of the land by the decision of the lord for your heritage you be to make an offering to the lord of a part of the land a holy it be to be twenty five thousand long and twenty thousand wide all the land inside these limit be to be holy . of this a square five hundred long and five hundred wide be to be for the holy place with a space of fifty cubit all round it . and of this measure let a space be measure twenty five thousand long and ten thousand wide in it there will be the holy place even the most holy . this holy part of the land be to be for the priest the servant of the holy place who come near to the lord to do his work it be to be a place for their house and for grass land and for cattle . a space of land twenty five thousand long and ten thousand wide be to be for the levite the servant of the house a property for themselves for town for their living place . and a the property for the town you be to have a part five thousand wide and twenty five thousand long by the side of the offering of the holy part of the land this be to be for all the child of israel . and for the ruler there be to be a part on one side and on the other side of the holy offering and of the property of the town in front of the holy offering and in front of the property of the town on the west of it and on the east measure in the same line a one of the part of the land from it limit on the west to it limit on the east of the land . and this will be his heritage in israel and my ruler will no longer be cruel master to my people but they will give the land a a heritage to the child of israel by their tribe . this be what the lord have say let this be enough for you o ruler of israel let there be an end of violent behaviour and waste do what be right judge uprightly let there be no more drive out of my people say the lord . have true scale and a true ephah and a true bath . the ephah and the bath be to be of the same measure so that the bath be equal to a tenth of a homer and the ephah to a tenth of a homer the unit of measure be to be a homer . and the shekel be to be twenty gerahs five shekel be five and ten shekel be ten and your maneh be to be fifty shekel this be the offering you be to give a sixth of an ephah out of a homer of wheat and a sixth of an ephah out of a homer of barley and the fixed measure of oil be to be a tenth of a bath from the cor for ten bath make up the cor and one lamb from the flock out of every two hundred from all the family of israel for a meal offering and for a burned offering and for peace offering to take away their sin say the lord . all the people be to give this offering to the ruler . and the ruler will be responsible for the burned offering and the meal offering and the drink offering at the feast and the new moon and the sabbath at all the fixed feast of the child of israel he will give the sin offering and meal offering and burn offering and the peace offering to take away the sin of the child of israel . this be what the lord have say in the first month on the first day of the month you be to take a young ox without any mark on him and you be to make the holy place clean . and the priest be to take some of the blood of the sin offering and put it on the upright at the side of the door of the house and on the four angle of the shelf of the altar and on the side of the doorway of the inner square . and this you be to do on the seventh day of the month for everyone who be in error and for the feeble mind you be to make the house free from sin . in the first month on the fourteenth day of the month you be to have the passover a feast of seven day unleavened bread be to be your food . and on that day the ruler be to give for himself and for all the people of the land an ox for a sin offering . and on the seven day of the feast he be to give a burned offering to the lord seven ox and seven sheep without any mark on them every day for seven day and a he goat every day for a sin offering . and he be to give a meal offer an ephah for every ox and an ephah for every sheep and a hin of oil to every ephah . in the seventh month on the fifteenth day of the month at the feast he be to give the same for seven day the sin offer the burned offer the meal offering and the oil a before .this be what the lord have say the doorway of the inner square look to the east be to be shut on the six working day but on the sabbath it be to be open and at the time of the new moon it be to be open . and the ruler be to go in through the covered way of the outer doorway outside and take his place by the pillar of the doorway and the priest will make his burned offering and his peace offering and he will give worship at the doorstep of the doorway then he will go out and the door will not be shut till the evening . and the people of the land be to give worship at the door of that doorway before the lord on the sabbath and at the new moon . and the burned offering offer to the lord by the ruler on the sabbath day be to be six lamb without a mark on them and a male sheep without a mark and the meal offering be to be an ephah for the sheep and for the lamb whatever he be able to give and a hin of oil to an ephah . and at the time of the new moon it be to be a young ox of the herd without a mark on him and six lamb and a male sheep all without a mark and he be to give a meal offer an ephah for the ox and an ephah for the sheep and for the lamb whatever he be able to give and a hin of oil to an ephah . and when the ruler come in he be to go in through the covered way of the doorway and he be to go out by the same way . but when the people of the land come before the lord at the fixed feast he who come in by the north doorway to give worship be to go out by the south doorway and he who come in by the south doorway be to go out by the north doorway he be not to come back by the doorway through which he go in but be to go straight before him . and the ruler when they come in be to come among them and be to go out when they go out . at the feast and the fixed meeting the meal offering be to be an ephah for an ox and an ephah for a male sheep and for the lamb whatever he be able to give and a hin of oil to an ephah . and when the ruler make a free offering a burned offering or a peace offering freely give to the lord the doorway look to the east be to be make open for him and he be to make his burned offering and his peace offering a he do on the sabbath day and he will go out and the door will be shut after he have go out . and you be to give a lamb a year old without any mark on it for a burned offering to the lord every day morning by morning you be to give it . and you be to give morning by morning a meal offering with it a sixth of an ephah and a third of a hin of oil drop on the best meal a meal offering offer to the lord at all time by an eternal order . and they be to give the lamb and the meal offering and the oil morning by morning for a burned offering at all time . this be what the lord have say if the ruler give a property to any of his son it be his heritage and will be the property of his son it be theirs for their heritage . and if he give a part of his heritage to one of his servant it will be his till the year of make free and then it will go back to the ruler for it be his son ' heritage and be to be theirs . and the ruler be not to take the heritage of any of the people drive them out of their property he be to give a heritage to his son out of the property which be his so that my people may not be send away from their property . and he take me through by the way in at the side of the doorway into the holy room which be the priest ' look to the north and i saw a place at the side of them to the west . and he say to me this be the place where the offering for error and the sin offering be to be cook in water by the priest and where the meal offering be to be cook in the oven so that they may not be take out into the outer square to make the people holy . and he take me out into the outer square and make me go by the four angle of the square and i saw that in every angle of the open square there be a space shut in . in the four angle there be space wall in forty cubit long and thirty wide the four be of the same size . and there be a line of wall all round inside them round all four and boil place be make under it all round about . and he say to me these be the boiling room where the offering of the people be cook by the servant of the house .and he take me back to the door of the house and i saw that water be flow out from under the doorstep of the house on the east for the house be face east and the water come down from under from the right side of the house on the south side of the altar . and he take me out by the north doorway and make me go round to the outside of the doorway look to the east and i saw water run slowly out on the south side . and the man go out to the east with the line in his hand and after measure a thousand cubits he make me go through the water which come over my foot . and again measure a thousand cubits he make me go through the water which come up to my knee . again measure a thousand he make me go through the water up to the middle of my body . again after his measure a thousand it become a river which it be not possible to go through for the water have become deep enough for swim a river it be not possible to go through . and he say to me son of man have you see this ? then he take me to the river 's edge . and he take me back and i saw at the edge of the river a very great number of tree on this side and on that . and he say to me these water be flow out to the east part of the land and down into the arabah and they will go to the sea and the water will be make sweet . and it will come about that every living and move thing wherever their stream come will have life and there will be very much fish because these water have come there and have be make sweet and everything wherever the river come will have life . and fisherman will take up their place by it from en gedi as far a en eglaim will be a place for the stretch out of net the fish will be of every sort like the fish of the great sea a very great number . the wet place and the pool will not be make sweet they will be give up to salt . and by the edge of the river on this side and on that will come up every tree use for food whose leaf will ever be green and it fruit will not come to an end it will have new fruit every month because it water come out from the holy place the fruit will be for food and the leaf will make well those who be ill. this be what the lord have say these be the limit by which you will take up your heritage in the land among the twelve tribe of israel joseph be to have two part . and you be to make an equal division of it a i give my oath to your father to give it to you for this land be to be your heritage . and this be to be the limit of the land on the north side from the great sea in the direction of hethlon as far a the way into hamath to zedad berothah sibraim which be between the limit of damascus and the limit of hazar hatticon which be on the limit of hauran . and this be the limit from the sea in the direction of hazar enon and the limit of damascus be to the north and on the north be the limit of hamath . this be the north side . and the east side will be from hazar enon which be between hauran and damascus and between gilead and the land of israel the jordan will be the limit to the east sea to tamar . this be the east side . and the south side to the south will be from tamar as far a the water of meribath kadesh to the stream of egypt to the great sea . this be the south side on the south . and the west side will be the great sea from the limit on the south to a point opposite the way into hamath . this be the west side . you will make a division of the land among you tribe by tribe . and you be to make a distribution of it by the decision of the lord for a heritage to you and to the men from other land who be live among you and who have child in your land they will be the same to you a if they be israelite by birth they will have their heritage with you among the tribe of israel . in whatever tribe the man from a strange land be live there you be to give him his heritage say the lord .now these be the name of the tribe from the north end from the west on the way of hethlon to the way into hamath in the direction of hazar enon with the limit of damascus to the north by hamath and on the limit from the east side to the west side dan one part . and on the limit of dan from the east side to the west side asher one part . and on the limit of asher from the east side to the west side naphtali one part . and on the limit of naphtali from the east side to the west side manasseh one part . and on the limit of manasseh from the east side to the west side ephraim one part . and on the limit of ephraim from the east side to the west side reuben one part . and on the limit of reuben from the east side to the west side judah one part . and on the limit of judah from the east side to the west side will be the offering which you be to make twenty five thousand wide and as long a one of the part from the east side to the west side and the holy place will be in the middle of it . the offering you will give to the lord be to be twenty five thousand long and twenty five thousand wide . and for these that be the priest the holy offering be to be twenty five thousand long to the north ten thousand wide to the west ten thousand wide to the east and twenty five thousand long to the south and the holy place of the lord will be in the middle of it . for the priest who have be make holy those of the son of zadok who keep the order i give them who do not go out of the right way when the child of israel go from the way a the levite do even for them will be the offering from the offering of the land a thing most holy on the limit of the land give to the levite . and the levite be to have a part of the land equal to the limit of the priest ' twenty five thousand long and ten thousand wide all of it together to be twenty five thousand long and twenty thousand wide . and they be not to let any of it go for a price or give it in exchange and the part of the land give to the lord be not to go into other hand for it be holy to the lord . and the other five thousand measure from side to side in front of the twenty five thousand be to be for common use for the town for living in and for a free space and the town will be in the middle of it . and these will be it measure the north side four thousand five hundred and the south side four thousand five hundred and on the east side four thousand five hundred and on the west side four thousand five hundred . and the town will have a free space on the north of two hundred and fifty on the south of two hundred and fifty on the east of two hundred and fifty and on the west of two hundred and fifty . and the rest in measure as long a the holy offering will be ten thousand to the east and ten thousand to the west and it produce will be for food for the worker of the town . it will be farm by worker of the town from all the tribe of israel . the size of the offer all together be to be twenty five thousand by twenty five thousand you be to make the holy offering a square together with the property of the town . and the rest be to be for the prince on this side and on that side of the holy offering and of the property of the town in front of the twenty five thousand to the east as far a the east limit and to the west in front of the twenty five thousand as far a the west limit and of the same measure a those part it will be the property of the prince and the holy offering and holy place of the house will be in the middle of it . and the property of the levite and the property of the town will be in the middle of the prince 's property between the limit of judah 's part and the limit of benjamin 's part will be for the prince . and a for the rest of the tribe from the east side to the west side benjamin one part . and on the limit of benjamin from the east side to the west side simeon one part . and on the limit of simeon from the east side to the west side issachar one part . and on the limit of issachar from the east side to the west side zebulun one part . and on the limit of zebulun from the east side to the west side gad one part . and on the limit of gad on the south side and to the south of it the limit will be from tamar to the water of meribath kadesh to the stream to the great sea . this be the land of which distribution be to be make by the decision of the lord among the tribe of israel for their heritage and these be their heritage say the lord . and these be the outskirt of the town on the north side four thousand five hundred by measure and the door of the town be to be name by the name of the tribe of israel three door on the north one for reuben one for judah one for levi and at the east side four thousand five hundred by measure and three door one for joseph one for benjamin one for dan and at the south side four thousand five hundred by measure and three door one for simeon one for issachar one for zebulun at the west side four thousand five hundred by measure with their three door one for gad one for asher one for naphtali . it be to be eighteen thousand all round and the name of the town from that day will be the lord be there .in the third year of the rule of jehoiakim king of judah nebuchadnezzar king of babylon come to jerusalem shut it in with his force . and the lord give into his hand jehoiakim king of judah with some of the vessel of the house of god and he take them away into the land of shinar to the house of his god and he put the vessel into the store house of his god . and the king give order to ashpenaz the captain of his unsexed servant to take in some of the child of israel certain of the king 's family and those of high birth young men who be strong and healthy good look and train in all wisdom have a good education and much knowledge and able to take position in the king 's house and to have them train in the writing and language of the chaldaean . and a regular amount of food and wine every day from the king 's table be order for them by the king and they be to be care for for three year so that at the end of that time they might take their place before the king . and among these there be of the child of judah daniel hananiah mishael and azariah . and the captain of the unsexed servant give them name to daniel he give the name of belteshazzar to hananiah the name of shadrach to mishael the name of meshach and to azariah the name of abed nego . and daniel have come to the decision that he would not make himself unclean with the king 's food or wine so he make a request to the captain of the unsexed servant that he might not make himself unclean . and god put into the heart of the captain of the unsexed servant kind feeling and pity for daniel . and the captain of the unsexed servant say to daniel i be in fear of my lord the king who have give order about your food and your drink what if he see you look less happy than the other young men of your generation ? then you would have put my head in danger from the king . then daniel say to the keeper in whose care the captain of the unsexed servant have put daniel hananiah mishael and azariah put your servant to the test for ten day let them give u grain for our food and water for our drink . then take a look at our face and the face of the young men who have food from the king 's table and have see them do to your servant a it seem right to you . so he give ear to them in this thing and put them to the test for ten day . and at the end of ten day their face seem fairer and they be fatter in flesh than all the young men who have their food from the king 's table . so the keeper regularly take away their meat and the wine which be to have be their drink and give them grain . now a for these four young men god give them knowledge and make them expert in all book learning and wisdom and daniel be wise in all vision and dream . now at the end of the time fix by the king for them to go in the captain of the unsexed servant take them in to nebuchadnezzar . and the king have talk with them and among them all there be no one like daniel hananiah mishael and azariah so they be give place before the king . and in any business needing wisdom and good sense about which the king put question to them he saw that they be ten time well than all the wonder worker and user of secret art in all his kingdom . and daniel go on till the first year of king cyrus .in the second year of the rule of nebuchadnezzar nebuchadnezzar have dream and his spirit be trouble and his sleep go from him . then the king give order that the wonder worker and the user of secret art and those who make use of evil power and the chaldaean be to be send for to make clear to the king his dream . so they come and take their place before the king . and the king say to them i have have a dream and my spirit be trouble by the desire to have the dream make clear to me . then the chaldaean say to the king in the aramaean language o king have life for ever give your servant an account of your dream and we will make clear to you the sense of it . the king make answer and say to the chaldaean this be my decision if you do not make clear to me the dream and the sense of it you will be cut in bit and your house make waste . but if you make clear the dream and the sense of it you will have from me offering and reward and great honour so make clear to me the dream and the sense of it . a second time they say in answer let the king give his servant an account of his dream and we will make clear the sense . the king make answer and say i be certain that you be attempt to get more time because you see that my decision be fix that if you do not make my dream clear to me there be only one fate for you for you have make ready false and evil word to say before me till the time be change so give me an account of the dream and i will be certain that you be able to make the sense of it clear . then the chaldaean say to the king in answer there be not a man on earth able to make clear the king 's business for no king however great his power have ever make such a request to any wonder worker or user of secret art or chaldaean . the king 's request be a very hard one and there be no other who be able to make it clear to the king but the god whose live place be not with flesh . because of this the king be angry and full of wrath and give order for the destruction of all the wise men of babylon . so the order go out that the wise men be to be put to death and they be look for daniel and his friend to put them to death . then daniel give an answer with wisdom and good sense to arioch the captain of the king 's arm men who have go out to put to death the wise men of babylon he make answer and say to arioch o captain of the king why be the king 's order so cruel ? then arioch give daniel an account of the business . and daniel go in and make a request to the king to give him time and he would make clear the sense of his dream to the king . and daniel go to his house and give his friend hananiah mishael and azariah the news so that they might make a request for the mercy of the god of heaven in the question of this secret so that daniel and his friend might not come to destruction with the rest of the wise men of babylon . then the secret be make clear to daniel in a vision of the night . and daniel give bless to the god of heaven . and daniel say in answer may the name of god be praise for ever and ever for wisdom and strength be his by him time and year be change by him king be take away and king be lift up he give wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those whose mind be awake he be the unveiler of deep and secret thing he have knowledge of what be in the dark and the light have it living place with him . i give you praise and worship o god of my father who have give me wisdom and strength and have now make clear to me what we be request from you for you have give u knowledge of the king 's business . for this reason daniel go to arioch to whom the king have give order for the destruction of the wise men of babylon and say to him do not put to death the wise men of babylon take me in before the king and i will make clear to him the sense of the dream . then arioch quickly take daniel in before the king and say to him here be a man from among the prisoner of judah who will make clear to the king the sense of the dream . the king make answer and say to daniel whose name be belteshazzar be you able to make clear to me the dream which i saw and it sense ? then daniel say in answer to the king no wise men or user of secret art or wonder worker or reader of sign be able to make clear to the king the secret he be search for but there be a god in heaven the unveiler of secret and he have give to king nebuchadnezzar knowledge of what will take place in the last day . your dream and the vision of your head on your bed be these a for you o king the thought which come to you on your bed be of what will come about after this and the unveiler of secret have make clear to you what be to come . a for me this secret be not make clear to me because of any wisdom which i have more than any living man but in order that the sense of the dream may be make clear to the king and that you may have knowledge of the thought of your heart . you o king be look and a great image be there . this image which be very great and whose glory be very bright be place before you it form send fear into the heart . a for this image it head be make of the best gold it breast and it arm be of silver it middle and it side be of brass it leg of iron it foot be in part of iron and in part of potter 's earth . while you be look at it a stone be cut out but not by hand and it give the image a blow on it foot which be of iron and earth and they be break in bit . then the iron and the earth the brass and the silver and the gold be smash together and become like the dust on the floor where grain be crush in summer and the wind take them away so that no sign of them be to be see and the stone which give the image a blow become a great mountain cover all the earth . this be the dream and we will make clear to the king the sense of it . you o king king of king to whom the god of heaven have give the kingdom the power and the strength and the glory wherever the child of men be live into whose hand he have give the beast of the field and the bird of heaven and have make you ruler over them all you be the head of gold . and after you another kingdom low than you will come to power and a third kingdom of brass ruling over all the earth . and the fourth kingdom will be strong a iron because a all thing be break and overcome by iron so it will have the power of crushing and smash down all the earth . and a you saw the foot and toe part of potter 's work and part of iron there will be a division in the kingdom but there will be some of the strength of iron in it because you saw the iron mixed with the potter 's earth . and a the toe of the foot be in part of iron and in part of earth so part of the kingdom will be strong and part of it will readily be break . and a you saw the iron mixed with earth they will give their daughter to one another a wife but they will not be united one with another even a iron be not mixed with earth . and in the day of those king the god of heaven will put up a kingdom which will never come to destruction and it power will never be give into the hand of another people and all these kingdom will be break and overcome by it but it will keep it place for ever . because you saw that a stone be cut out of the mountain without hand and that by it the iron and the brass and the earth and the silver and the gold be break to bits a great god have give the king knowledge of what be to take place in the future the dream be fix and it sense be certain . then king nebuchadnezzar fall down on his face give worship to daniel and give order for an offering and spice to be give to him and the king make answer to daniel and say truly your god be a god of god and a lord of king and an unveiler of secret for you have be able to make this secret clear . then the king make daniel great and give him offering in great number and make him ruler over all the land of babylon and chief over all the wise men of babylon . and at daniel 's request the king give shadrach meshach and abed nego authority over the business of the land of babylon but daniel be keep near the king 's person .nebuchadnezzar the king make an image of gold sixty cubit high and six cubit wide he put it up in the valley of dura in the land of babylon . and nebuchadnezzar the king send to get together all the captain the chief the ruler the wise men the keeper of public money the judge the overseer and all the ruler of the division of the country to come to see the unveiling of the image which nebuchadnezzar the king have put up . then the captain the chief the ruler the wise men the keeper of public money the judge the overseer and all the ruler of the division of the country come together to see the unveiling of the image which nebuchadnezzar the king have put up and they take their place before the image which nebuchadnezzar have put up . then one of the king 's crier say in a loud voice to you the order be give o people nation and language that when the sound of the horn pipe harp trigon psaltery bagpipe and all sort of instrument come to your ear you be to go down on your face in worship before the image of gold which nebuchadnezzar the king have put up and anyone not fall down and worship will that same hour be put into a burning and flaming fire . so at that time all the people when the sound of the horn pipe harp trigon psaltery and all sort of instrument come to their ear go down on their face in worship before the image of gold which nebuchadnezzar the king have put up . at that time certain chaldaean come near and make a statement against the jew . they make answer and say to nebuchadnezzar the king o king have life for ever . you o king have give an order that every man when the sound of the horn pipe harp trigon psaltery bagpipe and all sort of instrument come to his ear be to go down on his face in worship before the image of gold and anyone not fall down and worship be to be put into a burning and flaming fire . there be certain jew whom you have put over the business of the land of babylon shadrach meshach and abed nego these men have not give attention to you o king they be not servant of your god or worshipper of the gold image which you have put up . then nebuchadnezzar in his wrath and passion give order for shadrach meshach and abed nego to be send for . then they make these men come in before the king . nebuchadnezzar make answer and say to them be it true o shadrach meshach and abed nego that you will not be servant of my god or give worship to the image of gold which i have put up ? now if you be ready on hear the sound of the horn pipe harp trigon psaltery bagpipe and all sort of instrument to go down on your face in worship before the image which i have make it be well but if you will not give worship that same hour you will be put into a burning and flaming fire and what god be there who will be able to take you out of my hand ? shadrach meshach and abed nego answer nebuchadnezzar the king say there be no need for u to give you an answer to this question . if our god whose servant we be be able to keep u safe from the burning and flaming fire and from your hand o king he will keep u safe . but if not be certain o king that we will not be the servant of your god or give worship to the image of gold which you have put up . then nebuchadnezzar be full of wrath and the form of his face be change against shadrach meshach and abed nego and he give order that the fire be to be heat up seven time more than it be generally heat . and he give order to certain strong men in his army to put cord on shadrach meshach and abed nego and put them into the burning and flaming fire . then these men have cord put round them a they be in their coat their trouser their hat and their clothing and be drop into the burning and flaming fire . and because the king 's order be not to be put on one side and the heat of the fire be so great the men who take up shadrach meshach and abed nego be burn to death by the flame of the fire . and these three men shadrach meshach and abed nego with the cord about them go down into the burning and flaming fire . then king nebuchadnezzar full of fear and wonder get up quickly and say to his wise men do we not put three men in cord into the fire ? and they make answer and say to the king true o king . he make answer and say look ! i see four men loose walk in the middle of the fire and they be not damage and the form of the fourth be like a son of the god . then nebuchadnezzar come near the door of the burning and flaming fire he make answer and say shadrach meshach and abed nego you servant of the most high god come out and come here . then shadrach meshach and abed nego come out of the fire . and the captain the chief and the ruler and the king 's wise men who have come together saw these men over whose body the fire have no power and not a hair of their head be burn and their coat be not change and there be no smell of fire about them . nebuchadnezzar make answer and say praise be to the god of shadrach meshach and abed nego who have send his angel and keep his servant safe who have faith in him and who put the king 's word on one side and give up their body to the fire so that they might not be servant or worshipper of any other god but their god . and it be my decision that any people nation or language say evil against the god of shadrach meshach and abed nego will be cut to bit and their house make waste because there be no other god who be able to give salvation such a this . then the king give shadrach meshach and abed nego even great authority in the land of babylon .nebuchadnezzar the king to all the people nation and language live in all the earth may your peace be increase . it have seem good to me to make clear the sign and wonder which the most high god have do with me . how great be his sign ! and how full of power be his wonder ! his kingdom be an eternal kingdom and his rule go on from generation to generation . i nebuchadnezzar be at rest in my place and all thing be go well for me in my great house i saw a dream which be a cause of great fear to me i be trouble by the image of my mind on my bed and by the vision of my head . and i give order for all the wise men of babylon to come in before me so that they might make clear to me the sense of my dream . then the wonder worker the user of secret art the chaldaean and the reader of sign come in to me and i put the dream before them but they do not make clear the sense of it to me . but at last daniel come in before me he whose name be belteshazzar after the name of my god and in whom be the spirit of the holy god and i put the dream before him say o belteshazzar master of the wonder worker because i be certain that the spirit of the holy god be in you and you be trouble by no secret this be the dream which i saw make clear to me it sense . on my bed i saw a vision there be a tree in the middle of the earth and it be very high . and the tree become tall and strong stretch up to heaven and to be see from the end of the earth it leaf be fair and it have much fruit and in it be food enough for all the beast of the field have shade under it and the bird of heaven be rest in it branch and it give food to all living thing . in the vision of my head on my bed i saw a watcher a holy one come down from heaven cry out with a loud voice and this be what he say let the tree be cut down and it branch break off let it leaf be take off and it fruit sent in every direction let the beast get away from under it and the bird from it branch but keep it broken end and it root still in the earth even with a band of iron and brass let him have the young grass of the field for food and let him be wet with the dew of heaven and let his part be with the beast . let his heart be change from that of a man and the heart of a beast be give to him and let seven time go by him . this order be fix by the watcher and the decision be by the word of the holy one so that the living may be certain that the most high be ruler over the kingdom of men and give it to any man at his pleasure lift up over it the low of men . this dream i king nebuchadnezzar saw and do you o belteshazzar make clear the sense of it for all the wise men of my kingdom be unable to make the sense of it clear to me but you be able for the spirit of the holy god be in you . then daniel whose name be belteshazzar be at a loss for a time his thought trouble him . the king make answer and say belteshazzar do not be trouble by the dream or by the sense of it . belteshazzar answer say my lord may the dream be about your hater and it sense about those who be against you . the tree which you saw which become tall and strong stretch up to heaven and see from the end of the earth which have fair leaf and much fruit and have in it food for all under which the beast of the field be live and in the branch of which the bird of heaven have their resting place it be you o king who have become great and strong for your power be increase and stretch up to heaven and your rule to the end of the earth . and a for the vision which the king saw of a watcher a holy one come down from heaven say let the tree be cut down and give to destruction this be the sense of it o king and it be the decision of the most high which have come on my lord the king that they will send you out from among men to be with the beast of the field they will give you grass for your food like the ox and you will be wet with the dew of heaven and seven time will go by you till you be certain that the most high be ruler in the kingdom of men and give it to any man at his pleasure . and a they give order to let the broken end and the root of the tree be so your kingdom will be safe for you after it be clear to you that the heaven be rule . for this cause o king let my suggestion be please to you and let your sin be cover by righteousness and your evil do by mercy to the poor so that the time of your well be may be long . all this come to king nebuchadnezzar . at the end of twelve month he be walk on the roof of his great house in babylon . the king make answer and say be this not great babylon which i have make for the living place of king by the strength of my power and for the glory of my honour ? while the word be still in the king 's mouth a voice come down from heaven say o king nebuchadnezzar to you it be say the kingdom have go from you and they will send you out from among men to be with the beast of the field they will give you grass for your food like the ox and seven time will go by you till you be certain that the most high be ruler in the kingdom of men and give it to any man at his pleasure . that very hour the order about nebuchadnezzar be put into effect and he be send out from among men and have grass for his food like the ox and his body be wet with the dew of heaven till his hair become long a eagle ' feather and his nail like those of bird . and at the end of the day i nebuchadnezzar lift up my eye to heaven got back my reason and bless the most high i give praise and honour to him who be live for ever whose rule be an eternal rule and whose kingdom go on from generation to generation . and all the people of the earth be a nothing he do his pleasure in the army of heaven and among the people of the earth and no one be able to keep back his hand or say to him what be you do ? at the same time my reason come back to me and for the glory of my kingdom my honour and my great name come back to me and my wise men and my lord be turn to me again and i be make safe in my kingdom and have more power than before . now i nebuchadnezzar give worship and praise and honour to the king of heaven for all his work be true and his way be right and those who go in pride he be able to make low .belshazzar the king make a great feast for a thousand of his lord drink wine before the thousand . belshazzar while he be overcome with wine give order for them to put before him the gold and silver vessel which nebuchadnezzar his father have take from the temple in jerusalem so that the king and his lord his wife and his other woman might take their drink from them . then they take in the gold and silver vessel which have be in the temple of the house of god at jerusalem and the king and his lord his wife and his other woman take wine from them . they take their wine and give praise to the god of gold and silver of brass and iron and wood and stone . in that very hour the finger of a man 's hand be see write opposite the support for the light on the white wall of the king 's house and the king saw the part of the hand which be write . then the colour go from the king 's face and he be trouble by his thought strength go from his body and his knee be shake . the king cry out with a loud voice say that the user of secret art the chaldaean and the reader of sign be to be send for . the king make answer and say to the wise men of babylon whoever be able to make out this writing and make clear to me the sense of it will be clothe in purple and have a chain of gold round his neck and will be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom . then all the king 's wise men come in but they be not able to make out the writing or give the sense of it to the king . then king belshazzar be greatly troubled and the colour go from his face and his lord be at a loss . the queen because of the word of the king and his lord come into the house of the feast the queen make answer and say o king have life for ever do not be trouble by your thought or let the colour go from your face there be a man in your kingdom in whom be the spirit of the holy god and in the day of your father light and reason like the wisdom of the god be see in him and king nebuchadnezzar your father make him master of the wonder worker and the user of secret art and the chaldaean and the reader of sign because a most special spirit and knowledge and reason and the power of read dream and unfold dark saying and answer hard question be see to be in him even in daniel name belteshazzar by the king now let daniel be send for and he will make clear the sense of the writing . then they take daniel in before the king the king make answer and say to daniel so you be that daniel of the prisoner of judah whom my father take out of judah . and i have have news of you that the spirit of the god be in you and that light and reason and special wisdom have be see in you . and now the wise men the user of secret art have be send in before me for the purpose of read this writing and make clear to me the sense of it but they be not able to make clear the sense of the thing and i have have news of you that you have the power of make thing clear and of answer hard question now if you be able to make out the writing and give me the sense of it you will be clothe in purple and have a gold chain round your neck and be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom . then daniel make answer and say to the king keep your offering for yourself and give your reward to another but i after read the writing to the king will give him the sense of it . a for you o king the most high god give to nebuchadnezzar your father the kingdom and great power and glory and honour and because of the great power he give him all people and nation and language be shake in fear before him some he put to death and others he keep live at his pleasure lift up some and put others down a it please him . but when his heart be lift up and his spirit become hard with pride he be put down from his place a king and they take his glory from him and he be send out from among the son of men and his heart be make like the beast ' and he be live with the ass of the field he have grass for his food like the ox and his body be wet with the dew of heaven till he be certain that the most high be ruler in the kingdom of men and give power over it to anyone at his pleasure . and you his son o belshazzar have not keep your heart free from pride though you have knowledge of all this but you have be lift yourself up against the lord of heaven and they have put the vessel of his house before you and you and your lord your wife and your woman have take wine in them and you have give praise to god of silver and gold of brass and iron and wood and stone who be without the power of see or hearing and without knowledge and to the god in whose hand your breath be and whose be all your way you have not give glory then the part of the hand be send out from before him and this writing be record . and this be the write which be record mene tekel peres . this be the sense of the word mene your kingdom have be number by god and end . tekel you have be put in the scale and see to be under weight . peres your kingdom have be cut up and give to the medes and persian . then by the order of belshazzar they put a purple robe on daniel and a gold chain round his neck and a public statement be make that he be to be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom . that very night belshazzar the king of the chaldaean be put to death . and darius the mede take the kingdom be then about sixty two year old .darius be pleased to put over the kingdom a hundred and twenty captain who be to be all through the kingdom and over them be three chief ruler of whom daniel be one and the captain be to be responsible to the chief ruler so that the king might undergo no loss . then this daniel do his work well than the chief ruler and the captain because there be a special spirit in him and it be the king 's purpose to put him over all the kingdom . then the chief ruler and the captain be look for some cause for put daniel in the wrong in connection with the kingdom but they be unable to put forward any wrongdoing or error against him because he be true and no error or wrong be to be see in him . then these men say we will only get a reason for attack daniel in connection with the law of his god . then these chief ruler and the captain come to the king and say to him o king darius have life for ever . all the chief ruler of the kingdom the chief and the captain the wise men and the ruler have make a common decision to put in force a law have the king 's authority and to give a strong order that whoever make any request to any god or man but you o king for thirty day be to be put into the lion ' hole . now o king put the order in force sign the writing so that it may not be change like the law of the medes and persian which may not come to an end . for this reason king darius put his name on the writing and the order . and daniel on hearing that the writing have be sign go into his house now he have window in his room on the roof opening in the direction of jerusalem and three time a day he go down on his knee in prayer and praise before his god a he have do before . then these men be watch and saw daniel make prayer and request grace before his god . then they come near before the king and say o king have you not put your name to an order that any man who make a request to any god or man but you o king for thirty day be to be put into the lion ' hole ? the king make answer and say the thing be fix by the law of the medes and persian which may not come to an end . then they make answer and say before the king daniel one of the prisoner of judah have no respect for you o king or for the order sign by you but three time a day he make his prayer to god . when this thing come to the king 's ear it be very evil to him and his heart be fix on keep daniel safe and till the go down of the sun he be do everything in his power to get him free . then these men say to the king be certain o king that by the law of the medes and persians no order or law which the king have put into force may be change . then the king give the order and they take daniel and put him into the lion ' hole . the king make answer and say to daniel your god whose servant you be at all time will keep you safe . then they get a stone and put it over the mouth of the hole and it be stamp with the king 's stamp and with the stamp of the lord so that the decision about daniel might not be change . then the king go to his great house and take no food that night and no ... be place before him and his sleep go from him . then very early in the morning the king get up and go quickly to the lion ' hole . and when he come near the hole where daniel be he give a loud cry of grief the king make answer and say to daniel o daniel servant of the living god be your god whose servant you be at all time able to keep you safe from the lion ? then daniel say to the king o king have life for ever . my god have send his angel to keep the lion ' mouth shut and they have do me no damage because i be see to be without sin before him and far before you o king i have do no wrong . then the king be very glad and give order for them to take daniel up out of the hole . so daniel be take up out of the hole and he be see to be untouched because he have faith in his god . and at the king 's order they take those men who have say evil against daniel and put them in the lion ' hole with their wife and their child and they have not get to the floor of the hole before the lion overcome them and all their bone be break . then king darius send a letter to all the people nation and language live in all the earth may your peace be increase . it be my order that in all the kingdom of which i be ruler men be to be shake with fear before the god of daniel for he be the living god unchanging for ever and his kingdom be one which will never come to destruction his rule will go on to the end . he give salvation and make men free from danger and do sign and wonder in heaven and earth who have keep daniel safe from the power of the lion . so this daniel do well in the kingdom of darius and in the kingdom of cyrus the persian .in the first year of belshazzar king of babylon daniel saw a dream and vision come into his head on his bed then he put the dream in write . i have a vision by night and saw the four wind of heaven violently move the great sea . and four great beast come up from the sea different one from another . the first be like a lion and have eagle 's wing while i be watch it wing be pull off and it be lift up from the earth and place on two foot like a man and a man 's heart be give to it . and i saw another beast like a bear and it be lift up on one side and three side bone be in it mouth between it teeth and they say to it up ! take much flesh . after this i saw another beast like a leopard which have on it back four wing like those of a bird and the beast have four head and the power of a ruler be give to it . after this in my vision of the night i saw a fourth beast a thing cause fear and very troubling full of power and very strong and it have great iron teeth it take it food crush some of it to bit and stamp down the rest with it foot it be different from all the beast before it and it have ten horn . i be watch the horn with care and i saw another come up among them a little one before which three of the first horn be pull up by the root and there be eye like a man 's eye in this horn and a mouth say great thing . i go on look till the seat of king be place and one like a very old man take his seat his clothing be white a snow and the hair of his head be like clean wool his seat be flame of fire and it wheel burn fire . a stream of fire be flow and come out from before him a thousand thousand be his servant and ten thousand time ten thousand be in their place before him the judge be seat and the book be open . then i saw because of the voice of the great word which the horn say i saw till the beast be put to death and it body be give to destruction and the beast be give to the burning of fire . a for the rest of the beast their authority be take away but they let them go on living for a measure of time . i saw in vision of the night and there be come with the cloud of heaven one like a man and he come to the one who be very old and they take him near before him . and to him be give authority and glory and a kingdom and all people nation and language be his servant his authority be an eternal authority which will not come to an end and his kingdom be one which will not come to destruction . a for me daniel my spirit be pain because of this and the vision of my head be trouble me . i come near to one of those who be wait there question him about what all this be . and he say to me that he would make clear to me the sense of these thing . these great beast be four king who will be cut off from the earth . but the saint of the most high will take the kingdom and it will be theirs for ever even for ever and ever . then it be my desire to have certain knowledge about the fourth beast which be different from all the others a cause of great fear whose teeth be of iron and his nail of brass who take his food crush some of it to bit and stamp on the rest with his foot and about the ten horn on his head and the other which come up cause the fall of three that horn which have eye and a mouth say great thing which seem to be great than the other horn . and i saw how that horn make war on the saint and overcome them till he come who be very old and the decision be make and the authority be give to the saint of the most high and the time come when the saint take the kingdom . this be what he say the fourth beast be a fourth kingdom which will come on earth different from all the kingdom and it will overcome all the earth crush it down and smash it . and a for the ten horn out of this kingdom ten king will come to power and after them another will come up he will be different from the first one and will put down three king . and he will say word against the most high attempting to put an end to the saint of the most high and he will have the idea of change time and law and the saint will be give into his hand for a time and time and half a time . but the judge will be seat and they will put an end to his authority to overcome it and send complete destruction on it . and the kingdom and the authority and the power of the kingdom under all the heaven will be give to the people of the saint of the most high his kingdom be an eternal kingdom and all power will be his servant and do his pleasure . here be the end of the account . a for me daniel i be greatly troubled by my thought and the colour go from my face but i keep the thing in my heart .in the third year of the rule of belshazzar the king a vision be see by me daniel after the one i saw at first . and i saw in the vision and when i saw it i be in the strong town shushan which be in the country of elam and in the vision i be by the water door of the ulai . and lift up my eye i saw there before the stream a male sheep with two horn and the two horn be high but one be high than the other the high one come up last . i saw the sheep push to the west and to the north and to the south and no beast be able to keep their place before him and no one be able to get people out of his power but he do whatever his pleasure be and make himself great . and while i be give thought to this i saw a he goat come from the west over the face of all the earth without touch the earth and the he goat have a great horn between his eye . and he come to the two horn sheep which i saw before the stream rush at him in the heat of his power . and i saw him come right up to the sheep and he be move with wrath against him attack the sheep so that his two horn be break and the sheep have not strength to keep his place before him but be push down on the earth and crush under his foot and there be no one to get the sheep out of his power . and the he goat become very great and when he be strong the great horn be break and in it place come up four other horn turn to the four wind of heaven . and out of one of them come another horn a little one which become very great stretch to the south and to the east and to the beautiful land . and it become great even as high a the army of heaven pull down some of the army even of the star to the earth and crush them under it foot . it make itself great even as great a the lord of the army and by it the regular burn offering be take away and the place overturn and the holy place make waste . ... against the regular burned offering and ... crush down to the earth and it do it pleasure and thing go well for it . then there come to my ear the voice of a holy one talk and another holy one say to that certain one who be talk how long will the vision be while the regular burned offering be take away and the unclean thing cause fear be put up and the holy place crush under foot ? and he say to him for two thousand three hundred evening and morning then the holy place will be make clean . and it come about that when i daniel have see this vision i have a desire for the sense of it to be unfolded and i saw one before me in the form of a man . and the voice of a man come to my ear between the side of the ulai cry out and say gabriel make the vision clear to this man . so he come and take his place near where i be and when he come i be full of fear and go down on my face but he say to me let it be clear to you o son of man for the vision have to do with the time of the end . now while he be talk to me i go into a deep sleep with my face to the earth but touch me he put me on my foot where i have be . and he say see i will make clear to you what be to come in the late time of the wrath for it have to do with the fixed time of the end . the sheep which you saw with two horn they be the king of medium and persia . and the he goat be the king of greece and the great horn between his eye be the first king . and a for that which be break in place of which four come up four kingdom will come up from his nation but not with his power . and in the late year of their kingdom when their evil doings have become complete there will come up a king full of pride and expert in dark saying . and his power will be great and he will be purpose strange thing . and all will go well for him and he will do his pleasure and he will send destruction on the strong one . and his design will be turn against the holy people cause deceit to do well in his hand in his heart he will make himself great and send destruction on number who be live unconscious of their danger and he will put himself up against the prince of prince but he will be break though not by men 's hand . and the vision of evening and morning which have be talk of be true and keep the vision secret for it have to do with the far off future . and i daniel be ill for some day then i get up and do the king 's business and i be full of wonder at the vision but no one be able to give the sense of it .in the first year of darius the son of ahasuerus of the seed of the medes who be make king over the kingdom of the chaldaean in the first year of his rule i daniel saw clearly from the book the number of year give by the word of the lord to the prophet jeremiah in which the make waste of jerusalem be to be complete that be seventy year . and turn my face to the lord god i give myself up to prayer request his grace go without food in haircloth and dust . and i make prayer to the lord my god put our sin before him and say o lord the great god greatly to be fear . keep your agreement and mercy with those who have love for you and do your order we be sinner act wrongly and do evil we have go against you turn away from your order and from your law we have not give ear to your servant the prophet who say word in your name to our king and our ruler and our father and all the people of the land . o lord righteousness be yours but shame be on u even to this day and on the men of judah and the people of jerusalem and on all israel those who be near and those who be far off in all the country where you have send them because of the sin which they have do against you . o lord shame be on u on our king and our ruler and our father because of our sin against you . with the lord our god be mercy and forgiveness for we have go against him and have not give ear to the voice of the lord our god to go in the way of his law which he put before u by the mouth of his servant the prophet . and all israel have be sinner against your law turn away so a not to give ear to your voice and the curse have be let loose on u and the oath record in the law of moses the servant of god for we have do evil against him . and he have give effect to his word which he say against u and against those who be our judge by send a great evil on u for under all heaven there have not be do what have be do to jerusalem . a it be record in the law of moses all this evil have come on u but we have make no prayer for grace from the lord our god that we might be turn from our evil doings and come to true wisdom . so the lord have be watch over this evil and have make it come on u for the lord our god be upright in all his act which he have do and we have not give ear to his voice . and now o lord our god who take your people out of the land of egypt with a strong hand and make a great name for yourself even to this day we be sinner we have do evil . o lord because of your righteousness let your wrath and your passion be turn away from your town jerusalem your holy mountain because through our sin and the evil do of our father jerusalem and your people have become a cause of shame to all who be round about u . and now give ear o our god to the prayer of your servant and to his request for grace and let your face be shin on your holy place which be make waste because of your servant o lord . o my god let your ear be turn and give hear let your eye be open and see how we have be make waste and the town which be name by your name for we be not offer our prayer before you because of our righteousness but because of your great mercy . o lord give ear o lord have forgiveness o lord take note and do let there be no more wait for the honour of your name o my god because your town and your people be name by your name . and while i be still say these word in prayer and put my sin and the sin of my people israel before the lord and request grace from the lord my god for the holy mountain of my god even while i be still in prayer the man gabriel whom i have see in the vision at first when my weariness be great put his hand on me about the time of the evening offering . and teach me and talk to me he say o daniel i have come now to give you wisdom . at the first word of your prayer a word go out and i have come to give you knowledge for you be a man dearly love so give thought to the word and let the vision be clear to you . seventy week have be fix for your people and your holy town to let wrongdoing be complete and sin come to it full limit and for the clear away of evil do and the come in of eternal righteousness so that the vision and the word of the prophet may be stamp a true and to put the holy oil on a most holy place . have then the certain knowledge that from the go out of the word for the building again of jerusalem till the come of a prince on whom the holy oil have be put will be seven week in sixty two week it building will be complete with square and earthwork . and at the end of the time even after the sixty two week one on whom the holy oil have be put will be cut off and have no ... and the town and the holy place will be make waste together with a prince and the end will come with an overflowing of water and even to the end there will be war the making waste which have be fix . and a strong order will be send out against the great number for one week and so for half of the week the offering and the meal offering will come to an end and in it place will be an unclean thing cause fear till the destruction which have be fix be let loose on him who have make waste .in the third year of cyrus king of persia a secret be unfold to daniel whose name be belteshazzar and the thing be true even a hard work and he have knowledge of it and the vision be clear to him . in those day i daniel give myself up to grief for three full week . i have no please food no meat or wine come into my mouth and i put no oil on my body till three full week be end . and on the twenty fourth day of the first month i be by the side of the great river and lift up my eye i saw the form of a man clothe in a linen robe and round him there be a band of gold of the best gold and his body be like the beryl and his face have the look of a thunder flame and his eye be like burn light and his arm and foot like the colour of polished brass and the sound of his voice be like the sound of an army . and i daniel be the only one who saw the vision for the men who be with me do not see it but a great shaking come on them and they go in flight to take cover . so i be by myself and i saw this great vision and all my strength go from me and the colour go from my face . but the sound of his word come to my ear and on hear his voice i go into a deep sleep with my face to the earth . then a hand give me a touch awaking me and put me on my knee and my hand . and he say to me o daniel you man dearly love take in the sense of the word i say to you and get up on to your foot for to you i be now send and when he have say this to me i get on to my foot shake with fear . then he say to me have no fear daniel for from the first day when you give your heart to get wisdom and make yourself poor in spirit before your god your word have come to his ear and i have come because of your word . but the angel of the kingdom of persia put himself against me for twenty one day but michael one of the chief angel come to my help and when i come he be still there with the angel of the king of persia . now i have come to give you knowledge of the fate of your people in the late day for there be still a vision for the day . and after he have say these word to me i keep my face turn to the earth and be unable to say anything . then one whose form be like the son of men put his finger on my lip and open my mouth i say to him who be before me o my lord because of the vision my pain have come on me and i have no more strength . for how may this servant of my lord have talk with my lord ? for a for me straight away my strength go from me and there be no breath in my body . then again one have the form of a man put his hand on me and give me strength . and he say to me o man greatly love have no fear peace be with you be strong and let your heart be lift up . and at his word i become strong and say let my lord say on for you have give me strength . then he say it be clear to you why i have come to you . and now i will give you an account of what be record in the true writing but i be go back to make war with the angel of persia and when i be go the angel of greece will come . and there be no one on my side against these but michael your angel .and a for me in the first year of darius the mede i be on his side to make his position safe and make him strong . and now i will make clear to you what be true . there be still three king to come in persia and the fourth will have much great wealth than all of them and when he have become strong through his wealth he will put his force in motion against all the kingdom of greece . and a strong king will come to power ruling with great authority and do whatever be his pleasure . and when he have become strong his kingdom will be break and part to the four wind of heaven but not to his offspring for it will be uprooted and his kingdom will be for the others and not for these but not with the same authority a his . and the king of the south will be strong but one of his captain will be strong than he and will be ruler and his rule will be a great rule . and at the end of year they will be join together and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north to make an agreement but she will not keep the strength of her arm and his offspring will not keep their place but she will be uprooted with those who be the cause of her coming and her son and he who take her in those time . but out of a branch from her root one will come up to take his place who will come against the army force his way into the strong place of the king of the north and he will take them in hand and overcome them and their god and their metal image and their fair vessel of silver and gold he will take away into the south and for some year he will keep away from the king of the north . and he will come into the kingdom of the king of the south but he will go back to his land . and his son will make war and will get together an army of great force and he will make an attack on him overflow and go past and he will again take the war even to his strong place . and the king of the south will be move with wrath and will come out and make war on him on this same king of the north and he will get together a great army but the army will be give into his hand . and the army will be take away and his heart will be uplift he will be the cause of the downfall of ten of thousand but he will not be strong . and again the king of the north will get together an army great than the first and he will make an attack on him at the end of year with a great army and much wealth . in those time a number will take up arm against the king of the south and the child of the violent among your people will be lift themselves up to make the vision come true but it will be their downfall . so the king of the north will come and put up earthwork and take a well arm town and the force of the king of the south will make an attempt to keep their position even the best of his army but they will not have strength to do so . and he who come against him will do his pleasure and no one will be able to keep his place before him he will take up his position in the beautiful land and in his hand there will be destruction . and it will be his purpose to come with the strength of all his kingdom but in place of this he will make an agreement with him and he will give him the daughter of woman to send destruction on it but this will not take place or come about . after this his face will be turn to the island and he will take a number of them but a chief by his destruction will put an end to the shame offer by him and more than this he will make his shame come back on him . then his face will be turn to the strong place of his land but his way will be stop cause his downfall and he will not be see again . then his place will be take by one who will send out a man with the glory of a king to get wealth together but after a short time destruction will overtake him but not in wrath or in the fight . and his place will be take by a low person to whom the honour of the kingdom have not be give but he will come in time of peace and will get the kingdom by fair word . and his force will be completely take away from before him and break and even the ruler of the agreement will have the same fate . and from the time when they make an agreement with him he will be work falsely for he will take up arm suddenly with a small force against fertile place and will make waste a part of the country and he will do what his father have not do or his father ' father he will make distribution among them of good take in war and by force and of property he will even make design against the strong place for a time . and he will put in motion his power and his strength against the king of the south with a great army and the king of the south will go to war with a very great and strong army but he will be force to give way because of their design against him and his fear will overcome him and be the cause of his downfall and his army will come to complete destruction and a great number will be put to the sword . and a for these two king their heart will be fix on do evil and they will say false word at one table but it will come to nothing for the end will be at the time fix . and he will go back to his land with great wealth and his heart will be against the holy agreement and he will do his pleasure and go back to his land . at the time fix he will come back and come into the south but in the late time it will not be a it be before . for those who go out from the west will come against him and he will be in fear and will go back full of wrath against the holy agreement and he will do his pleasure and he will go back and be unite with those who have give up the holy agreement . and army send by him will take up their position and they will make unclean the holy place even the strong place and take away the regular burned offering and put in it place an unclean thing cause fear . and those who do evil against the agreement will be turn to sin by his fair word but the people who have knowledge of their god will be strong and do well . and those who be wise among the people will be the teacher of the mass of the people but they will come to their downfall by the sword and by the flame be make prisoner and undergoing loss for a long time . now at the time of their downfall they will have a little help but number will be join to them in the town and in their separate heritage . and some of those who be wise will have wisdom in test themselves and make themselves clean till the time of the end for it be still for the fixed time . and the king will do his pleasure he will put himself on high lift himself over every god and say thing to be wonder at against the god of god and all will be well for him till the wrath be complete for what have be purpose will be do . he will have no respect for the god of his father or for the god desire by woman he will have no respect for any god for he will put himself on high over all . but in place of this he will give honour to the god of armed place and to a god of whom his father have no knowledge he will give honour with gold and silver and jewel and thing to be desire . and he will make use of the people of a strange god to keep his strong place to those whom he take note of he will give high honour and he will make them ruler over the mass of the people and will make division of the land for a price . and at the time of the end the king of the south will make an attack on him and the king of the north will come against him like a storm wind with war carriage and horseman and number of ship and he will go through many land like overflow water . and he will come into the beautiful land and ten of thousand will be overcome but these will be keep from fall into his hand edom and moab and the chief of the child of ammon . and his hand will be stretch out on the country and the land of the south will not be safe from him . but he will have power over the store of gold and silver and over all the value thing of the south and the libyan and the ethiopian will be at his step . but he will be trouble by news from the east and from the north and he will go out in great wrath to send destruction on and put an end to great number . he will put the tent of his great house between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain but he will come to his end with no helper .and at that time michael will take up his place the great angel who be the supporter of the child of your people and there will be a time of trouble such a there never be from the time there be a nation even till that same time and at that time your people will be keep safe everyone who be record in the book . and a number of those who be sleep in the dust of the earth will come out of their sleep some to eternal life and some to eternal shame . and those who be wise will be shin like the light of the outstretched sky and those by whom number have be turn to righteousness will be like the star for ever and ever . but a for you o daniel let the word be keep secret and the book roll up and keep shut till the time of the end number will be go out of the way and trouble will be increase . then i daniel look saw two others one at the edge of the river on this side and one at the edge of the river on that side . and i say to the man clothe in linen who be over the water of the river how long will it be to the end of these wonder ? then in my hear the man clothe in linen who be over the river lift up his right hand and his left hand to heaven take an oath by him who be live for ever that it would be a time time and a half and when the power of the crusher of the holy people come to an end all these thing will be end . and the word come to my ear but the sense of them be not clear to me then i say o my lord what be the sense of these thing ? and he say go on your way daniel for the word be secret and shut up till the time of the end till a number be test and make themselves clean and the evil doer will do evil for not one of the evil doer will have knowledge but all will be make clear to those who be wise . and from the time when the regular burn offering be take away and an unclean thing cause fear be put up there will be a thousand two hundred and ninety day . a blessing will be on the man who go on wait and come to the thousand three hundred and thirty five day . but you go on your way and take your rest for you will be in your place at the end of the day .the word of the lord which come to hosea the son of beeri in the day of uzziah jotham ahaz and hezekiah king of judah and in the day of jeroboam the son of joash king of israel . the start of the word of the lord by hosea and the lord say to hosea go take for yourself a wife of loose way and child of the same for the land have be untrue to the lord . so he take a his wife gomer the daughter of diblaim and she give birth to a son . and the lord say to him give him the name of jezreel for after a little time i will send punishment for the blood of jezreel on the line of jehu and put an end to the kingdom of israel . and in that day i will let the bow of israel be break in the valley of jezreel . and after that she give birth to a daughter . and the lord say give her the name lo ruhamah for i will not again have mercy on israel to give them forgiveness . but i will have mercy on judah and will give them salvation by the lord their god but not by the bow or the sword or by fight or by horse or horseman . now when lo ruhamah have be take from the breast the woman give birth to a son . and the lord say give him the name lo ammi for you be not my people and i will not be your god . but still the number of the child of israel will be like the sand of the sea which may not be measure or number and in place of it be say to them you be not my people it will be say to them you be the son of the living god and the child of israel and the child of judah will come together and take for themselves one head and will go up from the land for great will be the day of jezreel .say to your brother ammi and to your sister ruhamah . take up the cause against your mother take it up for she be not my wife and i be not her husband let her put away her loose way from her face and her false way from between her breast for fear that i may take away her robe from her make her uncovered a in the day of her birth make her like a waste place and a dry land cause her death through need of water . and i will have no mercy on her child for they be the child of her loose way . for their mother have be untrue she who give them birth have do thing of shame for she say i will go after my lover who give me my bread and my water my wool and my linen my oil and my wine . for this cause i will put thorn in her road building up a wall round her so that she may not go on her way . and if she go after her lover she will not overtake them if she make search for them she will not see them then will she say i will go back to my first husband for then it be well for me than now . for she have no knowledge that it be i who give her the grain and the wine and the oil increase her silver and gold which they give to the baal . so i will take away again my grain in it time and my wine and i will take away my wool and my linen with which her body might have be cover . and now i will make her shame clear before the eye of her lover and no one will take her out of my hand . and i will put an end to all her joy her feast her new moon and her sabbath and all her regular meeting . and i will make waste her vine and her fig tree of which she have say these be the payment which my lover have make to me and i will make them a waste of tree and the beast of the field will take them for food . and i will give her punishment for the day of the baal to whom she have be burn perfume when she make herself fair with her nose ring and her jewel and go after her lover give no thought to me say the lord . for this cause i will make her come into the waste land and will say word of comfort to her . and i will give her vine garden from there and the valley of achor for a door of hope and she will give her answer there a in the day when she be young and a in the time when she come up out of the land of egypt . and in that day say the lord you will say to me ishi and you will never again give me the name of baali for i will take away the name of the baal out of her mouth and never again will she say their name . and in that day i will make an agreement for them with the beast of the field and the bird of heaven and the thing which go low on the earth i will put an end to the bow and the sword and war in all the land and will make them take their rest in peace . and i will take you a my bride for ever truly i will take you a my bride in righteousness and in right judging in love and in mercy . i will take you a my bride in good faith and you will have knowledge of the lord . and it will be in that day say the lord that i will give an answer to the heaven and the heaven to the earth and the earth will give it answer to the grain and the wine and the oil and they will give an answer to jezreel and i will put her a seed in the earth and i will have mercy on her to whom no mercy be give and i will say to those who be not my people you be my people and they will say my god .and the lord say to me give your love again to a woman who have a lover and be false to her husband even a the lord have love for the child of israel though they be turn to other god and be lover of grape cake . so i get her for myself for fifteen shekel of silver and a homer and a half of barley and i say to her you be to be mine for a long space of time you be not to be false to me and no other man be to have you for his wife and so will i be to you . for the child of israel will for a long time be without king and without ruler without offering and without pillar and without ephod or image . and after that the child of israel will come back and go in search of the lord their god and david their king and they will come in fear to the lord and to his mercy in the day to come .give ear to the word of the lord o child of israel for the lord have a cause against the people of this land because there be no good faith in it and no mercy and no knowledge of god in the land . there be curse and break faith violent death and attack on property men be untrue in married life house be break into and there be blood touch blood . because of this the land will be dry and everyone living in it will be waste away with the beast of the field and the bird of heaven even the fish of the sea will be take away . let no man go to law or make protest for your people be like those who go to law with a priest . you will not be able to keep on your foot by day and by night the prophet will be fall down with you and i will give your mother to destruction . destruction have overtake my people because they have no knowledge because you have give up knowledge i will give you up so that you will be no priest to me because you have not keep in mind the law of your god i will not keep your child in my memory . even while they be increase in number they be sin against me i will let their glory be change into shame . the sin of my people be like food to them and their desire be for their wrongdoing . and the priest will be like the people i will give them punishment for their evil way and the reward of their act . they will have food but they will not be full they will be false to me but they will not be increase because they no longer give think to the lord . loose way and new wine take away wisdom . my people get knowledge from their tree and their rod give them news for a false spirit be the cause of their wandering and they have be false to their god . they make offering on the top of mountain burn perfume in high place under tree of every sort because their shade be good and so your daughter be give up to loose way and your bride be false to their husband . i will not give punishment to your daughter or your bride for their evil behaviour for they make themselves separate with loose woman and make offering with those who be use for sex purpose in the worship of the god the people who have no wisdom will be send away . do not you o israel come into error do not you o judah come to gilgal or go up to beth aven or take an oath by the living lord . for israel be uncontrolled like a cow which may not be control now will the lord give them food like a lamb in a wide place . ephraim be join to false god let him be . their drink have become bitter they be completely false her ruler take pleasure in shame . they be fold in the skirt of the wind they will be sham because of their offering .give ear to this o priest give attention o israel and you family of the king for you be to be judge you have be a deceit at mizpah and a net stretch out on tabor . they have go deep in the evil way of shittim but i be the judge of all . i have knowledge of ephraim and israel be not secret from me for now o ephraim you have be false to me israel have become unclean . their work will not let them come back to their god for a false spirit be in them and they have no knowledge of the lord . and the pride of israel give an answer to his face and ephraim will have a fall through his sin and the fall of judah will be the same a theirs . they will go with their flock and their herd in search of the lord but they will not see him he have take himself out of their view . they have be false to the lord they have give birth to strange child now the new moon will make them waste with their field . let the horn be sound in gibeah and in ramah give a loud cry in beth aven they be after you o benjamin . ephraim will become a waste in the day of punishment i have give knowledge among the tribe of israel of what be certain . the ruler of judah be like those who take away a landmark i will let loose my wrath on them like flow water . ephraim be troubled he be crush by his judge because he take pleasure in walk after deceit . and so to ephraim i be like a wasting insect and a destruction to the child of judah . when ephraim saw his disease and judah his wound then ephraim go to assyria and send to the great king but he be not able to make you well or give you help for your wound . for i will be to ephraim a a lion and a a young lion to the child of judah i even i will give him wound and go away i will take him away and there will be no helper . i will go back to my place till they be make waste in their trouble they will go after me early and will make search for me .come let u go back to the lord for he have give u wound and he will make u well he have give blow and he will give help . after two day he will give u life and on the third day he will make u get up and we will be live before him . and let u have knowledge let u go after the knowledge of the lord his go out be certain a the dawn his decision go out like the light he will come to u like the rain like the spring rain water the earth . o ephraim what be i to do to you ? o judah what be i to do to you ? for your love be like a morning cloud and like the dew which go early away . so i have have it cut in stone i give them teach by the word of my mouth because my desire be for mercy and not offering for the knowledge of god more than for burned offering . but like a man they have go against the agreement there they be false to me . gilead be a town of evil doer mark with blood . and like a band of thief wait for a man so be the priest watch secretly the way of those go quickly to shechem for they be work with an evil design . in israel i have see a very evil thing there false way be see in ephraim israel be unclean and judah have put up disgust image for himself .when my desire be for the fate of my people to be change and to make israel well then the sin of ephraim be make clear and the evil do of samaria for their way be false and the thief come into the house while the band of outlaws take property by force in the street . and they do not say to themselves that i keep in mind all their sin now their evil act come round them on every side they be before my face . in their sin they make a king for themselves and ruler in their deceit . they be all untrue they be like a burn oven the bread maker do not make up the fire from the time when the paste be mixed till it be leaven . on the day of our king the ruler make him ill with the heat of wine his hand be stretch out with the men of pride . for they have make their heart ready like an oven while they be wait secretly their wrath be sleep all night in the morning it be burn like a flaming fire . they be all heat like an oven and they put an end to their judge all their king have be make low not one among them make prayer to me . ephraim be mixed with the people ephraim be a cake not turn . men from other land have make waste his strength and he be not conscious of it grey hair have come on him here and there and he have no knowledge of it . and the pride of israel give an answer to his face but for all this they have not go back to the lord their god or make search for him . and ephraim be like a foolish dove without wisdom they send out their cry to egypt they go to assyria . when they go my net will be stretch out over them i will take them like the bird of heaven i will give them punishment i will take them away in the net for their sin . may trouble be theirs ! for they have go far away from me and destruction for they have be sin against me i be ready to be their saviour but they say false word against me . and they have not make prayer to me in their heart but they make loud cry on their bed they be cut themselves for food and wine they be turn against me . though i have give training and strength to their arm they have evil design against me . they have go to what be of no value they be like a false bow their captain will come to destruction by the sword and their ruler by my wrath for this the land of egypt will make sport of them .put the horn to your mouth . he come like an eagle against the house of the lord because they have go against my agreement they have not keep my law . they will send up to me a cry for help we israel have knowledge of you o god of israel . israel have give up what be good his hater will go after him . they have put up king but not by me they have make prince but i have no knowledge of it they have make image of silver and gold so that they may be cut off . i will have nothing to do with your young ox o samaria my wrath be burn against them how long will it be before the child of israel make themselves clean ? the workman make it it be no god the ox of samaria will be break into bit . for they have be plant the wind and their fruit will be the storm his grain have no stem it will give no meal and if it do a strange nation will take it . israel have come to destruction now they be among the nation like a cup in which there be no pleasure . for they have go up to assyria like an as go by himself ephraim have give money to get lover . but though they give money to the nation for help still i will send them in all direction and in a short time they will be without a king and ruler . because ephraim have be increase altar for sin altar have become a cause of sin to him . though i put my law in write for him in ten thousand rule they be to him a a strange thing . he give the offering of his lover and take the flesh for food but the lord have no pleasure in them now he will keep in mind their evil do and give them the punishment of their sin they will go back to egypt . for israel have no memory of his maker and have put up the house of king and judah have make great the number of his walled town . but i will send a fire on his town and put an end to his great house .have no joy o israel and do not be glad like the nation for you have be untrue to your god your desire have be for the loose woman 's reward on every grain floor . the grain floor and the place where the grape be crush will not give them food there will be no new wine for them . they will have no rest place in the lord 's land but ephraim will go back to egypt and they will take unclean food in assyria . they will give no wine offering to the lord they will not make offering ready for him their bread will be like the bread of those in sorrow all who take it will be unclean because their bread will be only for their desire it will not come into the house of the lord . what will you do on the day of worship and on the day of the feast of the lord ? for see they be go away into assyria egypt will get them together memphis will be their last resting place their fair silver vessel will be cover over with field plant and thorn will come up in their tent . the day of punishment the day of reward be come israel will be put to shame the prophet be foolish the man who have the spirit be off his head because of your great sin . there be great hate against the watchman of ephraim the people of my god a for the prophet there be a net in all his way and hate in the house of his god . they have go deep in evil a in the day of gibeah he will keep in mind their wrongdoing he will give them punishment for their sin . i make discovery of israel a of grape in the waste land i saw your father a the first fruit of the fig tree in her early fruit time but they come to baal peor and make themselves holy to the thing of shame and become disgust like that to which they give their love . a for ephraim their glory will go in flight like a bird there will be no birth and no one with child and no give of life . even though their child have come to growth i will take them away so that not a man will be there for their evil do will be complete and they will be put to shame because of it . a i have see a beast whose young have be take from her so ephraim will give birth to child only for them to be put to death . o lord what will you give them ? give them body which may not give birth and breast without milk . all their evil do be in gilgal there i have hate for them because of their evil do i will send them out of my house they will no longer be dear to me all their ruler be uncontrolled . the rod have come on ephraim their root be dry let them have no fruit even though they give birth i will put to death the dear fruit of their body . my god will give them up because they do not give ear to him they will be wander among the nation .israel be a branching vine full of fruit a his fruit be increase so the number of his altar be increase a the land be fair so they have make fair pillar . their mind be take away now they will be make waste he will have their altar break down he will give their pillar to destruction . now truly they will say we have no king we have no fear of the lord and the king what be he able to do for u ? their word be foolish they make agreement with false oath so punishment will come up like a poison plant in a ploughed field . the people of samaria will be full of fear because of the ox of beth aven it people will have sorrow for it and it priest will give cry of grief for it glory for the glory have go in flight . and they will take it to assyria and give it to the great king shame will come on ephraim and israel will be sham because of it image . a for samaria her king be cut off like mist on the water . and the high place of aven the sin of israel will come to destruction thorn and waste plant will come up on their altar they will say to the mountain be a cover over u and to the hill come down on u . o israel you have do evil from the day of gibeah there they take up their position so that the fighting against the child of evil might not overtake them in gibeah . i will come and give them punishment and the people will come together against them when i give them the reward of their two sin . and ephraim be a trained cow take pleasure in crush the grain but i have put a yoke on her fair neck i will put a horseman on the back of ephraim judah will be work the plough jacob will be turn up the earth . put in the seed of righteousness get in your grain in mercy let your unploughed earth be turn up for it be time to make search for the lord till he come and send righteousness on you like rain . you have be plough sin you have get in a store of evil the fruit of deceit have be your food for you put faith in your way in the number of your men of war . so a great outcry will go up from among your people and all your strong place will be break a beth arbel be break by shalman in the day of war a the mother be break on the rock with her child . so will beth el do to you because of your evil do at dawn will the king of israel be cut off completely .when israel be a child he be dear to me and i take my son out of egypt . when i send for them then they go away from me they make offering to the baal burn perfume to image . but i be guide ephraim 's footstep i take them up in my arm but they be not conscious that i be ready to make them well . i make them come after me with the cord of a man with the band of love i be to them a one who take the yoke from off their mouth put meat before them . he will go back to the land of egypt and the assyrian will be his king because they would not come back to me . and the sword will go through his town waste his child and cause destruction because of their evil design . my people be give up to sin against me though their voice go up on high no one will be lift them up . how may i give you up o ephraim ? how may i be your saviour o israel ? how may i make you like admah ? how may i do to you a i do to zeboim ? my heart be turn in me it be soft with pity . i will not put into effect the heat of my wrath i will not again send destruction on ephraim for i be god and not man the holy one among you i will not put an end to you . they will go after the lord his cry will be like that of a lion his cry will be loud and the child will come from the west shake with fear shake with fear like a bird they will come out of egypt like a dove out of the land of assyria and i will give them rest in their house say the lord . the deceit of ephraim and the false word of israel be about me on every side . ...ephraim 's food be the wind and he go after the east wind deceit and destruction be increase day by day they make an agreement with assyria and take oil into egypt . the lord have a cause against judah and will give punishment to jacob for his way he will give him the reward of his act . in the body of his mother he take his brother by the foot and in his strength he be fight with god he have a fight with the angel and overcame him he make request for grace to him with weep he come face to face with him in beth el and there his word come to him even the lord the god of army the lord be his name . so then come back to your god keep mercy and right and be wait at all time on your god . a for canaan the scale of deceit be in his hand he take pleasure in twisted way . and ephraim say now i have get wealth and much property in all my work no sin may be see in me . but i be the lord your god from the land of egypt i will give you tent for your living place again a in the day of the holy meeting . my word come to the ear of the prophet and i give them vision in great number and by the mouth of the prophet i make use of comparison . in gilead there be evil . they be quite without value in gilgal they make offering of ox truly their altar be like mass of stone in the hollow of a ploughed field . and jacob go in flight into the field of aram and israel become a servant for a wife and for a wife he keep sheep . and by a prophet the lord make israel come up out of egypt and by a prophet he be keep safe . i have be bitterly move to wrath by ephraim so that his blood will be on him and the lord will make his shame come back on him .when the word of my law come from ephraim he be lift up in israel but when he do evil through the baal death overtook him . and now their sin be increase they have make themselves a metal image false god from their silver after their design all of them the work of the metal worker they say of them let them give offering let men give kiss to the ox . so they will be like the morning cloud like the dew which go early away like the dust of the grain which the wind be drive out of the crush floor like smoke go up from the fireplace . but i be the lord your god from the land of egypt you have knowledge of no other god and there be no saviour but me . i have knowledge of you in the waste land where no water be . when i give them food they be full and their heart be full of pride and they do not keep me in mind . so i will be like a lion to them a a cruel beast i will keep watch by the road i will come face to face with them like a bear whose young one have be take from her and their inmost heart will be break there the dog will make a meal of them they will be wound by the beast of the field . i have send destruction on you o israel who will be your helper ? where be your king that he may be your saviour ? and all your ruler that they may take up your cause ? of whom you say give me a king and ruler . i have give you a king because i be angry and have take him away in my wrath . the wrongdoing of ephraim be shut up his sin be put away in secret . the pain of a woman in childbirth will come on him he be an unwise son for at this time it be not right for him to keep his place when child come to birth . i will give the price to make them free from the power of the underworld i will be their saviour from death o death ! where be your pain ? o underworld ! where be your destruction ? my eye will have no pity . though he give fruit among his brother an east wind will come the wind of the lord come up from the waste land and his spring will become dry his fountain will be without water it will make waste the store of all the vessel of his desire . samaria will be make waste for she have go against her god they will be cut down by the sword their little child will be break on the rock their woman who be with child will be cut open .o israel come back to the lord your god for your evil do have be the cause of your fall . take with you word and come back to the lord say to him let there be forgiveness for all wrongdoing so that we may take what be good and give in payment the fruit of our lip . assyria will not be our salvation we will not go on horse we will not again say to the work of our hand you be our god for in you there be mercy for the child who have no father . i will put right their error freely will my love be give to them for my wrath be turn away from him . i will be a the dew to israel he will put out flower like a lily and send out his root like lebanon . his branch will be stretch out he will be beautiful a the olive tree and sweet smelling a lebanon . they will come back and have rest in his shade their life will be make new like the grain and they will put out flower like the vine his name will be like the wine of lebanon . a for ephraim what have he to do with false god any longer ? i have give an answer and i will keep watch over him i be like a branching fir tree from me come your fruit . he who be wise will see these thing he who have good sense will have knowledge of them . for the way of the lord be straight and the upright will go in them but sinner will be fall in them .the word of the lord which come to joel the son of pethuel . give ear to this you old men and take note you people of the land . have this ever be in your day or in the day of your father ? give the story of it to your child and let them give it to their child and their child to another generation . what the worm do not make a meal of have be take by the locust and what the locust do not take have be food for the plant worm and what the plant worm do not take have be food for the field fly . come out of your sleep you who be overcome with wine and give yourselves to weep give cry of sorrow all you drinker of wine because of the sweet wine for it have be cut off from your mouth . for a nation have come up over my land strong and without number his teeth be the teeth of a lion and he have the back teeth of a great lion . by him my vine be make waste and my fig tree broken he have take all it fruit and send it down to the earth it branch be make white . make sound of grief like a virgin dress in haircloth for the husband of her early year . the meal offering and the drink offering have be cut off from the house of the lord the priest the lord 's servant be sorrow . the field be waste the land have become dry for the grain be waste the new wine be keep back the oil be poor . the farmer be sham the worker in the vine garden give cry of grief for the wheat and the barley for the produce of the field have come to destruction . the vine have become dry and the fig tree be feeble the pomegranate and the palm tree and the apple tree even all the tree of the field be dry because joy have go from the son of men . put haircloth round you and give yourselves to sorrow you priest give cry of grief you servant of the altar come in and clothe in haircloth let the night go past you servant of my god for the meal offering and the drink offering have be keep back from the house of your god . let a time be fix for go without food have a holy meeting let the old men even all the people of the land come together to the house of the lord your god cry out to the lord . sorrow for the day ! for the day of the lord be near and a destruction from the ruler of all it will come . be not food cut off before our eye ? joy and delight from the house of our god ? the grain have become small and dry under the spade the store house be make waste the grain store be break down for the grain be dry and dead . what sound of pain come from the beast ! the herd of cattle be at a loss because there be no grass for them even the flock of sheep be no long to be see . o lord my cry go up to you for fire have put an end to the grass land of the waste and all the tree of the field be burn with it flame . the beast of the field be turn to you with desire for the water stream be dry and fire have put an end to the grass land of the waste .let the horn be sound in zion and a war cry in my holy mountain let all the people of the land be trouble for the day of the lord be come for a day of dark and deep shade be near a day of cloud and black night like a black cloud a great and strong people be cover the mountain there have never be any like them and will not be after them again from generation to generation . before them fire sends destruction and after them flame be burn the land be like the garden of eden before them and after them an unpeopled waste truly nothing have be keep safe from them . their form be like the form of horse and they be run like war horse . like the sound of war carriage they go jump on the top of the mountain like the noise of a flame of fire burn up the grain stem like a strong people line up for the fight . at their come the people be bent with pain all face become red together . they be run like strong men they go over the wall like men of war every man go straight on his way their line be not break . no one be push against another everyone go straight on his way burst through the sword point their order be not break . they make a rush on the town run on the wall they go up into the house and in through the window like a thief . the earth be trouble before them and the heaven be shake the sun and the moon have become dark and the star keep back their shining and the lord be thunder before his force for very great be his army for he be strong who give effect to his word for the day of the lord be great and greatly to be fear and who have strength against it ? but even now say the lord come back to me with all your heart keep from food with weeping and with sorrow let your heart be break and not your clothing and come back to the lord your god for he be full of grace and pity slow to be angry and great in mercy ready to be turn from his purpose of punishment . may it not be that he will again let his purpose be change and let a blessing come after him even a meal offering and a drink offering for the lord your god ? let a horn be sound in zion let a time be fix for go without food have a holy meeting get the people together make the mass of the people holy send for the old men get together the child and baby at the breast let the newly marry man come out of his room and the bride from her tent . let the priest the servant of the lord be weep between the covered way and the altar and let them say have mercy on your people o lord do not give up your heritage to shame so that the nation become their ruler why let them say among the people where be their god ? then the lord have a care for the honour of his land and have pity on his people . and the lord make answer and say to his people see i will send you grain and wine and oil in full measure and i will no longer let you be sham among the nation i will send the one from the north far away from you drive him into a dry and waste land with his front to the sea of the east and his back to the sea of the west and the smell of him will go up even his evil smell will go up . have no fear o land be glad with great joy for the lord have do great thing . have no fear you beast of the field for the grass land of the waste be become green for the tree be produce fruit the fig tree and the vine give out their strength . be glad then you child of zion and have joy in the lord your god for he give you food in full measure make the rain come down for you the early and the late rain a at the first . and the floor will be full of grain and the crushing place overflow with wine and oil . i will give back to you the year which be food for the locust the plant worm the field fly and the worm my great army which i send among you . you will have food in full measure and give praise to the name of the lord your god who have do wonder for you and you will be certain that i be in israel and that i be the lord your god and there be no other and my people will never be sham . and after that it will come about say the lord that i will send my spirit on all flesh and your son and your daughter will be prophet your old men will have dream your young men will see vision and on the servant and the servant girl in those day i will send my spirit . and i will let wonder be see in the heaven and on the earth blood and fire and pillar of smoke . the sun will be make dark and the moon turn to blood before the great day of the lord come a day to be fear . and it will be that whoever make his prayer to the name of the lord will be keep safe for in mount zion and in jerusalem some will be keep safe a the lord have say and will be among the small band mark out by the lord .for in those day and in that time when i let the fate of judah and jerusalem be change i will get together all the nation and make them come down into the valley of jehoshaphat and there i will take up with them the cause of my people and of my heritage israel whom they have send wandering among the nation and of my land which have be part by them . and they have put the fate of my people to the decision of chance give a boy for the price of a loose woman and a girl for a drink of wine . and further what be you to me o tyre and zidon and all the circle of philistia ? will you give me back any payment ? and if you do quickly and suddenly i will send it back on your head for you have take my silver and my gold put in the house of your god my beautiful and pleasing thing . and the child of judah and the child of jerusalem you have give for a price to the son of the greek to send them far away from their land see i will have them move from the place where you have send them and will let what you have do come back on your head i will give your son and your daughter into the hand of the child of judah for a price and they will give them for a price to the men of sheba a nation far off for the lord have say it . give this out among the nation make ready for war get the strong men awake let all the men of war come near let them come up . get your plough blade hammer into sword and your vine knives into spear let the feeble say i be strong . come quickly all you nation round about and get yourselves together there make your strong one come down o lord . let the nation be awake and come to the valley of jehoshaphat for there i will be seat a judge of all the nation round about . put in the blade for the grain be ready come get you down for the wine crusher be full the vessel be overflow for great be their evil do . mass on mass in the valley of decision ! for the day of the lord be near in the valley of decision . the sun and the moon have become dark and the star keep back their shining . and the lord will be thunder from zion and his voice will be sound from jerusalem and the heaven and the earth will be shake but the lord will be a breastplate for his people and a strong place for the child of israel . and you will be certain that i be the lord your god living in zion my holy mountain and jerusalem will be holy and no strange person will ever again go through her . and it will come about in that day that the mountain will be drop sweet wine and the hill will be flow with milk and all the stream of judah will be flow with water and a fountain will come out from the house of the lord water the valley of acacia tree . egypt will be a waste and edom a land of destruction because of the evil do to the child of judah because they have let blood be drain out in their land without cause . but judah will be people for ever and jerusalem from generation to generation . and i will send punishment for their blood for which punishment have not be send for the lord be live in zion .the word of amos who be among the herdsman of tekoa what he saw about israel in the day of uzziah king of judah and in the day of jeroboam the son of joash king of israel two year before the earth shock . and he say the lord will give a lion 's cry from zion his voice will be sound from jerusalem and the field of the keeper of sheep will become dry and the top of carmel will be waste away . these be the word of the lord for three crime of damascus and for four i will not let it fate be change because they have be crush gilead with iron grain crush instrument . and i will send a fire into the house of hazael burn up the great house of ben hadad . and i will have the lock of the door of damascus break and him who be seat in power cut off from the valley of aven and him in whose hand be the rod from the house of eden and the people of aram will go away a prisoner into kir say the lord . these be the word of the lord for three crime of gaza and for four i will not let it fate be change because they take all the people away prisoner to give them up to edom . and i will send a fire on the wall of gaza burn up it great house him who be seat in power i will have cut off from ashdod and him in whose hand be the rod from ashkelon and my hand will be turn against ekron and the rest of the philistine will come to destruction say the lord god . these be the word of the lord for three crime of tyre and for four i will not let it fate be change because they give up all the people prisoner to edom without give a thought to the brother ' agreement between them . and i will send a fire on the wall of tyre burn up it great house . these be the word of the lord for three crime of edom and for four i will not let it fate be change because his sword be turn against his brother without pity and his wrath be burn at all time and he be angry for ever . and i will send a fire on teman burn up the great house of bozrah . these be the word of the lord for three crime of the child of ammon and for four i will not let it fate be change because in gilead they have woman with child cut open so that they might make wider the limit of their land . and i will make a fire in the wall of rabbah burn up it great house with loud cry in the day of war with a storm in the day of the great wind and their king will be make prisoner he and his captain together say the lord .these be the word of the lord for three crime of moab and for four i will not let it fate be change because he have the bone of the king of edom burn to dust . and i will send a fire on moab burn up the great house of kerioth and death will come on moab with noise and outcry and the sound of the horn and i will have the judge cut off from among them and all their captain i will put to death with him say the lord . these be the word of the lord for three crime of judah and for four i will not let it fate be change because they have give up the law of the lord and have not keep his rule and their false way in which their father go have make them go out of the right way . and i will send a fire on judah burn up the great house of jerusalem . these be the word of the lord for three crime of israel and for four i will not let it fate be change because they have give the upright man for silver and the poor for the price of two shoe crush the head of the poor and turn the step of the gentle out of the way and a man and his father go in to the same young woman put shame on my holy name by every altar they be stretch on clothing take from those who be in their debt drinking in the house of their god the wine of those who have make payment for wrongdoing . though i send destruction on the amorite before them who be tall a the cedar and strong a the oak tree cut off his fruit from on high and his root from under the earth . and i take you up out of the land of egypt guiding you for forty year in the waste land so that you might take for your heritage the land of the amorite . and some of your son i make prophet and some of your young men i make separate for myself . be it not even so o child of israel ? say the lord . but to those who be separate you give wine for drink and to the prophet you say be prophets no longer . see i be crush you down a one be crush under a cart full of grain . and flight will be impossible for the quick foot and the force of the strong will become feeble and the man of war will not get away safely and the bowman will not keep his place he who be quick foot will not get away safely and the horseman will not keep his life . and he who be without fear among the fight men will go in flight without his clothing in that day say the lord .give ear to this word which the lord have say against you o child of israel against all the family which i take up out of the land of egypt say you only of all the family of the earth have i take care of for this reason i will send punishment on you for all your sin . be it possible for two to go walk together if not by agreement ? will a lion give his loud cry in the woodland when no food be there ? will the voice of the young lion be sound from his hole if he have take nothing ? be it possible for a bird to be take in a net on the earth where no net have be put for him ? will the net come up from the earth if it have take nothing at all ? if the horn be sound in the town will the people not be full of fear ? will evil come on a town if the lord have not do it ? certainly the lord will do nothing without make clear his secret to his servant the prophet . the cry of the lion be sound who will not have fear ? the lord god have say the word be it possible for the prophet to keep quiet ? give out the news in the great house of assyria and in the land of egypt and say come together on the mountain of samaria and see what great outcry be there and what cruel act be do in it . for they have no knowledge of how to do what be right say the lord who be store up violent act and destruction in their great house . for this reason say the lord an attacker will come shutting in the land on every side and your strength will come down and your great house will be make waste . these be the word of the lord a the keeper of sheep take out of the mouth of the lion two leg or part of an ear so will the child of israel be make safe who be rest in samaria on seat of honour or on the silk cushion of a bed . give ear now and give witness against the family of jacob say the lord god the god of army for in the day when i give israel punishment for his sin i will send punishment on the altar of beth el and the horn of the altar will be cut off and come down to the earth . and i will send destruction on the winter house with the summer house the ivory house will be fall down and the great house will come to an end say the lord .give ear to this word you cow of bashan who be in the hill of samaria by whom the poor be keep down and those in need be crush who say to their lord get out the wine and give u drink . the lord god have take an oath by his holy name that the day be come when they will take you away with hook and the rest of you with fish hook . and you will go out through the broken place every one go straight before her and you will be send into harmon say the lord . come to beth el and do evil to gilgal increase the number of your sin come with your offering every morning and your tenth every three day let that which be leaven be burn a a praise offering let the news of your free offering be give out publicly for this be please to you o child of israel say the lord . but in all your town i have keep food from your teeth and in all your place there have be need of bread and still you have not come back to me say the lord . and i have keep back the rain from you when it be still three month before the grain cutting i send rain on one town and keep it back from another one part be rain on and the part where there be no rain become a waste . so two or three town go wander to one town look for water and do not get enough and still you have not come back to me say the lord . i have send destruction on your field by burn and disease the increase of your garden and your vine garden your fig tree and your olive tree have be food for worm and still you have not come back to me say the lord . i have send disease among you a it be in egypt i have put your young men to the sword and have take away your horse i have make the evil smell from your tent come up to your nose and still you have not come back to me say the lord . and i have send destruction among you a when god send destruction on sodom and gomorrah and you be like a burn stick pull out of the fire and still you have not come back to me say the lord . so this be what i will do to you o israel and because i will do this to you be ready for a meeting with your god o israel . for see he who give form to the mountain and make the wind give knowledge of his purpose to man who make the morning dark and be walk on the high place of the earth the lord the god of army be his name .give ear to this word my song of sorrow over you o child of israel . the virgin of israel have be make low never again to be lift up she be stretch out by herself on her land there be no one to put her on her foot again . for these be the word of the lord god the town which be able to send out a thousand will have only a hundred and that which send out a hundred will have only ten in israel . for these be the word of the lord to the child of israel let your heart be turn to me so that you may have life do not be look for help to beth el and do not go to gilgal or make your way to beer sheba for gilgal will certainly be take prisoner and beth el will come to nothing . go to the lord for help so that you may have life for fear that he may come like fire burst out in the family of joseph cause destruction and there will be no one to put it out in beth el . you who make the work of judge a bitter thing crush down righteousness to the earth go for help to him who make orion and the pleiades by whom the deep dark be turn into morning who make the day black with night whose voice go out to the water of the sea send them out over the face of the earth the lord be his name who send sudden destruction on the strong so that destruction come on the walled town . they have hate for him who make protest against evil in the public place and he whose word be upright be disgust to them . so because the poor man be crush under your foot and you take tax from him of grain you have make for yourselves house of cut stone but you will not take your rest in them the fair vine garden plant by your hand will not give you wine . for i have see how your evil do be increase and how strong be your sin you troubler of the upright who take reward and do wrong to the cause of the poor in the public place . so the wise will say nothing in that time for it be an evil time . go after good and not evil so that life may be yours and so the lord the god of army will be with you a you say . be hater of evil and lover of good and let right be do in the public place it may be that the lord the god of army will have mercy on the rest of joseph . so these be the word of the lord the god of army the lord there will be weep in all the open space and in all the street they will say sorrow ! sorrow ! and they will get in the farmer to the weeping and the maker of sad song to give cry of grief . in all the vine garden there will be cry of grief for i will go through among you say the lord . sorrow to you who be look for the day of the lord ! what be the day of the lord to you ? it be dark and not light . a if a man run away from a lion come face to face with a bear or go into the house and put his hand on the wall and get a bite from a snake . will not the day of the lord be dark and not light ? even very dark with no light shin in it ? your feast be disgust to me i will have nothing to do with them i will take no delight in your holy meeting . even if you give me your burned offering and your meal offering i will not take pleasure in them i will have nothing to do with the peace offering of your fat beast . take away from me the noise of your song my ear be shut to the melody of your instrument . but let the right go roll on like water and righteousness like an ever flow stream . do you come to me with offering of beast and meal offering in the waste land for forty year o israel ? truly you will take up saccuth your king and kaiwan your image the star of your god which you make for yourselves . and i will send you away a prisoner far than damascus say the lord whose name be the god of army .sorrow to those who be rest in comfort in zion and to those who have no fear of danger in the mountain of samaria the note men of the chief of the nation to whom the people of israel come ! go on to calneh and see and from there go to hamath the great then go down to gath of the philistine be you good than these kingdom ? or be your land wider than theirs ? you who put far away the evil day cause the rule of the violent to come near who be rest on bed of ivory stretch out on soft seat feast on lamb from the flock and young ox from the cattle house make foolish song to the sound of corded instrument and design for themselves instrument of music like david drink wine in basin rub themselves with the best oil but they have no grief for the destruction of joseph . so now they will go away prisoner with the first of those who be make prisoner and the loud cry of those who be stretch out will come to an end . the lord god have take an oath by himself say the lord the god of army the pride of jacob be disgust to me and i have hate for his great house so i will give up the town with everything in it . then it will come about that if there be still ten men in a house death will overtake them . and when a man 's relation even the one who be responsible for burn his body lift him up to take his bone out of the house say to him who be in the inmost part of the house be there still anyone with you ? and he say no then he will say keep quiet for the name of the lord may not be name . for see at the order of the lord the great house will be full of crack and the little house will be break . be it possible for horse to go run on the rock ? may the sea be plough with ox ? for the right to be turn by you into poison and the fruit of righteousness into a bitter plant ? you whose joy be in a thing of no value who say have we not take for ourselves horn by the strength which be ours ? for see i will send against you a nation o israel say the lord the god of army rule you cruelly from the way into hamath as far a the stream of the arabah .this be what the lord god let me see and i saw that when the growth of the late grass be start he make locust it be the late growth after the king 's cutting be do . and it come about that after they have take all the grass of the land i say o lord god have mercy how will jacob be able to keep his place ? for he be small . the lord change his purpose about this say it will not be . this be what the lord let me see and i saw that the lord god send for a great fire to be the instrument of his punishment and after burn up the great deep it be about to put an end to the lord 's heritage . then say i o lord god let there be an end how will jacob be able to keep his place ? for he be small . the lord change his purpose about this say and this will not be . this be what he let me see and i saw the lord station by a wall make straight by a weighted line and he have a weighted line in his hand . and the lord say to me amos what do you see ? and i say a weighted line . then the lord say see i will let down a weighted line among my people israel never again will my eye be shut to their sin and the high place of isaac will be unpeopled and the holy place of israel will be make waste and i will come up against the family of jeroboam with the sword . then amaziah the priest of beth el send to jeroboam king of israel say amos have make design against you among the people of israel the land be trouble by his word . for amos have say jeroboam will be put to the sword and israel will certainly be take away a a prisoner out of his land . and amaziah say to amos o seer go in flight into the land of judah and there get your living by work a a prophet but be a prophet no longer at beth el for it be the holy place of the king and the king 's house . then amos in answer say to amaziah i be no prophet or one of the son of the prophet i be a herdman and one who take care of sycamore tree and the lord take me from the flock and the lord say to me go be a prophet to my people israel . now then give ear to the word of the lord you say be no prophet to israel and say not a word against the people of isaac . so this be what the lord have say your wife will be a loose woman in the town and your son and your daughter will be put to the sword and your land will be cut up into part by a line and you yourself will come to your end in an unclean land and israel will certainly be take away a prisoner out of his land .this be what the lord god let me see and i saw a basket of summer fruit . and he say amos what do you see ? and i say a basket of summer fruit . then the lord say to me the end have come to my people israel never again will my eye be shut to their sin . and the song of the king 's house will be cry of pain in that day say the lord god great will be the number of the dead body and everywhere they will put them out without a word . give ear to this you who be crush the poor and whose purpose be to put an end to those who be in need in the land say when will the new moon be go so that we may do trade in grain ? and the sabbath so that we may put out in the market the produce of our field ? make the measure small and the price great and trading falsely with scale of deceit get the poor for silver and him who be in need for the price of two shoe and take a price for the waste part of the grain . the lord have take an oath by the pride of jacob truly i will ever keep in mind all their work . will not the land be shake with fear because of this and everyone in it have sorrow ? and all of it will be overflow like the river and it will be troubled and go down again like the river of egypt . and it will come about in that day say the lord god that i will make the sun go down in the middle of the day and i will make the earth dark in daylight your feast will be turn into sorrow and all your melody into song of grief everyone will be clothe with haircloth and the hair of every head will be cut i will make the weeping like that for an only son and the end of it like a bitter day . see the day be come say the lord god when i will send time of great need on the land not need of food or desire for water but for hear the word of the lord . and they will go wander from sea to sea and from the north even to the east run here and there in search of the word of the lord and they will not get it . in that day the fair virgin and the young men will be feeble from need of water . those who make their oath by the sin of samaria and say by the life of your god o dan and by the living way of beer sheba even they will go down never again to be lift up .i saw the lord station by the side of the altar give blow to the top of the pillar so that the doorstep be shake and he say i will let all of them be break with earth shock i will put the last of them to the sword if any one of them go in flight he will not get away not one of them will be safe . even if they go deep into the underworld my hand will take them up from there if they go up to heaven i will get them down though they take cover on the top of carmel i will go in search of them and get them out though they keep themselves from my eye in the bed of the sea i will give order to the great snake there and he will give them a bite and though they be take away a prisoner by their attacker even there will i give order to the sword to put them to death my eye will be fix on them for evil and not for good . for the lord the god of army be he at whose touch the land be turn to water and everyone in it will be give up to sorrow all of it will be overflow like the river and will go down again like the river of egypt it be he who make his room in the heaven base his arch on the earth whose voice go out to the water of the sea and send them flow over the face of the earth the lord be his name . be you not a the child of the ethiopian to me o child of israel ? say the lord . have i not take israel up out of the land of egypt and the philistine from caphtor and the aramaean from kir ? see the eye of the lord be on the evil kingdom and i will put an end to it in all the earth but i will not send complete destruction on jacob say the lord . for see i will give order and i will have israel move about among all the nation a grain be move about by the shaking of the tray but not the small seed will be drop on the earth . all those sinner among my people will be put to the sword who say evil will not overtake u or come face to face with u . in that day i will put up the tent of david which have come down and make good it broken place and i will put up again his damage wall build it up a in the past so that the rest of edom may be their heritage and all the nation who have be name by my name say the lord who be do this . see the day will come say the lord when the ploughman will overtake him who be cut the grain and the crusher of the grape him who be plant seed and sweet wine will be drop from the mountain and the hill will be turn into stream of wine . and i will let the fate of my people israel be change and they will be build up again the waste town and living in them they will again be plant vine garden and take the wine for their drink and they will make garden and get the fruit of them . and i will have them plant in their land and never again will they be uproot from their land which i have give them say the lord your god .the vision of obadiah . this be what the lord have say about edom we have have word from the lord and a representative have be send among the nation say up ! and let u make war against her . see i have make you small among the nation you be much look down on . you have be trick by the pride of your heart o you whose live place be in the crack of the rock whose house be high up who have say in his heart who will make me come down to earth ? though you go up on high like an eagle though your house be place among the star i will make you come down from there say the lord . if thief come attack you by night how be you cut off ! would they not go on take till they have enough ? if men come cut your grape would they take them all ? how be the thing of esau search out ! how be his secret store look for ! all the men who be unite with you have be false to you drive you out to the edge of the land the men who be at peace with you have overcome you they have take their heritage in your place . will i not in that day say the lord take away the wise men out of edom and wisdom out of the mountain of esau ? and your men of war o teman will be overcome with fear so that every one of them may be cut off from the mountain of esau . because you be the cause of violent death and because of your cruel behaviour to your brother jacob you will be cover with shame and will be cut off for ever . because you be there watch when men from other land take away his good and strange men come into his door and put the fate of jerusalem to the decision of chance you be like one of them . do not see with pleasure your brother 's evil day the day of his fate and do not be glad over the child of judah on the day of their destruction or make wide your mouth on the day of trouble . do not go into the door of my people on the day of their downfall do not be look on their trouble with pleasure on the day of their downfall or put your hand on their good on the day of their downfall . and do not take your place at the cross road cut off those of his people who get away and do not give up to their hater those who be still there in the day of trouble . for the day of the lord be come quickly on all nation a you have do it will be do to you the reward of your act will come on your head . for a you have be drink on my holy mountain so will all the nation go on drinking without end they will go on drinking and the wine will go down their throat and they will be a if they have never be . but in mount zion some will be keep safe and it will be holy and the child of jacob will take their heritage . and the child of jacob will be a fire and those of joseph a flame and the child of esau dry stem of grass burn up by them till all be go and there will be no people live in esau for the lord have say it . and they will take the south and the lowland and the country of ephraim and gilead a their heritage . and those of the child of israel who be the first to be take away a prisoner will have their heritage among the canaanite as far a zarephath and those who be take away from jerusalem who be in sepharad will have the town of the south . and those who have be keep safe will come up from mount zion to be judge of the mountain of esau and the kingdom will be the lord 's .and the word of the lord come to jonah the son of amittai say up ! go to nineveh that great town and let your voice come to it for their evil do have come up before me . and jonah get up to go in flight to tarshish away from the lord and he go down to joppa and saw there a ship go to tarshish so he give them the price of the journey and go down into it to go with them to tarshish away from the lord . and the lord send out a great wind on to the sea and there be a violent storm in the sea so that the ship seem in danger of be break . then the sailor be full of fear every man cry to his god and the good in the ship be drop out into the sea to make the weight less . but jonah have go down into the inmost part of the ship where he be stretch out in a deep sleep . and the ship 's captain come to him and say to him what be you do sleep ? up ! say a prayer to your god if by chance god will give a thought to u so that we may not come to destruction . and they say to one another come let u put this to the decision of chance and see on whose account this evil have come on u . so they do so and jonah be see to be the man . then they say to him now make clear to u what be your work and where you come from ? what be your country and who be your people ? and he say to them i be a hebrew a worshipper of the lord the god of heaven who make the sea and the dry land . and the men be in great fear and they say to him what be this you have do ? for the men have knowledge of his flight from the lord because he have not keep it from them . and they say to him what be we to do to you so that the sea may become calm for u ? for the sea be get rougher and rougher . and he say to them take me up and put me into the sea and the sea will become calm for you for i be certain that because of me this great storm have come on you . and the men be work hard to get back to the land but they be not able to do so for the sea get rougher and rougher against them . so cry to the lord they say give ear to our prayer o lord give ear and do not let destruction overtake u because of this man 's life do not put on u the sin of take life without cause for you o lord have do what seem good to you . so they take jonah up and put him into the sea and the sea be no long angry . then great be the men 's fear of the lord and they make an offering to the lord and take oath to him . and the lord make ready a great fish to take jonah into it mouth and jonah be inside the fish for three day and three night .then jonah make prayer to the lord his god from the inside of the fish and say in my trouble i be cry to the lord and he give me an answer out of the deep underworld i send up a cry and you give ear to my voice . for you have put me down into the deep into the heart of the sea and the river be round about me all your wave and your rolling water go over me . and i say i have be send away from before your eye how may i ever again see your holy temple ? the water be circle round me even to the neck the deep be about me the sea grass be twist round my head . i go down to the base of the mountain a for the earth her wall be about me for ever but you have take up my life from the underworld o lord my god . when my soul in me be overcome i keep the memory of the lord and my prayer come in to you into your holy temple . the worshipper of false god have give up their only hope . but i will make an offering to you with the voice of praise i will give effect to my oath . salvation be the lord 's . and at the lord 's order the fish sent jonah out of it mouth on to the dry land .and the word of the lord come to jonah a second time say up ! go to nineveh that great town and give it the word which i have give you . so jonah get up and go to nineveh a the lord have say . now nineveh be a very great town three day ' journey from end to end . and jonah first of all go a day 's journey into the town and cry out say in forty day destruction will overtake nineveh . and the people of nineveh have belief in god and a time be fix for go without food and they put on haircloth from the great to the least . and the word come to the king of nineveh and he get up from his seat of authority and take off his robe and cover himself with haircloth take his seat in the dust . and he have it give out in nineveh by the order of the king and his great men no man or beast herd or flock be to have a taste of anything let them have no food or water and let man and beast be cover with haircloth and let them make strong prayer to god and let everyone be turn from his evil way and the violent act of their hand . who may say that god will not be turn change his purpose and turn away from his burn wrath so that destruction may not overtake u ? and god saw what they do how they be turn from their evil way and god 's purpose be change a to the evil which he say he would do to them and he do it not .but this seem very wrong to jonah and he be angry . and he make prayer to the lord and say o lord be this not what i say when i be still in my country ? this be why i take care to go in flight to tarshish for i be certain that you be a loving god full of pity slow to be angry and great in mercy and ready to be turn from your purpose of evil . so now o lord give ear to my prayer and take my life from me for death be well for me than life . and the lord say have you any right to be angry ? then jonah go out of the town and take his seat on the east side of the town and make himself a roof of branch and take his seat under it shade till he saw what would become of the town . and the lord god make a vine come up over jonah to give him shade over his head . and jonah be very glad because of the vine . but early on the morning after god make ready a worm for the destruction of the vine and it become dry and dead . then when the sun come up god send a burning east wind and so great be the heat of the sun on his head that jonah be overcome and request death for himself say death be well for me than life . and the lord say to jonah have you any right to be angry about the vine ? and he say i have a right to be truly angry . and the lord say you have pity on the vine for which you do no work and for the growth of which you be not responsible which come up in a night and come to an end in a night and be i not to have mercy on nineveh that great town in which there be more than a hundred and twenty thousand person without the power of judge between right and leave as well a much cattle ?the word of the lord which come to micah the morashtite in the day of jotham ahaz and hezekiah king of judah his vision about samaria and jerusalem . give ear you people all of you give attention o earth and everything in it let the lord god be witness against you the lord from his holy temple . for see the lord be come out from his place and will come down step on the high place of the earth . and the mountain will be turn to water under him and the deep valley will be break open like wax before the fire like water flow down a slope . all this be because of the wrongdoing of jacob and the sin of the child of israel . what be the wrongdoing of jacob ? be it not samaria ? and what be the high place of judah ? be they not jerusalem ? so i will make samaria into a field and the planting of a vine garden i will send it stone fall down into the valley uncover it base . and all her picture image will be hammer into bit and all the payment for her loose way will be burn with fire and all the image of her god i will make waste for with the price of a loose woman she get them together and a the price of a loose woman will they be give back . for this i will be full of sorrow and give cry of grief i will go uncovered and unclothed i will give cry of grief like the jackal and will be in sorrow like the ostrich . for her wound may not be make well for it have come even to judah stretch up to the doorway of my people even to jerusalem . give no word of it in gath let there be no weep at all at beth le aphrah be roll in the dust . be uncovered and go away you who be live in shaphir the one living in zaanan have not come out of her town beth ezel be take away from it base even from it rest place . for the one living in maroth be wait for good for evil have come down from the lord to the doorway of jerusalem . let the war carriage be yoke to the quick running horse you who be live in lachish she be the first cause of sin to the daughter of zion for the wrongdoing of israel be see in you . for this cause give a parting offering to moresheth gath the daughter of achzib will be a deceit to the king of israel . even now will the taker of your heritage come to you you who be live in mareshah the glory of israel will come to destruction for ever . let your head be uncover and your hair cut off in sorrow for the child of your delight let the hair be pull from your head like an eagle 's for they have be take away from you a prisoner .a curse on the designer of evil work on their bed ! in the morning light they do it because it be in their power . they have a desire for field and take them by force and for house and take them away they be cruel to a man and his family even to a man and his heritage . for this cause the lord have say see against this family i be purpose an evil from which you will not be able to take your neck away and you will be weight down by it for it be an evil time . in that day this say will be say about you and this song of grief will be make the heritage of my people be measure out and there be no one to give it back those who have make u prisoner have take our field from u and complete destruction have come to u . for this cause you will have no one to make the decision by the measuring line in the meeting of the lord . let not word like these be drop they say shame and the curse will not come to the family of jacob ! be the lord quickly make angry ? be these his doings ? do not his word do good to his people israel ? a for you you have become hater of those who be at peace with you you take the clothing of those who go by without fear and make them prisoner of war . the woman of my people you have be drive away from their dearly love child from their young one you be take my glory for ever . up ! and go for this be not your rest because it have be make unclean the destruction order will come on you . if a man come with a false spirit of deceit say i will be a prophet to you of wine and strong drink he would be the sort of prophet for this people . i will certainly make all of you o jacob come together i will get together the rest of israel i will put them together like the sheep in their circle like a flock in their green field they will be full of the noise of men . the opener of the way will go up before them force their way out they will go on to the doorway and out through it their king will go on before them and the lord at their head .and i say give ear now you head of jacob and ruler of the people of israel be it not for you to have knowledge of what be right ? you who be hater of good and lover of evil pull off their skin from them and their flesh from their bone like meat they take the flesh of my people for their food skin them and crush their bone yes cut them up a if for the pot like flesh inside the cooking pot . then they will be cry to the lord for help but he will not give them an answer yes he will keep his face veil from them at that time because their act have be evil . this be what the lord have say about the prophet by whom my people have be turn from the right way who bite with their teeth say peace and if anyone put nothing in their mouth they make ready for war against him . for this cause it will be night for you without a vision and it will be dark for you without knowledge of the future the sun will go down over the prophet and the day will be black over them . and the seer will be sham and the reader of the future will be at a loss all of them cover their lip for there be no answer from god . but i truly be full of the spirit of the lord with power of judging and with strength to make clear to jacob his wrongdoing and to israel his sin . then give ear to this you head of the child of jacob you ruler of the child of israel hat what be right twist what be straight . they be build up zion with blood and jerusalem with evil do . it head take reward for judging and the priest take payment for teaching and the prophet get silver for read the future but still support themselves on the lord they say be not the lord among u ? no evil will overtake u . for this reason zion will be plough like a field because of you and jerusalem will become a mass of broken wall and the mountain of the house like a high place in the wood .but in the last day it will come about that the mountain of the lord 's house will be place on the top of the mountain and be lift up over the hill and people will be flow to it . and a number of nation will go and say come and let u go up to the mountain of the lord and to the house of the god of jacob and he will give u knowledge of his way and we will be guide by his word for from zion the law will go out and the word of the lord from jerusalem . and he will be judge between great people and strong nation far away will be rule by his decision their sword will be hammer into plough blade and their spear into vine knife nation will no longer be lift up their sword against one another and knowledge of war will have go for ever . but every man will be seat under his vine and under his fig tree and no one will be a cause of fear to them for the mouth of the lord of army have say it . for all the people will be walk every one in the name of his god and we will be walk in the name of the lord our god for ever and ever . in that day say the lord i will get together her who go with uncertain step i will get together her who have be send away and her on whom i have send evil and i will make her whose step be uncertain a small band and her who be feeble a strong nation and the lord will be their king in mount zion from now and for ever . and you o tower of the flock ophel of the daughter of zion to you it will come even the early authority the kingdom of the daughter of jerusalem . now why be you cry so loudly ? be there no king in you ? have destruction come on your wise helper ? so that pain have take you like the pain of a woman in childbirth be in pain make sound of grief o daughter of zion like a woman in childbirth for now you will go out of the town living in the open country and will come even to babylon there you will have salvation there the lord will make you free from the hand of your hater . and now a number of nation have come together against you and they say let her be make unclean and let our eye see the fate of zion . but they have no knowledge of the thought of the lord their mind be not able to see his purpose for he have get them together like stem of grain to the crushing floor . up ! and let the grain be crush o daughter of zion for i will make your horn iron and your foot brass and a number of people will be break by you and you will give up their increase to the lord and their wealth to the lord of all the earth .now you will give yourselves deep wound for grief they will put up a wall round u they will give the judge of israel a blow on the face with a rod . and you beth lehem ephrathah the least among the family of judah out of you one will come to me who be to be ruler in israel whose go out have be purpose from time past from the eternal day . for this cause he will give them up till the time when she who be with child have give birth then the rest of his brother will come back to the child of israel . and he will take his place and give food to his flock in the strength of the lord in the glory of the name of the lord his god and their resting place will be safe for now he will be great to the end of the earth . and this will be our peace when the assyrian come into our country and his foot be in our land then we will put up against him seven keeper of the flock and eight chief among men . and they will make waste the land of assyria with the sword and the land of nimrod with the edge of the sword he will give u salvation from the assyrian when he come into our country when his foot come inside the limit of our land . and the rest of jacob will be among the mass of people like dew from the lord like shower on the grass which may not be keep back by man or be wait for the son of men . and the rest of jacob will be among the nation in the middle of the mass of people like a lion among the beast of the wood like a young lion among the flock of sheep if he go through they will be crush under foot and pull to bit and there will be no saviour . your hand be lift up against those who be against you and all your hater will be cut off . and it will come about in that day say the lord that i will take away your horse from you and will give your war carriage to destruction i will have the town of your land cut off and all your strong place pull down i will put an end to your use of secret art and you will have no more reader of sign and i will have your image and your pillar cut off from you and you will no longer give worship to the work of your hand . i will have your asherahs pull up from among you and i will send destruction on your image . and my punishment will be effect on the nation with such burn wrath a they have not have word of .give ear now to the word of the lord up ! put forward your cause before the mountain let your voice be sound among the hill . give ear o you mountains to the lord 's cause and take note you base of the earth for the lord have a cause against his people and he will take it up with israel . o my people what have i do to you ? how have i be a weariness to you ? give answer against me . for i take you up out of the land of egypt and make you free from the prison house i send before you moses aaron and miriam . o my people keep in mind now what be design by balak king of moab and the answer which balaam son of beor give him the event from shittim to gilgal so that you may be certain of the upright act of the lord . with what be i to come before the lord and go with bent head before the high god ? be i to come before him with burn offering with young oxen a year old ? will the lord be please with thousand of sheep or with ten thousand river of oil ? be i to give my first child for my wrongdoing the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul ? he have make clear to you o man what be good and what be desire from you by the lord only do what be right and love mercy and walk without pride before your god . the voice of the lord be cry out to the town give ear you tribes and the meeting of the town . be i to let the store of the evil doer go out of my memory and the short measure which be curse ? be it possible for me to let wrong scale and the bag of false weight go without punishment ? for it men of wealth be cruel and it people have say what be not true and their tongue be false in their mouth . so i have make a start with your punishment i have make you waste because of your sin . you will have food but not enough your shame will be ever with you you will get your good move but you will not take them away safely and what you do take away i will give to the sword . you will put in seed but you will not get in the grain you will be crush olive but your body will not be rub with the oil and you will get in the grape but you will have no wine . for you have keep the law of omri and all the work of the family of ahab and you have be guide by their design so that i might make you a cause of wonder and your people a cause of hiss and the shame of my people will be on you .sorrow be mine ! for i be a when they have get in the summer fruit like the last of the grape there be nothing for food not even an early fig for my desire . the good man be go from the earth there be no one upright among men they be all wait secretly for blood every man be go after his brother with a net . their hand be make ready to do evil the ruler make request for money and the judge be look for a reward and the great man give decision at his pleasure and the right be twist . the best of them be like a waste plant and their upright one be like a wall of thorn . sorrow ! the day of their fate have come now will trouble come on them . put no faith in a friend do not let your hope be place in a relation keep watch on the door of your mouth against her who be rest on your breast . for the son put shame on his father the daughter go against her mother and the daughter in law against her mother in law and a man 's hater be those of his family . but a for me i be look to the lord i be wait for the god of my salvation the ear of my god will be open to me . do not be glad because of my sorrow o my hater after my fall i will be lift up when i be seat in the dark the lord will be a light to me . i will undergo the wrath of the lord because of my sin against him till he take up my cause and do what be right for me when he make me come out into the light i will see his righteousness and my hater will see it and be cover with shame she who say to me where be the lord your god ? my eye will see their desire effect on her now she will be crush under foot like the dust of the street . a day for build your wall ! in that day will your limit be stretch far and wide . in that day they will come to you from assyria and the town of egypt and from egypt even to the river and from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain . but the land will become a waste because of it people a the fruit of their work . keep your people safe with your rod the flock of your heritage living by themselves in the wood in the middle of carmel let them get their food in bashan and gilead a in the past . a in the day when you come out from the land of egypt let u see thing of wonder . the nation will see and be sham because of all their strength they will put their hand on their mouth their ear will be stop . they will take dust a their food like a snake like the thing which go flat on the earth they will come shake with fear out of their secret place they will come with fear to the lord our god full of fear because of you . who be a god like you offer forgiveness for evil do and overlook the sin of the rest of his heritage ? he do not keep his wrath for ever because his delight be in mercy . he will again have pity on u he will put our sin under his foot and you will send all our sin down into the heart of the sea . you will make clear your good faith to jacob and your mercy to abraham a you give your oath to our father from time long past .the word about nineveh . the book of the vision of nahum the elkoshite . the lord be a god who take care of his honour and give punishment for wrong the lord give punishment and be angry the lord send punishment on those who be against him be angry with his hater . the lord be slow to get angry and great in power and will not let the sinner go without punishment the way of the lord be in the wind and the storm and the cloud be the dust of his foot . he say sharp word to the sea and make it dry dry up all the river bashan be feeble and carmel and the flower of lebanon be without strength . the mountain be shake because of him and the hill flow away the earth be fall to bit before him the world and all who be in it . who may keep his place before his wrath ? and who may undergo the heat of his passion ? his wrath be let loose like fire and the rock be break open by him . the lord be good a strong place in the day of trouble and he have knowledge of those who take him for their safe cover . but like water overflow he will take them away he will put an end to those who come up against him drive his hater into the dark . what be you design against the lord ? he will put an end to it his hater will not come up again a second time . for though they be like twisted thorn and be overcome a with drink they will come to destruction like stem of grass fully dry . one have go out from you who be design evil against the lord whose purpose be of no value . this be what the lord have say the day of my cause against you be end they be cut off and past . though i have send trouble on you you will no longer be trouble . and now i will let his yoke be break off you and your chain be part . the lord have give an order about you that no more of your name be to be plant from the house of your god i will have the picture and metal image cut off i will make your last resting place a place of shame for you be completely evil . see on the mountain the foot of him who come with good news give word of peace ! keep your feast o judah give effect to your oath for the good for nothing man will never again go through you he be completely cut off .a crusher have come up before your face keep a good look out let the way be watch make yourself strong let your power be greatly increase . for the lord will make good the vine of jacob as well a the vine of israel for the waster have make them waste and send destruction on the branch of their vine . the body cover of his fight men have be make red the men of war be clothe in bright red the war carriage be like flame of fire in the day when he get ready the horse be shake . the war carriage be rush through the street push against one another in the wide way look like burn light run like thunder flame . he take the record of his great men they go fall on their way they go quickly to the wall the cover be make ready . the river doorway be force open and the king 's house be flow away . and the queen be uncovered she be take away and her servant girl be weep like the sound of dove hammer on their breast . but nineveh be like a pool of water whose water be flow away keep your place they say but no one be turn back . take silver take gold for there be no end to the store take for yourselves a weight of thing to be desire . everything have be take from her all be go she have nothing more the heart be turn to water the knee be shake all be twist in pain and colour have go from all face . where be the lion ' hole the place where the young lion get their food where the lion and the she lion be walk with their young without cause for fear ? food enough for his young and for his she lion be pull down by the lion his hole be full of flesh and his rest place store with meat . see i be against you say the lord of army and i will have your war carriage burn in the smoke and your young lion will be food for the sword you will no longer get your food by force on the earth and the voice of your she lion will be stop for ever .a curse be on the town of blood it be full of deceit and violent act and there be no end to the taking of life . the noise of the whip and the noise of thunder wheel horse rush and war carriage jump horseman drive forward and the shining sword and the bright spear and a great number of wounded and mass of dead body they be fall over the body of the dead because of all the false way of the loose woman expert in attraction and wise in secret art who take nation in the net of her false way and family through her secret art . see i be against you say the lord of army and i will have your skirt pull over your face and let the nation see you unclothed and the kingdom your shame . i will make you completely disgust and full of shame and will put you up to be look at by all . and it will come about that all who see you will go in flight from you and say nineveh be make waste who will be weep for her ? where be i to get comforter for her ? be you good than no amon seat on the nile stream with water all round her whose wall be the sea and her earthwork the water ? ethiopia be her strength and egyptian without number put and lubim be her helper . but even she have be take away she have go away a a prisoner even her young child be smash to bit at the top of all the street the fate of her honoured men be put to the decision of chance and all her great men be put in chain . and you will be overcome with wine you will become feeble you will be look for a safe place from those who be fight against you . all your walled place will be like fig tree and your people like the first fig fall at a shake into the mouth which be open for them . see the people who be in you be woman the doorway of your land be wide open to your attacker the lock of your door have be burn away in the fire . get water for the time when you be shut in make strong your town go into the potter 's earth stamp it down with your foot make strong the brickwork . there the fire will make you waste you will be cut off by the sword make yourself a great in number a the worm a great in number a the locust . let your trader be increase more than the star of heaven your crowned one be like the locust and your scribe like the cloud of insect which take cover in the wall on a cold day but when the sun come up they go in flight and be see no longer in their place . sorrow ! how be the keeper of your flock sleep o king of assyria ! your strong men be at rest your people be wander on the mountain and there be no one to get them together . your pain may not be make well you be wound to death all those hear the news about you will be wave their hand in joy over you for who have not undergo the weight of your evil do again and again ?the word of the lord which come to zephaniah the son of cushi the son of gedaliah the son of amariah the son of hezekiah in the day of josiah the son of amon king of judah . i will take away everything from the face of the earth say the lord . i will take away man and beast i will take away the bird of the heaven and the fish of the sea cause the downfall of the evil doer and cut man off from the face of the earth say the lord . and my hand will be stretch out on judah and on all the people of jerusalem cut off the name of the baal from this place and the name of the false priest and the worshipper of the army of heaven on the house top and the lord 's worshipper who take oath by milcom and those who be turn back from go after the lord and those who have not make prayer to the lord or get direction from him . let there be no sound before the lord god for the day of the lord be near for the lord have make ready an offering he have make his guest holy . and it will come about in the day of the lord 's offering that i will send punishment on the ruler and the king 's son and all who be clothe in robe from strange land . and in that day i will send punishment on all those who come jumping over the doorstep and make their master 's house full of violent behaviour and deceit . and in that day say the lord there will be the sound of a cry from the fish doorway and an outcry from the new town and a great thundering from the hill and cry of grief from the people of the hollow because of the downfall of all the people of canaan all those who be weight down with silver have be cut off . and it will come about at that time that i will go search through jerusalem with light and i will send punishment on the men who have become like wine store over long who say to themselves the lord will not do good and will not do evil . and their wealth will be violently take away and their house will be make waste they will go on building house and never living in them and plant vine garden but not drink the wine from them . the great day of the lord be near it be near and come very quickly the bitter day of the lord be near come on more quickly than a man of war . that day be a day of wrath a day of trouble and sorrow a day of waste and destruction a day of dark night and deep shade a day of cloud and thick dark . a day of sound the horn and the war cry against the walled town and the high tower . and i will send trouble on men so that they will go about like the blind because they have do evil against the lord and their blood will be drain out like dust and their strength like waste . even their silver and their gold will not be able to keep them safe in the day of the lord 's wrath but all the land will be burn up in the fire of his bitter wrath for he will put an end even suddenly to all who be live in the land .come together make everyone come together o nation without shame before the lord send you violently away in flight like the waste from the grain before the burn wrath of the lord come on you before the day of the lord 's wrath come on you . make search for the lord all you quiet one of the earth who have do what be right in his eye make search for righteousness and a quiet heart it may be that you will be safely cover in the day of the lord 's wrath . for gaza will be give up and ashkelon will become waste they will send ashdod out in the middle of the day and ekron will be uproot . sorrow to the people live by the sea the nation of the cherethites ! the word of the lord be against you o canaan the land of the philistine i will send destruction on you till there be no one living in you . and the land by the sea will be grass land with house for keeper of sheep and wall place for flock . the land by the sea will be for the rest of the child of judah by the sea they will give their flock food in the house of ashkelon they will take their rest in the evening for the lord their god will take them in hand and their fate will be change . my ear have be open to the bitter word of moab and the word of shame of the child of ammon which they have say against my people lift themselves up against the limit of their land . for this cause by my life say the lord of army the god of israel truly moab will become like sodom and the child of ammon like gomorrah give up to waste plant and salt pool and unpeopled for ever the rest of my people will take their property the overflow of my nation will take their heritage . this will be their fate because of their pride because they have say evil lifting themselves up against the people of the lord of army . the lord will let himself be see by them for he will make all the god of the earth feeble and men will go down before him in worship everyone from his place even all the sea land of the nation . and you ethiopians will be put to death by my sword . and his hand will be stretch out against the north for the destruction of assyria and he will make nineveh unpeopled and dry like the waste land . and herd will take their rest in the middle of her all the beast of the valley the pelican and the porcupine will make their living place on the top of it pillar the owl will be cry in the window the raven will be see on the doorstep . this be the town which be full of joy living without fear of danger say in her heart i be and there be no other how have she be make waste a place for beast to take their rest in ! everyone who go by her will make hiss wave his hand .sorrow to her who be uncontrolled and unclean the cruel town ! she give no attention to the voice she have no use for teach she put no faith in the lord she do not come near to her god . her ruler be like loud voice lion in her her judge be wolf of the evening crush up the bone before the morning . her prophet be good for nothing person full of deceit her priest have make the holy place unclean and have go violently against the law . the lord in her be upright he will not do evil every morning he let his righteousness be see he be unchanging but the evil doer have no sense of shame . i have have the nation cut off their tower be break down i have make their street a waste so that no one go through them destruction have overtake their town so that there be no man live in them . i say certainly you will go in fear of me and come under my training so that whatever i may send on her may not be cut off before her eye but they get up early and make all their work evil . for this reason go on wait for me say the lord till the day when i come up a a witness for my purpose be to send for the nation and to get the kingdom together so that i may let loose on them my passion even all my burning wrath for all the earth will be burn up in the fire of my bitter passion . for then i will give the people a clean language so that they may all make prayer to the lord and be his servant with one mind . from over the river of ethiopia and from the side of the north they will come to me with an offering . in that day you will have no shame on account of all the thing in which you do evil against me for then i will take away from among you those who be lift up in pride and you will no longer be lift up with pride in my holy mountain . but i will still have among you a quiet and poor people and they will put their faith in the name of the lord . the rest of israel will do no evil and say no false word the tongue of deceit will not be see in their mouth for they will take their food and their rest and no one will be a cause of fear to them . make melody o daughter of zion give a loud cry o israel be glad and let your heart be full of joy o daughter of jerusalem . the lord have take away those who be judge you he have send your hater far away the king of israel even the lord be among you you will have no more fear of evil . in that day it will be say to jerusalem have no fear o zion let not your hand be feeble . the lord your god be among you a a strong saviour he will be glad over you with joy he will make his love new again he will make a song of joy over you a in the time of a holy feast . i will take away your trouble lift up your shame from off you . see at that time i will put an end to all who have be trouble you i will give salvation to her whose step be uncertain and get together her who have be send in flight and i will make them a cause of praise and an honoured name in all the earth when i let their fate be change . at that time i will make you come in at that time i will get you together for i will make you a name and a praise among all the people of the earth when i let your fate be change before your eye say the lord .in the second year of darius the king in the sixth month on the first day of the month come the word of the lord by haggai the prophet to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel ruler of judah and to joshua the son of jehozadak the high priest say these be the word of the lord of army these people say the time have not come for build the lord 's house . then the word of the lord come by haggai the prophet say be it a time for you to be live in roofed house while this house be a waste ? for this cause the lord of army have say give thought to your way . much have be plant but little get in you take food but have not enough you take drink but be not full you be clothe but no one be warm and he who get payment for his work get it to put it into a bag full of hole . this be what the lord of army have say give thought to your way . go up to the hill and get wood and put up the house and i will take pleasure in it and be honour say the lord . you be look for much and it come to little and when you get it into your house i take it away with a breath . why ? say the lord of army . because of my house which be a waste while every man take care of the house which be his . for this cause the heaven over you be keep from give dew and the earth from give her fruit . and by my order no rain come on the land or on the mountain or the grain or the wine or the oil or the produce of the earth or on men or cattle or on any work of man 's hand . then zerubbabel the son of shealtiel and joshua the son of jehozadak the high priest and all the rest of the people give ear to the voice of the lord their god and to the word of haggai the prophet because the lord their god have send him and the people be in fear before the lord . then haggai whom the lord have send to give his word to the people say i be with you say the lord . and the spirit of zerubbabel the son of shealtiel ruler of judah be move by the lord a be the spirit of joshua the son of jehozadak the high priest and the spirit of all the rest of the people and they come and do work in the house of the lord of army their god . on the twenty fourth day of the month in the sixth month in the second year of darius the king .in the seventh month on the twenty first day of the month the word of the lord come by haggai the prophet say say now to zerubbabel the son of shealtiel ruler of judah and to joshua the son of jehozadak the high priest and to the rest of the people who be there still among you who saw this house in it first glory ? and how do you see it now ? be it not in your eye a nothing ? but now be strong o zerubbabel say the lord and be strong o joshua son of jehozadak the high priest and be strong all you people of the land say the lord and get to work for i be with you say the lord of army the agreement which i make with you when you come out of egypt and my spirit be with you still have no fear . for this be what the lord of army have say in a short time i will make a shaking of the heaven and the earth and the sea and the dry land and i will make a shaking of all the nation and the desired thing of all nation will come and i will make this house full of my glory say the lord of army . the silver be mine and the gold be mine say the lord of army . the second glory of this house will be great than the first say the lord of army and in this place i will give peace say the lord of army . on the twenty fourth day of the ninth month in the second year of darius the word of the lord come by haggai the prophet say these be the word of the lord of army put now a point of law to the priest say if anyone have some holy flesh fold in the skirt of his robe will bread or soup or wine or oil or any other food be make holy if touch by his skirt ? and the priest answer say no . then haggai say will any of these be make unclean by the touch of one who be unclean through touch a dead body ? and the priest answer say it will be make unclean . then haggai say so be this people and so be this nation before me say the lord and so be every work of their hand and the offering they give there be unclean . and now give thought look back from this day to the time before one stone be put on another in the temple of the lord how when anyone come to a store of twenty measure there be only ten when anyone go to the wine store to get fifty vessel full there be only twenty . and i send burning and wasting and a rain of ice drop on all the work of your hand but still you be not turn to me say the lord . and now give thought look on from this day from the twenty fourth day of the ninth month from the time when the base of the lord 's house be put in it place give thought to it . be the seed still in the store house ? have the vine and the fig tree the pomegranate and the olive tree still not give their fruit ? from this day i will send my blessing on you . and the word of the lord come a second time to haggai on the twenty fourth day of the month say say to zerubbabel ruler of judah i will make a shaking of the heaven and the earth overturn the power of kingdom and i will send destruction on the strength of the kingdom of the nation by me war carriage will be overturn with those who be in them and the horse and the horseman will come down everyone by the sword of his brother . in that day say the lord of army i will take you o zerubbabel my servant the son of shealtiel say the lord and will make you a a jewelled ring for i have take you to be mine say the lord of army .in the eighth month in the second year of darius the word of the lord come to zechariah the son of berechiah the son of iddo the prophet say the lord have be very angry with your father and you be to say to them these be the word of the lord of army come back to me say the lord of army and i will come back to you . be not like your father to whom the voice of the early prophet come say be turn now from your evil way and from your evil doings but they do not give ear to me or take note say the lord . your father where be they ? and the prophet do they go on living for ever ? but my word and my order which i give to my servant the prophet have they not overtake your father ? and turn back they say a it be the purpose of the lord of army to do to u in reward for our way and our doings so have he do . on the twenty fourth day of the eleventh month the month shebat in the second year of darius the word of the lord come to zechariah the son of berechiah the son of iddo the prophet say i saw in the night a man on a red horse between the mountain in the valley and at his back be horse red black white and of mixed colour . then i say o my lord what be these ? and the angel who be talk to me say to me i will make clear to you what they be . and the man who be between the mountain answer me say these be those whom the lord have send to go up and down through the earth . and the man who be between the mountain answer say to the angel of the lord we have go up and down through the earth and all the earth be quiet and at rest . then the angel of the lord answering say o lord of army how long will it be before you have mercy on jerusalem and on the town of judah against which your wrath have be burn for seventy year ? and the lord give an answer in good and comfort word to the angel who be talk to me . and the angel who be talk to me say to me let your voice be loud and say these be the word of the lord of army i be greatly move about the fate of jerusalem and of zion . and i be very angry with the nation who be live untroubled for when i be only a little angry they make the evil worse . so this be what the lord have say i have come back to jerusalem with mercy my house be to be put up in her say the lord of army and a line be to be stretch out over jerusalem . and again let your voice be loud and say this be what the lord of army have say my town will again be overflow with good thing and again the lord will give comfort to zion and take jerusalem for himself . and lift up my eye i saw four horn . and i say to the angel who be talk to me what be these ? and he say to me these be the horn which have send judah israel and jerusalem in flight . and the lord give me a vision of four metal worker . then i say what have these come to do ? and he say these be the horn which send judah in flight and keep him from lift up his head but these men have come to send fear on them and to put down the nation who be lift up their horn against the land of judah to send it in flight .and lift up my eye i saw a man with a measure line in his hand . and i say to him where be you go ? and he say to me to take the measure of jerusalem to see how wide and how long it be . and the angel who be talk to me go out and another angel go out and meet him say to him go quickly and say to this young man jerusalem will be an unwalled town because of the great number of men and cattle in her . for i say the lord will be a wall of fire round about her and i will be the glory inside her . ho ho ! go in flight from the land of the north say the lord for i have send you far and wide to the four wind of heaven say the lord . ho ! zion go in flight from danger you who be live with the daughter of babylon . for this be what the lord of army have say in the way of glory he have send me to the nation which have take your good for anyone touching you be touch what be most dear to him . for at the shaking of my hand over them their good will be take by those who be their servant and you will see that the lord of army have send me . give song of joy o daughter of zion for i come and i will make my rest place among you say the lord . and a number of nation will be join to the lord in that day and will become my people and i will be live among you and you will see that the lord of army have send me to you . and judah will be the lord 's heritage in the holy land and jerusalem will again be his . let all flesh be quiet and make no sound before the lord for he be awake and have come from his holy rest place .and he let me see joshua the high priest in his place before the angel of the lord and the satan at his right hand ready to take up a cause against him . and the lord say to the satan may the lord 's word be sharp against you o satan the word of the lord who have take jerusalem for himself be this not a burning branch pull out of the fire ? now joshua be clothe in unclean robe and he be in his place before the angel . and he make answer and say to those who be there before him take the unclean robe off him and let him be clothe in clean robe and let them put a clean head dress on his head . so they put a clean head dress on his head clothing him with clean robe and to him he say see i have take your sin away from you . and the angel of the lord make a statement to joshua and say these be the word of the lord of army if you will go in my way and keep what i have put in your care then you will be judge over my temple and have the care of my house and i will give you the right to come in among those who be there . give ear now o joshua the high priest you and your friend who be seat before you for these be men who be a sign for see i will let my servant the branch be see . for see the stone which i have put before joshua on one stone be seven eye see the design cut on it will be my work say the lord of army and i will take away the sin of that land in one day . in that day say the lord of army you will be one another 's guest under the vine and under the fig tree .and the angel who be talk to me come again awake me a a man out of his sleep . and he say to me what do you see ? and i say i see a light support make all of gold with it cup on the top of it and seven light on it and there be seven pipe to every one of the light which be on the top of it and two olive tree by it one on the right side of the cup and one on the left . and i make answer and say to the angel who be talk to me what be these my lord ? then the angel who be talk to me answer me say have you no knowledge of what these be ? and i say no my lord . this be the word of the lord to zerubbabel say not by force or by power but by my spirit say the lord of army . who be you o great mountain ? before zerubbabel you will become level and he will let all see the headstone with cry of grace grace to it . then the word of the lord come to me say the hand of zerubbabel have put the base of this house in place and his hand will make it complete and it will be clear to you that the lord of army have send me to you . for who have have a poor opinion of the day of small thing ? for they will be glad when they see the weighted measuring line in the hand of zerubbabel . then he say in answer to me these seven light be the eye of the lord which go quickly up and down through all the earth . and i make answer and say to him what be these two olive tree on the right side of the light support and on the left ? and answer a second time i say to him what be these two olive branch through whose gold pip the oil be drain out ? and he say in answer to me have you no knowledge what these be ? and i say no my lord . and he say these be the two son of oil whose place be by the lord of all the earth .then again lift up my eye i saw a roll in flight through the air . and he say to me what do you see ? and i say a roll go through the air it be twenty cubit long and ten cubit wide . then he say to me this be the curse which go out over the face of all the land for long enough have every thief go without punishment and long enough have every taker of false oath go without punishment . and i will send it out say the lord of army and it will go into the house of the thief and into the house of him who take a false oath by my name and it will be in his house cause it complete destruction with it woodwork and it stone . and the angel who be talk to me go out and say to me let your eye be lift up now and see the ephah which be go out . and i say what be it ? and he say this be an ephah which be go out . and he say far this be their evil do in all the land . and i saw a round cover of lead lift up and a woman be seat in the middle of the ephah . and he say this be sin and push her down into the ephah he put the weight of lead on the mouth of it . and lift up my eye i saw two woman come out and the wind be in their wing and they have wing like the wing of a stork and they take the ephah lift it up between earth and heaven . and i say to the angel who be talk to me where be they take the ephah ? and he say to me to make a house for her in the land of shinar and they will make a place ready and put her there in the place which be hers .and again lift up my eye i saw four war carriage come out from between the two mountain and the mountain be mountain of brass . in the first war carriage be red horse and in the second black horse and in the third white horse and in the fourth horse of mixed colour . and i make answer and say to the angel who be talk to me what be these my lord ? and the angel answer say to me these go out to the four wind of heaven from their place before the lord of all the earth . the carriage in which be the black horse go in the direction of the north country the white go to the west and those of mixed colour go in the direction of the south country . and the red one go to the east and they make request that they might go up and down through the earth and he say go up and down through the earth . so they go up and down through the earth . then cry out to me he say see those who be go to the north country have give rest to the spirit of the lord in the north country . and the word of the lord come to me say take the offering of those who go away a prisoner from heldai tobijah and jedaiah and from the family of josiah the son of zephaniah who have come from babylon and take silver and gold and make a crown and put it on the head of zerubbabel and say to him these be the word of the lord of army see the man whose name be the branch under whom there will be fertile growth . and he will be the builder of the temple of the lord and the glory will be his and he will take his place a ruler on the seat of power and joshua will be a priest at his right hand and between them there will be a design of peace . and the crown will be for grace to heldai and tobijah and jedaiah and the son of zephaniah to keep their memory living in the house of the lord . and those who be far away will come and be builder in the temple of the lord and it will be clear to you that the lord of army have send me to you .and it come about in the fourth year of king darius that the word of the lord come to zechariah on the fourth day of the ninth month the month chislev . now they of beth el have send sharezer and regem melech to make a request for grace from the lord and to say to the priest of the house of the lord of army and to the prophet be i to go on weep in the fifth month separate myself a i have do in past year ? then the word of the lord of army come to me say say to all the people of the land and to the priest when you go without food and give yourselves to grief in the fifth and the seventh month for these seventy year do you ever do it because of me ? and when you be feast and drinking be you not do it only for yourselves ? be not these the word which the lord say to you by the early prophet when jerusalem be full of people and wealth and the town round about her and the south and the lowland be people ? and the word of the lord come to zechariah say this be what the lord of army have say let your judge be upright and do in good faith let every man have mercy and pity for his brother do not be hard on the widow or the child without a father on the man from a strange country or on the poor let there be no evil thought in your heart against your brother . but they would not give attention turn their back and stop their ear from hear and they make their heart like the hard stone so that they might not give ear to the law and the word which the lord of army have say by the early prophet and there come great wrath from the lord of army . and it come about that a they would not give ear to his voice so i would not give ear to their voice say the lord of army but with a storm wind i send them in flight among all the nation of whom they have no knowledge . so the land be waste after them so that no man go through or come back for they have make waste the desired land .and the word of the lord of army come to me say these be the word of the lord of army i be angry about the fate of zion i be angry about her with great wrath . this be what the lord have say i have come back to zion and will make my live place in jerusalem and jerusalem will be name the town of good faith and the mountain of the lord of army the holy mountain . this be what the lord of army have say there will again be old men and old woman seat in the open space of jerusalem every man with his stick in his hand because he be so old . and the open space of the town will be full of boy and girl play in it open space . this be what the lord of army have say if this be a wonder to the rest of this people be it a wonder to me ? say the lord of army . this be what the lord of army have say see i will be the saviour of my people from the east country and from the west country and i will make them come and be live in jerusalem and they will be to me a people and i will be to them a god in good faith and in righteousness . this be what the lord of army have say let your hand be strong you who be now hear these word from the mouth of the prophet that be to say in the day when the base of the house of the lord of army have be put in place for the building of the house that be the temple . for before those day there be no payment for a man 's work or for the use of a beast and there be no peace for him who go out or him who come in because of the attacker for i have every man turn against his neighbour . but now i will not be to the rest of this people a i be in the past say the lord of army . for i will let the seed of peace be plant the vine will give her fruit and the land will give her increase and the heaven will give their dew and i will give to the rest of this people all these thing for their heritage . and it will come about that a you be a curse among the nation o child of judah and child of israel so i will give you salvation and you will be a blessing have no fear and let your hand be strong . for this be what the lord of army have say a it be my purpose to do evil to you when your father make me angry say the lord of army and my purpose be not change so in these day it be again my purpose to do good to jerusalem and to the child of judah have no fear . these be the thing which you be to do let every man say what be true to his neighbour and let your judge give peace in your town . let no one have any evil thought in his heart against his neighbour and have no love for false oath for all these thing be hat by me say the lord . and the word of the lord of army come to me say this be what the lord of army have say the time of go without food in the fourth month and in the fifth and the seventh and the tenth month will be for the people of judah time of joy and happy meeting so be lover of good faith and of peace . this be what the lord of army have say it will again come about that when people and those living in great town come and the people of one town go to another and say let u certainly go with a request for grace from the lord and to give worship to the lord of army then i will go with you . and great people and strong nation will come to give worship to the lord of army in jerusalem and to make request for grace from the lord . this be what the lord of army have say in those day ten men from all the language of the nation will put out their hand and take a grip of the skirt of him who be a jew say we will go with you for it have come to our ear that god be with you .a word of the lord the lord have come to the land of hadrach and damascus be his rest place for the town of aram be the lord 's as well a hamath which be by it limit and tyre and zidon because they be very wise . and tyre make for herself a strong place and get together silver like dust and the best gold like the earth of the street . see the lord will take away her heritage overturn her power in the sea and she will be burn up with fire . ashkelon will see it with fear and gaza bent with pain and ekron for her hope will be sham and the king will be cut off from gaza and ashkelon will be unpeopled . and a mixed people will be live in ashdod and i will have the pride of the philistine cut off . and i will take away his blood from his mouth and his disgust thing from between his teeth and some of his people will be keep for our god and he will be a a family in judah and ekron a one living in jerusalem . and i will put my force in position round my house so that there may be no come and go and no cruel master will again go through them for now i have see his trouble . be full of joy o daughter of zion give a glad cry o daughter of jerusalem see your king come to you he be upright and have overcome gentle and seat on an as on a young as . and he will have the war carriage cut off from ephraim and the horse from jerusalem and the bow of war will be cut off and he will say word of peace to the nation and his rule will be from sea to sea and from the river to the end of the earth . and a for you because of the blood of your agreement i have send out your prisoner from the deep hole in which there be no water . and they will come back to you o daughter of zion a prisoner of hope today i say to you that i will give you back twice as much for i have make judah a bow bent for my use i have make ephraim the arrow of the bow i will make your son o zion take up arm against your son o greece and will make you like the sword of a man of war . and the lord will be see over them and his arrow will go out like the thunder flame and the lord god sound the war horn will go in the storm wind of the south . the lord of army will be a cover for them and they will overcome crush under foot the arm men they will take their blood for drink like wine they will be full like the side of the altar . and the lord their god will be their saviour in that day give them food like the flock of his people for they will be like the jewel of a crown shining over his land . for how good it be and how beautiful ! grain will make the young men strong and new wine the virgin .make your request to the lord for rain in the time of the spring rain even to the lord who make the thunder flame and he will give them shower of rain to every man grass in the field . for the image have say what be not true and the reader of sign have see deceit they have give account of false dream they give comfort to no purpose so they go out of the way like sheep they be trouble because they have no keeper . my wrath be burn against the keeper of the flock and i will send punishment on the he goats for the lord of army take care of his flock the people of judah and will make them like the horse of his pride in the fight . from him will come the keystone from him the nail from him the bow of war from him will come every ruler together they will be like men of war crush down their hater into the earth of the street in the fight they will make war because the lord be with them and the horseman will be sham . and i will make the child of judah strong and i will be the saviour of the child of joseph and i will make them come back again for i have have mercy on them they will be a if i have not give them up for i be the lord their god and i will give them an answer . and ephraim will be like a man of war and their heart will be glad a with wine and their child will see it with joy their heart will be glad in the lord . with the sound of the pipe i will get them together for i have give the price to make them free and they will be increase a they be increase . though i have them plant among the people they will keep me in mind in far country and they will take care of their child and will come back . and i will make them come back out of the land of egypt and will get them together out of assyria and i will take them into the land of gilead and it will not be wide enough for them . and they will go through the sea of egypt and all the deep water of the nile will become dry and the pride of assyria will be make low and the power of egypt will be take away . and their strength will be in the lord and their pride will be in his name say the lord .let your door be open o lebanon so that fire may be burn among your cedar . give a cry of grief o fir tree for the fall of the cedar because the great one have be make low give cry of grief o you oaks of bashan for the strong tree of the wood have come down . the sound of the cry of the keeper of the flock ! for their glory be make waste the sound of the loud cry of the young lion ! for the pride of jordan be make waste . this be what the lord my god have say take care of the flock of death whose owner put them to death and have no sense of sin and those who get a price for them say may the lord be praise for i have much wealth and the keeper of the flock have no pity for them . for i will have no more pity for the people of the land say the lord but i will give up everyone into his neighbour 's hand and into the hand of his king and they will make the land waste and i will not keep them safe from their hand . so i take care of the flock of death for those who make profit out of the flock and i take for myself two rod name one beautiful and the other band and i take care of the flock . and in one month i put an end to the three keeper of the flock for my soul be tire of them and their soul be disgust with me . and i say i will not take care of you if death come to any let death be it fate if any be cut off let it be cut off and let the rest take one another 's flesh for food . and i take my rod beautiful cut it in two so that the lord 's agreement which he have make with all the people might be break . and it be break on that day and the sheep trader who be watch me be certain that it be the word of the lord . and i say to them if it seem good to you give me my payment and if not do not give it . so they give me my payment by weight thirty shekel of silver . and the lord say to me put it into the store house the price at which i be value by them . and i take the thirty shekel of silver and put them into the store house in the house of the lord . then i take my other rod the one name band cut it in two so that the relation of brother between judah and israel might be break . and the lord say to me take again the instrument of a foolish keeper of sheep . for see i will put a sheep keeper over the land who will have no care for that which be cut off and will not go in search of the wanderer or make well what be break and he will not give food to that which be ill but he will take for his food the flesh of the fat and let their foot be break . a curse on the foolish keeper who go away from the flock ! the sword will be on his arm and on his right eye his arm will become quite dry and his eye will be make completely dark .the word of the lord about israel . the lord by whom the heaven be stretch out and the base of the earth put in place and the spirit of man form inside him have say see i will make jerusalem a cup of shake fear to all the people round about when jerusalem be shut in . and it will come about in that day that i will make jerusalem a stone of great weight for all the people all those who take it up will be badly wound and all the nation of the earth will come together against it . in that day say the lord i will put fear into every horse and make every horseman go off his head and my eye will be open on the people of judah and i will make every horse of the people blind . and the family of judah will say in their heart the people of jerusalem have their strength in the lord of army their god . in that day i will make the family of judah like a pot with fire in it among tree and like a flaming stick among cut grain they will send destruction on all the people round about on the right hand and on the left and jerusalem will be live again in the place which be hers that be in jerusalem . and the lord will give salvation to the tent of judah first so that the glory of the family of david and the glory of the people of jerusalem may not be great than that of judah . in that day the lord will be a cover over the people of jerusalem and he who be feeble among them in that day will be as strong a david and the family of david will be as god a the angel of the lord before them . and it will come about on that day that i will take in hand the destruction of all the nation who come against jerusalem . and i will send down on the family of david and on the people of jerusalem the spirit of grace and of prayer and their eye will be turn to the one who be wound by their hand and they will be weep for him a for an only son and their grief for him will be bitter like the grief of one sorrowing for his old son . in that day there will be a great weeping in jerusalem like the weeping of hadad rimmon in the valley of megiddon . and the land will give itself to weep every family separately the family of david by themselves and their wife by themselves the family of nathan by themselves and their wife by themselves the family of levi by themselves and their wife by themselves the family of shimei by themselves and their wife by themselves and all the other family by themselves and their wife by themselves .in that day there will be a fountain open to the family of david and to the people of jerusalem for sin and for that which be unclean . and it will come about on that day say the lord of army that i will have the name of the image cut off out of the land and there will be no more memory of them and i will send all the prophet and the unclean spirit away from the land . and if anyone go on act a a prophet then his father and his mother who give him life will say to him you may not go on living for you be say what be false in the name of the lord and his father and his mother will put a sword through him when he do so . and it will come about in that day that the prophet will be sham every man on account of his vision when he be talk a a prophet and they will not put on a robe of hair for purpose of deceit but he will say i be no prophet but a worker on the land for i have be an owner of land from the time when i be young . and if anyone say to him what be these wound between your hand ? then he will say those with which i be wound in the house of my friend . awake ! o sword against the keeper of my flock and against him who be with me say the lord of army put to death the keeper of the sheep and the sheep will go in flight and my hand will be turn against the little one . and it will come about that in all the land say the lord two part of it will be cut off and come to an end but the third will be still live there . and i will make the third part go through the fire clean them a silver be make clean and test them a gold be test and they will make their prayer to me and i will give them an answer i will say it be my people and they will say the lord be my god .see a day of the lord be come when they will make division of your good take by force before your eye . for i will get all the nation together to make war against jerusalem and the town will be overcome and the good take from the house and the woman take by force and half the town will go away a prisoner and the rest of the people will not be cut off from the town . then the lord will go out and make war against those nation a he do in the day of the fight . and in that day his foot will be on the mount of olive which be opposite jerusalem on the east and the mount of olive will be part in the middle to the east and to the west form a very great valley and half the mountain will be move to the north and half of it to the south . and the valley will be stop ... and you will go in flight a you go in flight from the earth shock in the day of uzziah king of judah and the lord my god will come and all his holy one with him . and in that day there will be no heat or cold or ice and it will be unbroken day such a the lord have knowledge of without change of day and night and even at nightfall it will be light . and on that day live water will go out from jerusalem half of them flow to the sea on the east and half to the sea on the west in summer and in winter it will be so . and the lord will be king over all the earth in that day there will be one lord and his name one . and all the land will become like the arabah from geba to rimmon south of jerusalem and she will be lift up and be live in her place from the doorway of benjamin to the place of the first doorway to the doorway of the angle and from the tower of hananel to the king 's wine crushing place men will be live in her . and there will be no more curse but jerusalem will be live without fear of danger . and this will be the disease which the lord will send on all the people which have be war against jerusalem their flesh will be waste away while they be on their foot their eye will be waste in their head and their tongue in their mouth . and it will be on that day that a great fear will be send among them from the lord and everyone will take his neighbour 's hand and every man 's hand will be lift against his neighbour 's . and even judah will be fight against jerusalem and the wealth of all the nation round about will be mass together a great store of gold and silver and clothing . and the horse and the transport beasts the camel and the ass and all the beast in those tent will be attack by the same disease . and it will come about that everyone who be still live of all those nation who come against jerusalem will go up from year to year to give worship to the king the lord of army and to keep the feast of tent . and it will be that if any one of all the family of the earth do not go up to jerusalem to give worship to the king the lord of army on them there will be no rain . and if the family of egypt do not go up or come there they will be attack by the disease which the lord will send on the nation this will be the punishment of egypt and the punishment of all the nation who do not go up to keep the feast of tent . on that day all the bell of the horse will be holy to the lord and the pot in the lord 's house will be like the basin before the altar . and every pot in jerusalem and in judah will be holy to the lord of army and all those who make offering will come and take them for boil their offering in that day there will be no more trader in the house of the lord of army .the word of the lord to israel by malachi . you have be love by me say the lord . but you say where be your love for u ? be not esau jacob 's brother ? say the lord but jacob be love by me and esau be hat and i send destruction on his mountain and give his heritage to the beast of the waste land . though edom say we be crush down but we will come back build up the waste place this be what the lord of army have say they may put up building but i will have them pull down and they will be name the land of evil do and the people against whom the lord keep his wrath for ever . and your eye will see it and you will say the lord be great even outside the limit of israel . a son give honour to his father and a servant have fear of his master if then i be a father where be my honour ? and if i be a master where be the fear of me ? say the lord of army to you o priest who give no value to my name . and you say how have we not give value to your name ? you put unclean bread on my altar . and you say how have we make it unclean ? by your say the table of the lord be of no value . and when you give what be blind for an offering it be no evil ! and when you give what be damage and ill it be no evil ! give it now to your ruler will he be please with you or will you have his approval ? say the lord of army . and now make request for the grace of god so that he may have mercy on u this have be your do will he give his approval to any of you ? say the lord of army . if only there be one among you who would see that the door be shut so that you might not put a light to the fire on my altar for nothing ! i have no pleasure in you say the lord of army and i will not take an offering from your hand . for from the come up of the sun till it go down my name be great among the gentile and in every place the smell of burn flesh be offer to my name and a clean offering for my name be great among the gentile say the lord of army . but you make it unholy by say the lord 's table have become unclean and his food be of no value . and you say see what a weariness it be ! and you let out your breath at it say the lord of army and you have give what have be cut about by beast and what be damage in it foot and ill this be the offering you give will this be please to me from your hand ? say the lord . a curse on the false man who have a male in his flock and take his oath and give to the lord a damage thing for i be a great king say the lord of army and my name be to be fear among the gentile .and now o you priests this order be for you . if you will not give ear and take it to heart to give glory to my name say the lord of army then i will send the curse on you and will put a curse on your blessing truly even now i have put a curse on it because you do not take it to heart . see i will have your arm cut off and will put waste on your face even the waste from your feast and you will be take away with it . and you will be certain that i have send this order to you so that it might be my agreement with levi say the lord of army . my agreement with him be on my side life and peace and i give them to him on his side fear and he have fear of me and give honour to my name . true teaching be in his mouth and no evil be see on his lip he be walk with me in peace and righteousness turn number of people away from evil do . for it be right for the priest 's lip to keep knowledge and for men to be wait for the law from his mouth for he be the servant sent from the lord of army . but you be turn out of the way you have make the law hard for number of people you have make the agreement of levi of no value say the lord of army . and so i have take away your honour and make you low before all the people even a you have not keep my way and have give no thought to me in use the law . have we not all one father ? have not one god make u ? why be we every one of u act falsely to his brother put shame on the agreement of our father ? judah have be act falsely and a disgusting thing have be do in jerusalem for judah have make unclean the holy place of the lord which be dear to him and have take a his wife the daughter of a strange god . the lord will have the man who do this cut off root and branch out of the tent of jacob and him who make an offering to the lord of army . and this again you do cover the altar of the lord with weep and with grief so that he give no more thought to the offering and do not take it with pleasure from your hand . but you say for what reason ? because the lord have be a witness between you and the wife of your early year to whom you have be untrue though she be your friend and the wife to whom you have give your word . ... so give thought to your spirit and let no one be false to the wife of his early year . for i be against the put away of a wife say the lord the god of israel and against him who be clothe with violent act say the lord of army so give thought to your spirit and do not be false in your act . you have make the lord tire with your word . and still you say how have we make him tire ? by your say everyone who do evil be good in the eye of the lord and he have delight in them or where be god the judge ?see i be send my servant and he will make ready the way before me and the lord whom you be look for will suddenly come to his temple and the angel of the agreement in whom you have delight see he be come say the lord of army . but by whom may the day of his come be face ? and who may keep his place when he be see ? for he be like the metal tester 's fire and the cleaner 's soap . he will take his seat testing and clean the son of levi burn away the evil from them a from gold and silver so that they may make offering to the lord in righteousness . then the offering of judah and jerusalem will be please to the lord a in day go by and a in past year . and i will come near to you for judge i will quickly be a witness against the wonder worker against those who have be untrue in married life against those who take false oath against those who keep back from the servant his payment and who be hard on the widow and the child without a father who do not give his right to the man from a strange country and have no fear of me say the lord of army . for i be the lord i be unchanged and so you o son of jacob have not be cut off . from the day of your father you have be turn away from my rule and have not keep them . come back to me and i will come back to you say the lord of army . but you say how be we to come back ? will a man keep back from god what be right ? but you have keep back what be mine . but you say what have we keep back from you ? tenth and offering . you be curse with a curse for you have keep back from me what be mine even all this nation . let your tenths come into the store house so that there may be food in my house and put me to the test by do so say the lord of army and see if i do not make the window of heaven open and send down such a blessing on you that there be no room for it . and on your account i will keep back the locust from waste the fruit of your land and the fruit of your vine will not be drop on the field before it time say the lord of army and you will be name happy by all nation for you will be a land of delight say the lord of army . your word have be strong against me say the lord . and still you say what have we say against you ? you have say it be no use worship god what profit have we have from keep his order and go in clothing of sorrow before the lord of army ? and now to u the men of pride seem happy yes the evil doer be do well they put god to the test and be safe . then those in whom be the fear of the lord have talk together and the lord give ear and it be record in a book to be keep in mind before him for those who have the fear of the lord and give think to his name . and they will be mine say the lord in the day when i make them my special property and i will have mercy on them a a man have mercy on his son who be his servant . then you will again see how the upright man be different from the sinner and the servant of god from him who be not .for see the day be come it be burn like an oven all the men of pride and all who do evil will be dry stem of grass and in the day which be come they will be burn up say the lord of army till they have not a root or a branch . but to you who give worship to my name the sun of righteousness will come up with new life in it wing and you will go out play like young oxen full of food . and the evil doer will be crush under you they will be dust under your foot in the day when i do my work say the lord of army . keep in mind the law of moses my servant which i give him in horeb for all israel even the rule and the decision . see i be send you elijah the prophet before the day of the lord come that great day greatly to be fear . and by him the heart of father will be turn to their child and the heart of child to their father for fear that i may come and put the earth under a curse .the book of the generation of jesus christ the son of david the son of abraham . the son of abraham be isaac and the son of isaac be jacob and the son of jacob be judah and his brother and the son of judah be perez and zerah by tamar and the son of perez be hezron and the son of hezron be ram and the son of ram be amminadab and the son of amminadab be nahshon and the son of nahshon be salmon and the son of salmon by rahab be boaz and the son of boaz by ruth be obed and the son of obed be jesse and the son of jesse be david the king and the son of david be solomon by her who have be the wife of uriah and the son of solomon be rehoboam and the son of rehoboam be abijah and the son of abijah be asa and the son of asa be jehoshaphat and the son of jehoshaphat be joram and the son of joram be uzziah and the son of uzziah be jotham and the son of jotham be ahaz and the son of ahaz be hezekiah and the son of hezekiah be manasseh and the son of manasseh be amon and the son of amon be josiah and the son of josiah be jechoniah and his brother at the time of the take away to babylon . and after the take away to babylon jechoniah have a son shealtiel and shealtiel have zerubbabel and zerubbabel have abiud and abiud have eliakim and eliakim have azor and azor have zadok and zadok have achim and achim have eliud and eliud have eleazar and eleazar have matthan and matthan have jacob and the son of jacob be joseph the husband of mary who give birth to jesus whose name be christ . so all the generation from abraham to david be fourteen generation and from david to the take away to babylon fourteen generation and from the take away to babylon to the come of christ fourteen generation . now the birth of jesus christ be in this way when his mother mary be go to be marry to joseph before they come together the discovery be make that she be with child by the holy spirit . and joseph her husband be an upright man and not desire to make her a public example have a mind to put her away privately . but when he be give thought to these thing an angel of the lord come to him in a dream say joseph son of david have no fear of take mary a your wife because that which be in her body be of the holy spirit . and she will give birth to a son and you will give him the name jesus for he will give his people salvation from their sin . now all this take place so that the word of the lord by the prophet might come true see the virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son and they will give him the name immanuel that be god with u . and joseph do a the angel of the lord have say to him and take her a his wife and he have no connection with her till she have give birth to a son and he give him the name jesus .now when the birth of jesus take place in beth lehem of judaea in the day of herod the king there come wise men from the east to jerusalem say where be the king of the jew whose birth have now take place ? we have see his star in the east and have come to give him worship . and when it come to the ear of herod the king he be trouble and all jerusalem with him . and he get together all the chief priest and scribe of the people question them a to where the birth place of the christ would be . and they say to him in beth lehem of judaea for so it be say in the writing of the prophet you beth lehem in the land of judah be not the least among the chief of judah out of you will come a ruler who will be the keeper of my people israel . then herod sent for the wise men privately and put question to them about what time the star have be see . and he send them to beth lehem and say go and make certain where the young child be and when you have see him let me have news of it so that i may come and give him worship . and after hear the king they go on their way and the star which they saw in the east go before them till it come to rest over the place where the young child be . and when they saw the star they be full of joy . and they come into the house and saw the young child with mary his mother and fall down on their face they give him worship and from their store they give him offering of gold perfume and spice . and it be make clear to them by god in a dream that they be not to go back to herod so they go into their country by another way . and when they have go an angel of the lord come to joseph in a dream say get up and take the young child and his mother and go into egypt and do not go from there till i give you word for herod will be search for the young child to put him to death . so he take the young child and his mother by night and go into egypt and be there till the death of herod so that the word of the lord through the prophet might come true out of egypt have i sent for my son . then herod when he saw that he have be trick by the wise men be very angry and he send out and put to death all the male child in beth lehem and in all the part round about it from two year old and under act on the knowledge which he have get with care from the wise men . then the word of jeremiah the prophet come true in ramah there be a sound of weep and great sorrow rachel weep for her child and she would not be comfort for their loss . but when herod be dead an angel of the lord come in a dream to joseph in egypt say get up and take the young child and his mother and go into the land of israel because they who be attempt to take the young child 's life be dead . and he get up and take the young child and his mother and come into the land of israel . but when it come to his ear that archelaus be rule over judaea in the place of his father herod he be in fear of go there and god have give him news of the danger in a dream he go out of the way into the country part of galilee . and he come and be live in a town name nazareth so that the word of the prophet might come true he will be name a nazarene .and in those day john the baptist come preach in the waste land of judaea say let your heart be turn from sin for the kingdom of heaven be near . for this be he of whom isaiah the prophet say the voice of one cry in the waste land make ready the way of the lord make his road straight . now john be clothe in camel 's hair with a leather band about him and his food be locust and honey . then jerusalem and all judaea go out to him and all the people from near jordan and they be give baptism by him in the river jordan say openly that they have do wrong . but when he saw a number of the pharisee and sadducee come to his baptism he say to them offspring of snake at whose word be you go in flight from the wrath to come ? let your change of heart be see in your work and say not to yourselves we have abraham for our father because i say to you that god be able from these stone to make child for abraham . and even now the axe be put to the root of the tree every tree then which do not give good fruit be cut down and put into the fire . truly i give baptism with water to those of you whose heart be change but he who come after me be great than i whose shoe i be not good enough to take up he will give you baptism with the holy spirit and with fire in whose hand be the instrument with which he will make clean his grain he will put the good grain in his store but the waste will be burn up in the fire which will never be put out . then jesus come from galilee to john at the jordan to be give baptism by him . but john would have keep him back say it be i who have need of baptism from you and do you come to me ? but jesus make answer say to him let it be so now because so it be right for u to make righteousness complete . then he give him baptism . and jesus have be give baptism straight away go up from the water and the heaven open he saw the spirit of god come down on him a a dove and a voice come out of heaven say this be my dearly love son with whom i be well pleased .then jesus be send by the spirit into the waste land to be test by the evil one . and after go without food for forty day and forty night he be in need of it . and the evil one come and say to him if you be the son of god give the word for these stone to become bread . but he make answer and say it be in the writing bread be not man 's only need but every word which come out of the mouth of god . then the evil one take him to the holy town and he put him on the high point of the temple and say to him if you be the son of god let yourself go down for it be in the writing he will give his angel care over you and in their hand they will keep you up so that your foot may not be crush against a stone . jesus say to him again it be in the writing you may not put the lord your god to the test . again the evil one take him up to a very high mountain and let him see all the kingdom of the world and the glory of them and he say to him all these thing will i give you if you will go down on your face and give me worship . then say jesus to him away satan for it be in the writing give worship to the lord your god and be his servant only . then the evil one go away from him and angel come and take care of him . now when it come to his ear that john have be put in prison he go away to galilee and go away from nazareth he come and make his living place in capernaum which be by the sea in the country of zebulun and naphtali so that the word of the prophet isaiah might come true the land of zebulun and the land of naphtali by the way of the sea the other side of jordan galilee of the gentile the people who be in the dark saw a great light and to those in the land of the shade of death do the dawn come up . from that time jesus go about preaching and say let your heart be turn from sin for the kingdom of heaven be near . and when he be walk by the sea of galilee he saw two brother simon whose other name be peter and andrew his brother who be put a net into the sea for they be fisherman . and he say to them come after me and i will make you fisher of men . and straight away they let go the net and go after him . and go on from there he saw two other brother jam the son of zebedee and john his brother in the boat with their father stitch up their net and he say come . and they go straight from the boat and their father and come after him . and jesus go about in all galilee teach in their synagogue and preach the good news of the kingdom and make well those who be ill with any disease among the people . and news of him go out through all syria and they take to him all who be ill with different disease and pain those have evil spirit and those who be off their head and those who have no power of move . and he make them well . and there go after him great number from galilee and decapolis and jerusalem and judaea and from the other side of jordan .and see great mass of people he go up into the mountain and when he be seat his disciple come to him . and with these word he give them teach say happy be the poor in spirit for the kingdom of heaven be theirs . happy be those who be sad for they will be comfort . happy be the gentle for the earth will be their heritage . happy be those whose heart 's desire be for righteousness for they will have their desire . happy be those who have mercy for they will be give mercy . happy be the clean in heart for they will see god . happy be the peacemaker for they will be name son of god . happy be those who be attack on account of righteousness for the kingdom of heaven will be theirs . happy be you when men give you a bad name and be cruel to you and say all evil thing against you falsely because of me . be glad and full of joy for great be your reward in heaven for so be the prophet attack who be before you . you be the salt of the earth but if it taste go from the salt how will you make it salt again ? it be then good for nothing but to be put out and crush under foot by men . you be the light of the world . a town put on a hill may be see by all . and a burning light be not put under a vessel but on it table so that it ray may be shin on all who be in the house . even so let your light be shin before men so that they may see your good work and give glory to your father in heaven . let there be no thought that i have come to put an end to the law or the prophet . i have not come for destruction but to make complete . truly i say to you till heaven and earth come to an end not the small letter or part of a letter will in any way be take from the law till all thing be do . whoever then go against the small of these law teach men to do the same will be name least in the kingdom of heaven but he who keep the law teach others to keep them will be name great in the kingdom of heaven . for i say to you if your righteousness be not great than the righteousness of the scribe and pharisee you will never go into the kingdom of heaven . you have knowledge that it be say in old time you may not put to death and whoever put to death will be in danger of be judge but i say to you that everyone who be angry with his brother will be in danger of be judge and he who say to his brother raca will be in danger from the sanhedrin and whoever say you foolish one will be in danger of the hell of fire . if then you be make an offering at the altar and there it come to your mind that your brother have something against you while your offering be still before the altar first go and make peace with your brother then come and make your offering . come to an agreement quickly with him who have a cause against you at law while you be with him on the way for fear that he may give you up to the judge and the judge may give you to the police and you may be put into prison . truly i say to you you will not come out from there till you have make payment of the very last farthing . you have knowledge that it be say you may not have connection with another man 's wife but i say to you that everyone whose eye be turn on a woman with desire have have connection with her in his heart . and if your right eye be a cause of trouble to you take it out and put it away from you because it be well to undergo the loss of one part than for all your body to go into hell . and if your right hand be a cause of trouble to you let it be cut off and put it away from you because it be well to undergo the loss of one part than for all your body to go into hell . again it be say whoever put away his wife have to give her a statement in write for this purpose but i say to you that everyone who put away his wife for any other cause but the loss of her virtue make her false to her husband and whoever take her a his wife after she be put away be no true husband to her . again you have knowledge that it be say in old time do not take false oath but give effect to your oath to the lord but i say to you take no oath at all not by the heaven because it be the seat of god or by the earth because it be the rest place for his foot or by jerusalem because it be the town of the great king . you may not take an oath by your head because you be not able to make one hair white or black . but let your word be simply yes or no and whatever be more than these be of the evil one . you have knowledge that it be say an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth but i say to you do not make use of force against an evil man but to him who give you a blow on the right side of your face let the left be turn . and if any man go to law with you and take away your coat do not keep back your robe from him . and whoever make you go one mile go with him two . give to him who come with a request and keep not your property from him who would for a time make use of it . you have knowledge that it be say have love for your neighbour and hate for him who be against you but i say to you have love for those who be against you and make prayer for those who be cruel to you so that you may be the son of your father in heaven for his sun give light to the evil and to the good and he send rain on the upright man and on the sinner . for if you have love for those who have love for you what credit be it to you ? do not the tax farmer the same ? and if you say good day to your brother only what do you do more than others ? do not even the gentile the same ? be then complete in righteousness even a your father in heaven be complete .take care not to do your good work before men to be see by them or you will have no reward from your father in heaven . when then you give money to the poor do not make a noise about it a the false hearted men do in the synagogue and in the street so that they may have glory from men . truly i say to you they have their reward . but when you give money let not your left hand see what your right hand do so that your give may be in secret and your father who see in secret will give you your reward . and when you make your prayer be not like the false hearted men who take pleasure in get up and say their prayer in the synagogue and at the street turning so that they may be see by men . truly i say to you they have their reward . but when you make your prayer go into your private room and shut the door say a prayer to your father in secret and your father who see in secret will give you your reward . and in your prayer do not make use of the same word again and again a the gentile do for they have the idea that god will give attention to them because of the number of their word . so be not like them because your father have knowledge of your need even before you make your request to him . let this then be your prayer our father in heaven may your name be keep holy . let your kingdom come . let your pleasure be do a in heaven so on earth . give u this day bread for our need . and make u free of our debt a we have make those free who be in debt to u . and let u not be put to the test but keep u safe from the evil one . for if you let men have forgiveness for their sin you will have forgiveness from your father in heaven . but if you do not let men have forgiveness for their sin you will not have forgiveness from your father for your sin . and when you go without food be not sad face a the false hearted be . for they go about with changed look so that men may see that they be go without food . truly i say to you they have their reward . but when you go without food put oil on your head and make your face clean so that no one may see that you be go without food but your father in secret and your father who see in secret will give you your reward . make no store of wealth for yourselves on earth where it may be turn to dust by worm and weather and where thief may come in by force and take it away . but make a store for yourselves in heaven where it will not be turn to dust and where thief do not come in to take it away for where your wealth be there will your heart be . the light of the body be the eye if then your eye be true all your body will be full of light . but if your eye be evil all your body will be dark . if then the light which be in you be dark how dark it will be ! no man be able to be a servant to two master for he will have hate for the one and love for the other or he will keep to one and have no respect for the other . you may not be servant of god and of wealth . so i say to you take no thought for your life about food or drink or about clothing for your body . be not life more than food and the body more than it clothing ? see the bird of heaven they do not put seed in the earth they do not get in grain or put it in store house and your father in heaven give them food . be you not of much more value than they ? and which of you by take thought be able to make himself a cubit taller ? and why be you troubled about clothing ? see the flower of the field how they come up they do no work they make no thread but i say to you that even solomon in all his glory be not clothe like one of these . but if god give such clothing to the grass of the field which be here today and tomorrow be put into the oven will he not much more give you clothe o you of little faith ? then do not be full of care say what be we to have for food or drink ? or with what may we be clothe ? because the gentile go in search of all these thing for your father in heaven have knowledge that you have need of all these thing but let your first care be for his kingdom and his righteousness and all these other thing will be give to you in addition . then have no care for tomorrow tomorrow will take care of itself . take the trouble of the day a it come .be not judge of others and you will not be judge . for a you have be judge so you will be judge and with your measure will it be measure to you . and why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother 's eye but take no note of the bit of wood which be in your eye ? or how will you say to your brother let me take out the grain of dust from your eye when you yourself have a bit of wood in your eye ? you false one first take out the bit of wood from your eye then will you see clearly to take out the grain of dust from your brother 's eye . do not give that which be holy to the dog or put your jewel before pig for fear that they will be crush under foot by the pig whose attack will then be make against you . make a request and it will be answer what you be search for you will get give the sign and the door will be open to you because to everyone who make a request it will be give and he who be search will get his desire and to him who give the sign the door will be open . or which of you if his son make a request for bread will give him a stone ? or if he make a request for a fish will give him a snake ? if you then be evil be able to give good thing to your child how much more will your father in heaven give good thing to those who make request to him ? all those thing then which you would have men do to you even so do you to them because this be the law and the prophet . go in by the narrow door for wide be the door and open be the way which go to destruction and great number go in by it . for narrow be the door and hard the road to life and only a small number make discovery of it . be on the watch for false prophet who come to you in sheep 's clothing but inside they be cruel wolf . by their fruit you will get knowledge of them . do men get grape from thorn or fig from thistle ? even so every good tree give good fruit but the bad tree give evil fruit . it be not possible for a good tree to give bad fruit and a bad tree will not give good fruit . every tree which do not give good fruit be cut down and put in the fire . so by their fruit you will get knowledge of them . not everyone who say to me lord lord will go into the kingdom of heaven but he who do the pleasure of my father in heaven . a great number will say to me on that day lord lord be we not prophet in your name and do we not by your name send out evil spirit and by your name do work of power ? and then will i say to them i never have knowledge of you go from me you worker of evil . everyone then to whom my word come and who do them will be like a wise man who make his house on a rock and the rain come down and there be a rush of water and the wind be drive against that house but it be not move because it be base on the rock . and everyone to whom my word come and who do them not will be like a foolish man who make his house on sand and the rain come down and there be a rush of water and the wind be drive against that house and it come down and great be it fall . and it come about when jesus have come to the end of these word that the people be surprise at his teaching for he be teach a one have authority and not a their scribe .and when he have come down from the mountain great number of people come after him . and a leper come and give him worship say lord if it be your pleasure you have power to make me clean . and he put his hand on him say it be my pleasure be clean . and straight away he be make clean . and jesus say to him see that you say nothing about this to anyone but go and let the priest see you and make the offering which be order by moses for a witness to them . and when jesus be come into capernaum a certain captain come to him with a request say lord my servant be ill in bed at the house with no power in his body and in great pain . and he say to him i will come and make him well . and the captain in answer say lord i be not good enough for you to come under my roof but only say the word and my servant will be make well . because i myself be a man under authority have under me fight men and i say to this one go and he go and to another come and he come and to my servant do this and he do it . and when these word come to the ear of jesus he be surprised and say to those who come after him truly i say to you i have not see such great faith no not in israel . and i say to you that number will come from the east and the west and will take their seat with abraham and isaac and jacob in the kingdom of heaven but the son of the kingdom will be put out into the dark and there will be weep and cry of pain . and jesus say to the captain go in peace a your faith be so let it be do to you . and the servant be make well in that hour . and when jesus have come into peter 's house he saw his wife 's mother in bed very ill. and he put his hand on hers and the disease go from her and she get up and take care of his need . and in the evening they take to him a number of people who have evil spirit and he send the spirit out of them with a word and make well all who be ill so that the word of isaiah the prophet might come true he himself take our pain and our disease . now when jesus saw a great mass of people about him he give an order to go to the other side . and there come a scribe and say to him master i will come after you wherever you go . and jesus say to him the fox have hole and the bird of heaven have a resting place but the son of man have nowhere to put his head . and another of the disciple say to him lord let me first go and give the last honour to my father . but jesus say to him come after me and let the dead take care of their dead . and when he have get into a boat his disciple go after him . and there come up a great storm in the sea so that the boat be cover with the wave but he be sleep . and they come to him and awake him say help lord destruction be near . and he say to them why be you full of fear o you of little faith ? then he get up and give order to the wind and the sea and there be a great calm . and the men be full of wonder say what sort of man be this that even the wind and the sea do his order ? and when he have come to the other side to the country of the gadarenes there come out to him from the place of the dead two who have evil spirit so violent that no man be able to go that way . and they give a loud cry say what have we to do with you you son of god ? have you come here to give u punishment before the time ? now there be some distance away a great herd of pig take their food . and the evil spirit make strong prayer to him say if you send u out let u go into the herd of pig . and he say to them go . and they come out and go into the pig and the herd go rush down a sharp slope into the sea and come to their end in the water . and their keeper go in flight to the town and give an account of everything and of the men who have the evil spirit . and all the town come out to jesus and see him they make request that he would go away from their part of the country .and he get into a boat and go across and come to his town . and they take to him a man stretch on a bed who have no power of move and jesus see their faith say to the man who be ill son take heart you have forgiveness for your sin . and some of the scribe say among themselves this man have no respect for god . and jesus have knowledge of what be in their mind say why be your thought evil ? for which be the simpler to say you have forgiveness for your sin or to say get up and go ? but so that you may see that on earth the son of man have authority for the forgiveness of sin then say he to the man who be ill get up and take up your bed and go to your house . and he get up and go away to his house . but when the people saw it they be full of fear and give glory to god who have give such authority to men . and when jesus be go from there he saw a man whose name be matthew seat at the place where tax be take and he say to him come after me . and he get up and go after him . and it come about when he be in the house take food that a number of tax farmer and sinner come and take their place with jesus and his disciple . and when the pharisee saw it they say to his disciple why do your master take food with tax farmer and sinner ? but on hearing this he say those who be well have no need of a medical man but those who be ill. but go and take to heart the sense of these word my desire be for mercy not offering for i have come not to get the upright but sinner . then the disciple of john come to him say why do we and the pharisee frequently go without food but your disciple do not ? and jesus say to them will the friend of the newly marry man be sad as long a he be with them ? but the day will come when he will be take away from them and then will they go without food . and no man put a bit of new cloth on an old coat for by pull away from the old it make a bad hole . and men do not put new wine into old wine skin or the skin will be burst and the wine will come out and the skin be of no more use but they put new wine into new wine skin and so the two will be safe . while he be say these thing to them there come a ruler and give him worship say my daughter be even now dead but come and put your hand on her and she will come back to life . and jesus get up and go after him and so do his disciple . and a woman who for twelve year have have a flow of blood come after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe because she say to herself if i may but put my hand on his robe i will be make well . but jesus turning and see her say daughter take heart your faith have make you well . and the woman be make well from that hour . and when jesus come into the ruler 's house and saw the player with their instrument and the people make a noise he say make room for the girl be not dead but sleep . and they be laugh at him . but when the people be send out he go in and take her by the hand and the girl get up . and the news of it go out into all that land . and when jesus go on from there two blind men come after him cry out have mercy on u you son of david . and when he have come into the house the blind men come to him and jesus say to them have you faith that i be able to do this ? they say to him yes lord . then he put his hand on their eye say a your faith be let it be do to you . and their eye be make open . and jesus say to them sharply let no man have knowledge of it . but they go out and give news of him in all that land . and while they be go away there come to him a man without the power of talk and with an evil spirit . and when the evil spirit have be send out the man have the power of talk and they be all surprised say such a thing have never be see in israel . but the pharisee say by the ruler of evil spirit he send evil spirit out of men . and jesus go about all the town and small place teach in their synagogue and preach the good news of the kingdom and make well all sort of disease and pain . but when he saw all the people he be move with pity for them because they be trouble and wander like sheep without a keeper . then he say to his disciple there be much grain but not enough men to get it in . make prayer then to the lord of the grain field that he may send out worker to get in his grain .and he get together his twelve disciple and give them the power of drive out unclean spirit and of make well all sort of disease and pain . now the name of the twelve be these the first simon who be name peter and andrew his brother jam the son of zebedee and john his brother philip and bartholomew thomas and matthew the tax farmer jam the son of alphaeus and thaddaeus simon the zealot and judas iscariot who be false to him . these twelve jesus send out and give them order say do not go among the gentile or into any town of samaria but go to the wander sheep of the house of israel and on your way say the kingdom of heaven be near . make well those who be ill give life to the dead make leper clean send evil spirit out of men freely it have be give to you freely give . take no gold or silver or copper in your pocket take no bag for your journey and do not take two coat or shoe or a stick for the workman have a right to his food . and into whatever town or small place you go make search there for someone who be respect and make his house your rest place till you go away . and when you go in say may peace be on this house . and if the house be good enough let your peace come on it but if not let your peace come back to you . and whoever will not take you in or give ear to your word when you go out from that house or that town put off it dust from your foot . truly i say to you it will be good for the land of sodom and gomorrah in the day of god 's judging than for that town . see i send you out a sheep among wolf . be then as wise a snake and as gentle a dove . but be on the watch against men for they will give you up to the sanhedrin and in their synagogue they will give you blow and you will come before ruler and king because of me for a witness to them and to the gentile . but when you be give up into their hand do not be trouble about what to say or how to say it for in that hour what you be to say will be give to you because it be not you who say the word but the spirit of your father in you . and brother will give up brother to death and the father his child and child will go against their father and mother and put them to death . and you will be hat by all men because of my name but he who be strong to the end will have salvation . but when they be cruel to you in one town go in flight to another for truly i say to you you will not have go through the town of israel before the son of man come . a disciple be not great than his master or a servant than his lord . it be enough for the disciple that he may be a his master and the servant a his lord . if they have give the name beelzebub to the master of the house how much more to those of his house ! have then no fear of them because nothing be cover which will not come to light or secret which will not be make clear . what i say to you in the dark say in the light and what come to your ear secretly say publicly from the house top . and have no fear of those who put to death the body but be not able to put to death the soul . but have fear of him who have power to give soul and body to destruction in hell . be not sparrows two a farthing ? and not one of them come to an end without your father but the hair of your head be all numbered . then have no fear you be of more value than a flock of sparrow . to everyone then who give witness to me before men i will give witness before my father in heaven . but if anyone say before men that he have no knowledge of me i will say that i have no knowledge of him before my father in heaven . do not have the thought that i have come to send peace on the earth i come not to send peace but a sword . for i have come to put a man against his father and the daughter against her mother and the daughter in law against her mother in law and a man will be hat by those of his house . he who have more love for his father or mother than for me be not good enough for me he who have more love for son or daughter than for me be not good enough for me . and he who do not take his cross and come after me be not good enough for me . he who have the desire to keep his life will have it take from him and he who give up his life because of me will have it give back to him . he who give honour to you give honour to me and he who give honour to me give honour to him who send me . he who give honour to a prophet in the name of a prophet will be give a prophet 's reward and he who give honour to an upright man in the name of an upright man will be give an upright man 's reward . and whoever give to one of these little one a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple truly i say to you he will not go without his reward .and it come about that when jesus have come to the end of give these order to his twelve disciples he go away from there teach and preach in their town . now when john have news in prison of the work of the christ he send his disciple to say to him be you he who be to come or be we wait for another ? and jesus answering say to them go and give news to john of the thing which you be see and hear the blind see those who be not able to be walk leper be make clean those who be without hear now have their ear open the dead come to life again and the poor have the good news give to them . and a blessing will be on him who have no doubt about me . and when they be go away jesus talk of john say to all the people what go you out into the waste land to see ? a tall stem move in the wind ? but what go you out to see ? a man delicately clothe ? those who have fair robe be in king ' house . but why do you go out ? to see a prophet ? yes i say to you and more than a prophet . this be he of whom it have be say see i send my servant before your face who will make ready your way before you . truly i say to you among the son of woman there have not be a great than john the baptist but he who be least in the kingdom of heaven be great than he . and from the day of john the baptist till now the kingdom of heaven be force it way in and men of force take it . for all the prophet and the law be in force till john . and if you be able to see it this be elijah who be to come . he who have ear let him give ear . but what comparison may i make of this generation ? it be like child seat in the market place cry out to one another we make music for you and you do not take part in the dance we give cry of sorrow and you make no sign of grief . for john come take no food or drink and they say he have an evil spirit . the son of man have come feasting and they say see a lover of food and wine a friend of tax farmer and sinner ! and wisdom be judge to be right by her work . then he go on to say hard thing to the town where most of his work of power be do because they have not be turn from their sin . unhappy be you chorazin ! unhappy be you beth saida ! for if the work of power which be do in you have be do in tyre and sidon they would have be turn from their sin in day go by clothe themselves in haircloth and put dust on their head . but i say to you it will be good for tyre and sidon in the day of judge than for you . and you capernaum be you not to be lift up to heaven ? you will go down into hell for if the work of power which be do in you have be do in sodom it would have be here to this day . but i say to you that it will be good for the land of sodom in the day of judge than for you . at that time jesus make answer and say i give praise to you o father lord of heaven and earth because you have keep these thing secret from the wise and the men of learning and have make them clear to little child . yes father for so it be please in your eye . all thing have be give to me by my father and no one have knowledge of the son but the father and no one have knowledge of the father but the son and he to whom the son will make it clear . come to me all you who be trouble and weight down with care and i will give you rest . take my yoke on you and become like me for i be gentle and without pride and you will have rest for your soul for my yoke be good and the weight i take up be not hard .at that time jesus go through the field on the sabbath day and his disciple be in need of food be take the head of grain . but the pharisee when they saw it say to him see your disciple do that which it be not right to do on the sabbath . but he say to them have you no knowledge of what david do when he have need of food and those who be with him ? how he go into the house of god and take for food the holy bread which it be not right for him or for those who be with him to take but only for the priest ? or be it not say in the law how the sabbath be break by the priest in the temple and they do no wrong ? but i say to you that a great thing than the temple be here . but if these word have be in your mind my desire be for mercy and not for offering you would not have be judge those who have do no wrong . for the son of man be lord of the sabbath . and he go from there into their synagogue and there be a man with a dead hand . and they put a question to him say be it right to make a man well on the sabbath day ? so that they might have something against him . and he say to them which of you have a sheep if it get into a hole on the sabbath day will not put out a help hand and get it back ? of how much more value be a man than a sheep ! for this reason it be right to do good on the sabbath day . then say he to the man put out your hand . and he put it out and it be make as well a the other . but the pharisee go out and make design against him how they might put him to death . and jesus have knowledge of this go away from there and a great number go after him and he make them all well order them not to give people word of him so that what be say by isaiah the prophet might come true see my servant the man of my selection my love one in whom my soul be well pleased i will put my spirit on him and he will make my decision clear to the gentile . his come will not be with fight or loud cry and his voice will not be lift up in the street . the crushed stem will not be break by him and the feebly burn light will he not put out till he have make righteousness overcome all . and in his name will the gentile put their hope . then they take to him one with an evil spirit who be blind and have no power of talk and he make him well so that he have the power of talk and see . and all the people be surprised and say be not this the son of david ? but the pharisee hearing of it say this man only send evil spirit out of men by beelzebub the ruler of evil spirit . and have knowledge of their thought he say to them every kingdom have division in itself be make waste and every town or house have division in itself will come to destruction . and if satan send out satan he make war against himself how then will he keep his kingdom ? and if i by beelzebub send evil spirit out of men by whom do your son send them out ? so let them be your judge . but if i by the spirit of god send out evil spirit then be the kingdom of god come on you . or how may one go into a strong man 's house and take his good if he do not first put cord round the strong man ? and then he may take his good . whoever be not with me be against me and he who do not take part with me in get people together be drive them away . so i say to you every sin and every evil word against god will have forgiveness but for evil word against the spirit there will be no forgiveness . and whoever say a word against the son of man will have forgiveness but whoever say a word against the holy spirit will not have forgiveness in this life or in that which be to come . make the tree good and it fruit good or make the tree bad and it fruit bad for by it fruit you will get knowledge of the tree . you offspring of snake how be you be evil able to say good thing ? because out of the heart 's store come the word of the mouth . the good man out of his good store give good thing and the evil man out of his evil store give evil thing . and i say to you that in the day when they be judge men will have to give an account of every foolish word they have say . for by your word will your righteousness be see and by your word you will be judge . then some of the scribe and pharisee hear this say to him master we be look for a sign from you . but he answer say to them an evil and false generation be look for a sign and no sign will be give to it but the sign of the prophet jonah for a jonah be three day and three night in the stomach of the great fish so will the son of man be three day and three night in the heart of the earth . the men of nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation because they be turn from their sin at the preaching of jonah and now a great than jonah be here . the queen of the south will come up in the day of judging and give her decision against this generation for she come from the end of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of solomon and now a great than solomon be here . but the unclean spirit when he be go out of a man go through dry place look for rest and get it not . then he say i will go back into my house from which i come out and when he come he see that there be no one in it but that it have be make fair and clean . then he go and take with him seven other spirit bad than himself and they go in and make it their living place and the last condition of that man be bad than the first . even so will it be with this evil generation . while he be still talk to the people his mother and his brother come desire to have talk with him . and one say to him see your mother and your brother be outside desire to have talk with you . but he in answer say to him who give the news who be my mother and who be my brother ? and he put out his hand to his disciple and say see my mother and my brother ! for whoever do the pleasure of my father in heaven he be my brother and sister and mother .on that day jesus go out of the house and be seat by the seaside . and great number of people come together to him so that he get into a boat and the people take up their position by the sea . and he give them teach in the form of a story say a man go out to put seed in the earth and while he do so some seed be drop by the wayside and the bird come and take them for food and some of the seed go among the stone where it have not much earth and straight away it come up because the earth be not deep and when the sun be high it be burn and because it have no root it become dry and dead . and some seed go among thorn and the thorn come up and they have no room for growth and some fall on good earth give fruit some a hundred some sixty some thirty time a much . he who have ear let him give ear . and the disciple come and say to him why do you say thing to them in the form of story ? and he say to them in answer to you be give the knowledge of the secret of the kingdom of heaven but to them it be not give . because whoever have to him will be give and he will have more but from him who have not even what he have will be take away . for this reason i put thing into the form of story because they see without see and give ear without hearing and the sense be not clear to them . and for them the word of isaiah have come true though you give ear you will not get knowledge and see you will see but the sense will not be clear to you for the heart of this people have become fat and their ear be slow in hear and their eye be shut for fear that they might see with their eye and give hearing with their ear and become wise in their heart and be turn again to me so that i might make them well . but a blessing be on your eye because they see and on your ear because they be open . for truly i say to you that prophet and upright men have a desire to see the thing which you see and saw them not and to have knowledge of the word which have come to your ear and they have it not . give ear then to the story of the man who put the seed in the earth . when the word of the kingdom come to anyone and the sense of it be not clear to him then the evil one come and quickly take away that which be put in his heart . he be the seed drop by the wayside . and that which go on the stone this be he who hear the word straight away take it with joy but have no root in himself he go on for a time and when trouble come or pain because of the word he quickly become full of doubt . and that which be drop among the thorn this be he who have the word and the care of this life and the deceit of wealth put a stop to the growth of the word and it give no fruit . and the seed which be put in good earth this be he who give ear to the word and get the sense of it who give fruit some a hundred some sixty some thirty time a much . and he give them another story say the kingdom of heaven be like a man who put good seed in his field but while men be sleep one who have hate for him come and put evil seed among the grain and go away . but when the green stem come up and give fruit the evil plant be see at the same time . and the servant of the master of the house come and say to him sir do you not put good seed in your field ? how then have it evil plant ? and he say someone have do this in hate . and the servant say to him be it your pleasure that we go and take them up ? but he say no for fear that by chance while you take up the evil plant you may be root up the grain with them . let them come up together till the get in of the grain and then i will say to the worker take up first the evil plant and put them together for burn but put the grain into my store house . he put another story before them say the kingdom of heaven be like a grain of mustard seed which a man take and put in his field which be small than all seed but when it have come up it be great than the plant and become a tree so that the bird of heaven come and make their resting place in it branch . another story he give to them the kingdom of heaven be like leaven which a woman take and put in three measure of meal till it be all leaven . all these thing jesus say to the people in the form of story and without a story he say nothing to them that it might come true which be say by the prophet open my mouth i will give out story i will give knowledge of thing keep secret from before all time . then he go away from the people and go into the house and his disciple come to him say make clear to u the story of the evil plant in the field . and he make answer and say he who put the good seed in the earth be the son of man and the field be the world and the good seed be the son of the kingdom and the evil seed be the son of the evil one and he who put them in the earth be satan and the get in of the grain be the end of the world and those who get it in be the angel . a then the evil plant be get together and burn with fire so will it be in the end of the world . the son of man will send out his angel and they will take out of his kingdom everything which be a cause of error and all those who do wrong and will put them into the fire there will be weep and cry of sorrow . then will the upright be shin a the sun in the kingdom of their father . he who have ear let him give ear . the kingdom of heaven be like a secret store of wealth in a field which a man come across and put back again and in his joy he go and give all he have to get that field . again the kingdom of heaven be like a trader search for beautiful jewel . and have come across one jewel of great price he go and give all he have in exchange for it . again the kingdom of heaven be like a net which be put into the sea and take in every sort of fish when it be full they take it up on the sand and seat there they put the good into vessel but the bad they put away . so will it be in the end of the world the angel will come and take out the bad from the good and will put them into the fire there will be weep and cry of sorrow . be all these thing now clear to you ? they say to him yes . and he say to them for this reason every scribe who have become a disciple of the kingdom of heaven be like the owner of a house who give out from his store thing new and old . and when jesus have come to the end of these story he go away from there . and come into his country he give them teach in their synagogue so that they be greatly surprised and say where do this man get this wisdom and these work of power ? be not this the woodworker 's son ? be not his mother name mary ? and his brother james and joseph and simon and juda ? and his sister be they not all with u ? from where then have he all these thing ? and they be bitter against him . but jesus say to them a prophet be nowhere without honour but in his country and among his family . and the work of power which he do there be small in number because they have no faith .at that time news of jesus come to herod the king and he say to his servant this be john the baptist he have come back from the dead and so these power be work in him . for herod have take john and put him in prison because of herodias his brother philip 's wife . because john have say to him it be not right for you to have her . and he would have put him to death but for his fear of the people because in their eye john be a prophet . but when herod 's birthday come the daughter of herodias be dance before them and herod be pleased with her . so he give her his word with an oath to let her have whatever she might make request for . and she at her mother 's suggestion say give me here on a plate the head of john the baptist . and the king be sad but because of his oath and because of his guest he give the order for it to be give to her and he send and have john 's head cut off in the prison . and his head be put on a plate and give to the girl and she take it to her mother . and his disciple come and take up his body and put it in the earth and they go and give jesus news of what have take place . now when it come to the ear of jesus he go away from there in a boat to a waste place by himself and the people hearing of it go after him on foot from the town . and he come out and saw a great number of people and he have pity on them and make well those of them who be ill. and when even have come the disciple come to him say this place be waste land and the time be now past send the people away so that they may go into the town and get themselves food . but jesus say to them there be no need for them to go away give them food yourselves . and they say to him we have here but five cake of bread and two fish . and he say give them to me . and he give order for the people to be seat on the grass and he take the five cake of bread and the two fish and look up to heaven he say word of blessing and make division of the food and give it to the disciple and the disciple give it to the people . and they all take of the food and have enough and they take up twelve basket full of broken bit which be not use . and those who have food be about five thousand men in addition to woman and child . and straight away he make the disciple get into the boat and go before him to the other side till he have send the people away . and after he have send the people away he go up into the mountain by himself for prayer and when evening be come he be there by himself . but the boat be now in the middle of the sea and be trouble by the wave for the wind be against them . and in the fourth watch of the night he come to them walk on the sea . and when they saw him walk on the sea they be trouble say it be a spirit and they give cry of fear . but straight away jesus say to them take heart it be i have no fear . and peter answering say to him lord if it be you give me the order to come to you on the water . and he say come . and peter get out of the boat and walk on the water go to jesus . but when he saw the wind he be in fear and start to go down he give a cry say help lord . and straight away jesus put out his hand and take a grip of him and say to him o man of little faith why be you in doubt ? and when they have get into the boat the wind go down . and those who be in the boat give him worship say truly you be the son of god . and when they have go across they come to land at gennesaret . and when the men of that place have news of him they send into all the country round about and take to him all who be ill with the request that they might only put their hand on the edge of his robe and all those who do so be make well .then there come to jesus from jerusalem pharisee and scribe say why do your disciple go against the teaching of the father ? for they take food with unwashed hand . and in answer he say to them why do you yourselves go against the word of god on account of the teaching which have be hand down to you ? for god say give honour to your father and mother and he who say evil of father or mother will be put to death . but you say if a man say to his father or his mother that by which you might have have profit from me be give to god there be no need for him to give honour to his father . and you have make the word of god without effect because of your teaching . you false one well do isaiah say of you these people give me honour with their lip but their heart be far from me . but their worship be to no purpose while they give a their teach the rule of men . and he get the people together and say to them give ear and let my word be clear to you not that which go into the mouth make a man unclean but that which come out of the mouth . then the disciple come and say to him do you see that the pharisee be trouble when these word come to their ear ? but he say in answer every plant which my father in heaven have not put in the earth will be take up by the root . let them be they be blind guide . and if a blind man be guide a blind man the two will go fall into a hole together . then peter say to him make the story clear to u . and he say be you like them still without wisdom ? do you not see that whatever go into the mouth go on into the stomach and be send out a waste ? but the thing which come out of the mouth come from the heart and they make a man unclean . for out of the heart come evil thought the taking of life break faith between the married unclean desire of the flesh taking of property false witness bitter word these be the thing which make a man unclean but to take food with unwashed hand do not make a man unclean . and jesus go away from there into the country of tyre and sidon . and a woman of canaan come out from those part cry and say have pity on me o lord son of david my daughter be greatly troubled with an unclean spirit . but he give her no answer . and his disciple come and say to him send her away for she be cry after u . but he make answer and say i be send only to the wander sheep of the house of israel . but she come and give him worship say help lord . and he make answer and say it be not right to take the child 's bread and give it to the dog . but she say yes lord but even the dog take the bit from under their master ' table . then jesus answer say to her o woman great be your faith let your desire be do . and her daughter be make well from that hour . and jesus go from there and come to the sea of galilee and he go up into the mountain and take his seat there . and there come to him great number of people have with them those who be break in body or blind or without voice or wound or ill in any way and a number of others they put them down at his foot and he make them well so that the people be full of wonder when they saw that those who have no voice be talk the feeble be make strong those whose body be break have the power of walking and the blind be able to see and they give glory to the god of israel . and jesus get his disciple together and say i have pity for the people because they have now be with me three day and have no food and i will not send them away without food or they will have no strength for the journey . and the disciple say to him how may we get enough bread in a waste place to give food to such a number of people ? and jesus say to them how much bread have you ? and they say seven cake and some small fish . then he give an order to the people to be seat on the earth and he take the seven cake of bread and the fish and have give praise he give the broken bread to the disciple and the disciple give it to the people . and they all take food and have enough and they take up of the broken bit seven basket full . and there be four thousand men who take food together with woman and child . and when he have send the people away he get into the boat and come into the country of magadan .and the pharisee and sadducee come and test him make a request to him to give them a sign from heaven . but in answer he say to them at nightfall you say the weather will be good for the sky be red . and in the morning the weather will be bad today for the sky be red and angry . you be able to see the face of heaven but not the sign of the time . an evil and false generation be search after a sign and no sign will be give to it but the sign of jonah . and he go away from them . and when the disciple come to the other side they have not take thought to get bread . and jesus say to them take care to have nothing to do with the leaven of the pharisee and sadducee . and they be reason among themselves say we take no bread . and jesus see it say o you of little faith why be you reason among yourselves because you have no bread ? do you still not see or keep in mind the five cake of bread of the five thousand and the number of basket you take up ? or the seven cake of bread of the four thousand and the number of basket you take up ? how be it that you do not see that i be not talk to you about bread but about keep away from the leaven of the pharisee and sadducee ? then they saw that it be not the leaven of bread which he have in mind but the teaching of the pharisee and sadducee . now when jesus have come into the part of caesarea philippi he say question his disciple who do men say that the son of man be ? and they say some say john the baptist some elijah and others jeremiah or one of the prophet . he say to them but who do you say that i be ? and simon peter make answer and say you be the christ the son of the living god . and jesus make answer and say to him a blessing on you simon bar jonah because this knowledge have not come to you from flesh and blood but from my father in heaven . and i say to you that you be peter and on this rock will my church be base and the door of hell will not overcome it . i will give to you the key of the kingdom of heaven and whatever be fix by you on earth will be fix in heaven and whatever you make free on earth will be make free in heaven . then he give order to the disciple to give no man word that he be the christ . from that time jesus go on to make clear to his disciple how he would have to go up to jerusalem and undergo much at the hand of those in authority and the chief priest and scribe and be put to death and the third day come again from the dead . and peter protesting say to him be it far from you lord it be impossible that this will come about . but he turn to peter say get out of my way satan you be a danger to me because your mind be not on the thing of god but on the thing of men . then jesus say to his disciple if any man would come after me let him give up all and take up his cross and come after me . because whoever have a desire to keep his life safe will have it take from him but whoever give up his life because of me will have it give back to him . for what profit have a man if he get all the world with the loss of his life ? or what will a man give in exchange for his life ? for the son of man will come in the glory of his father with his angel and then he will give to every man the reward of his work . truly i say to you there be some of those here who will not have a taste of death till they see the son of man come in his kingdom .and after six day jesus take with him peter and james and john his brother and make them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves . and he be change in form before them and his face be shin like the sun and his clothing become white a light . and moses and elijah come before their eye talk with him . and peter make answer and say to jesus lord it be good for u to be here if you will let me i will make here three tent one for you and one for moses and one for elijah . while he be still talk a bright cloud come over them and a voice out of the cloud say this be my dearly love son with whom i be well pleased give ear to him . and at these word the disciple go down on their face in great fear . and jesus come and put his hand on them and say get up and have no fear . and lift up their eye they saw no one but jesus only . and when they be come down from the mountain jesus give them order say let no man have word of what you have see till the son of man have come again from the dead . and his disciple question him say why then do the scribe say that elijah have to come first ? and in answer he say elijah truly have to come and put all thing right but i say to you that elijah have come and they have no knowledge of him but do to him whatever they be pleased to do the same will the son of man undergo at their hand . then the disciple saw that he be talk to them of john the baptist . and when they come to the people a man go down on his knee to him say lord have mercy on my son for he be off his head and be in great pain and frequently he go fall into the fire and frequently into the water . and i take him to your disciple and they be not able to make him well . and jesus answering say o false and foolish generation how long will i be with you ? how long will i put up with you ? let him come here to me . and jesus give order to the unclean spirit and it go out of him and the boy be make well from that hour . then the disciple come to jesus privately and say why be we not able to send it out ? and he say to them because of your little faith for truly i say to you if you have faith a a grain of mustard seed you will say to this mountain be move from this place to that and it will be move and nothing will be impossible to you . and while they be go about in galilee jesus say to them the son of man will be give up into the hand of men and they will put him to death and the third day he will come again from the dead . and they be very sad . and when they have come to capernaum those who take the temple tax come to peter and say do not your master make payment of the temple tax ? he say yes . and when he come into the house jesus say to him what be your opinion simon ? from whom do the king of the earth get payment or tax ? from their son or from other people ? and when he say from other people jesus say to him then be the son free . but so that we may not be a cause of trouble to them go to the sea and let down a hook and take the first fish which come up and in his mouth you will see a bit of money take that and give it to them for me and you .in that hour the disciple come to jesus say who be great in the kingdom of heaven ? and he take a little child and put him in the middle of them and say truly i say to you if you do not have a change of heart and become like little child you will not go into the kingdom of heaven . whoever then will make himself as low a this little child the same be the great in the kingdom of heaven . and whoever give honour to one such little child in my name give honour to me but whoever be a cause of trouble to one of these little one who have faith in me it would be good for him to have a great stone fix to his neck and to come to his end in the deep sea . a curse be on the earth because of trouble ! for it be necessary for trouble to come but unhappy be that man through whom the trouble come . and if your hand or your foot be a cause of trouble let it be cut off and put it away from you it be well for you to go into life with the loss of a hand or a foot than have two hand or two foot to go into the eternal fire . and if your eye be a cause of trouble to you take it out and put it away from you it be well for you to go into life with one eye than have two eye to go into the hell of fire . let it not seem to you that one of these little one be of no value for i say to you that in heaven their angel see at all time the face of my father in heaven . what would you say now ? if a man have a hundred sheep and one of them have go wander away will he not let the ninety nine be and go to the mountain in search of the wander one ? and if he come across it truly i say to you he have more joy over it than over the ninety nine which have not go out of the way . even so it be not the pleasure of your father in heaven for one of these little one to come to destruction . and if your brother do wrong to you go make clear to him his error between you and him in private if he give ear to you you have get your brother back again . but if he will not give ear to you take with you one or two more that by the lip of two or three witness every word may be make certain . and if he will not give ear to them let it come to the hearing of the church and if he will not give ear to the church let him be to you a a gentile and a tax farmer . truly i say to you whatever thing be fix by you on earth will be fix in heaven and whatever you make free on earth will be make free in heaven . again i say to you that if two of you be in agreement on earth about anything for which they will make a request it will be do for them by my father in heaven . for where two or three be come together in my name there be i among them . then peter come and say to him lord what number of time may my brother do wrong against me and i give him forgiveness ? till seven time ? jesus say to him i say not to you till seven time but till seventy time seven . for this reason the kingdom of heaven be like a king who go over his account with his servant . and at the start one come to him who be in his debt for ten thousand talent . and because he be not able to make payment his lord give order for him and his wife and his son and daughter and all he have to be give for money and payment to be make . so the servant go down on his face and give him worship say lord give me time to make payment and i will give you all . and the lord of that servant be move with pity let him go and make him free of the debt . but that servant go out and meet one of the other servant who be in debt to him for one hundred penny he take him by the throat say make payment of your debt . so that servant go down on his face request him and say give me time and i will make payment to you . and he would not but go and put him into prison till he have make payment of the debt . so when the other servant saw what be do they be very sad and come and give word to their lord of what have be do . then his lord send for him and say you evil servant i make you free of all that debt because of your request to me be it not right for you to have mercy on the other servant even a i have mercy on you ? and his lord be very angry and put him in the hand of those who would give him punishment till he make payment of all the debt . so will my father in heaven do to you if you do not everyone from your heart give forgiveness to his brother .and it come about that after say these word jesus go away from galilee and come into the part of judaea on the other side of jordan . and a great number go after him and he make them well there . and certain pharisee come to him test him and say be it right for a man to put away his wife for every cause ? and he say in answer have you not see in the writing that he who make them at the first make them male and female and say for this cause will a man go away from his father and mother and be join to his wife and the two will become one flesh ? so that they be no longer two but one flesh . then let not that which have be join by god be part by man . they say to him why then do moses give order that a husband might give her a statement in writing and be free from her ? he say to them moses because of your hard heart let you put away your wife but it have not be so from the first . and i say to you whoever put away his wife for any other cause than the loss of her virtue and take another be a false husband and he who take her a his wife when she be put away be no true husband to her . the disciple say to him if this be the position of a man in relation to his wife it be well not to be marry . but he say to them not all men be able to take in this say but only those to whom it be give . for there be men who from birth be without sex and there be some who be make so by men and there be others who have make themselves so for the kingdom of heaven . he who be able to take it let him take it . then some people take little child to him so that he might put his hand on them in blessing and the disciple say sharp word to them . but jesus say let the little one come to me and do not keep them away for of such be the kingdom of heaven . and he put his hand on them and go away . and one come to him and say master what good thing have i to do so that i may have eternal life ? and he say to him why be you question me about what be good ? one there be who be good but if you have a desire to go into life keep the rule of the law . he say to him which ? and jesus say do not put anyone to death do not be untrue in married life do not take what be not yours do not give false witness give honour to your father and your mother and have love for your neighbour a for yourself . the young man say to him all these thing have i do what more be there ? jesus say to him if you have a desire to be complete go get money for your property and give it to the poor and you will have wealth in heaven and come after me . but hear these word the young man go away sorrow for he have much property . and jesus say to his disciple truly i say to you it be hard for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of heaven . and again i say to you it be simpler for a camel to go through a needle 's eye than for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of god . and the disciple hear this be greatly surprised say who then may have salvation ? and jesus look at them say with men this be not possible but with god all thing be possible . then peter say to him see we have give up everything and have come after you what then will we have ? and jesus say to them truly i say to you that in the time when all thing be make new and the son of man be seat in his glory you who have come after me will be seat on twelve seat judge the twelve tribe of israel . and everyone who have give up house or brother or sister or father or mother or child or land for my name will be give a hundred time a much and have eternal life . but a great number who be first will be last and some who be last will be first .for the kingdom of heaven be like the master of a house who go out early in the morning to get worker into his vine garden . and when he have make an agreement with the workman for a penny a day he send them into his vine garden . and he go out about the third hour and saw others in the market place do nothing and he say to them go into the vine garden with the others and whatever be right i will give you . and they go to work . again he go out about the sixth and the ninth hour and do the same . and about the eleventh hour he go out and saw others do nothing and he say to them why be you here all the day do nothing ? they say to him because no man have give u work . he say to them go in with the rest into the vine garden . and when even come the lord of the vine garden say to his manager let the worker come and give them their payment from the last to the first . and when those men come who have go to work at the eleventh hour they be give every man a penny . then those who come first have the idea that they would get more and they like the rest be give a penny . and when they get it they make a protest against the master of the house say these last have do only one hour 's work and you have make them equal to u who have undergo the hard work of the day and the burning heat . but he in answer say to one of them friend i do you no wrong do you not make an agreement with me for a penny ? take what be yours and go away it be my pleasure to give to this last even a to you . have i not the right to do a seem good to me in my house ? or be your eye evil because i be good ? so the last will be first and the first last . and when jesus be go up to jerusalem he take the twelve disciples on one side and say to them see we go up to jerusalem and the son of man will be give into the hand of the chief priest and scribe and they will give order for him to be put to death and will give him up to the gentile to be make sport of and to be whip and to be put to death on the cross and the third day he will come back again from the dead . then the mother of the son of zebedee come to him with her son give him worship and make a request of him . and he say to her what be your desire ? she say to him let my two son be seat the one at your right hand and the other at your left in your kingdom . but jesus make answer and say you have no idea what you be request . be you able to take of the cup which i be about to take ? they say to him we be able . he say to them truly you will take of my cup but to be seat at my right hand and at my left be not for me to give but it be for those for whom my father have make it ready . and when it come to the ear of the ten they be angry with the two brother . but jesus say to them you see that the ruler of the gentile be lord over them and their great one have authority over them . let it not be so among you but if anyone have a desire to become great among you let him be your servant and whoever have a desire to be first among you let him take the low place even a the son of man do not come to have servant but to be a servant and to give his life for the salvation of men . and when they be go out from jericho a great number go after him . and two blind men seat by the wayside when they have the news that jesus be go by give a loud cry say lord son of david have mercy on u . and the people give them order to be quiet but they go on cry even louder lord son of david have mercy on u . and jesus stopping sent for them and say what would you have me do to you ? they say to him lord that our eye may be open . and jesus be move with pity put his finger on their eye and straight away they be able to see and go after him .and when they be near jerusalem and have come to beth phage to the mountain of olive jesus send two disciple say to them go into the little town in front of you and straight away you will see an as with a cord round her neck and a young one with her let them loose and come with them to me . and if anyone say anything to you you will say the lord have need of them and straight away he will send them . now this take place so that these word of the prophet might come true say to the daughter of zion see your king come to you gentle and seat on an as and on a young as . and the disciple go and do a jesus have give them order and get the as and the young one and put their clothing on them and he take his seat on it . and all the people put their clothing down in the way and others get branch from the tree and put them down in the way . and those who go before him and those who come after give loud cry say glory to the son of david a blessing on him who come in the name of the lord glory in the high . and when he come into jerusalem all the town be move say who be this ? and the people say this be the prophet jesus from nazareth of galilee . and jesus go into the temple and send out all who be trade there overturn the table of the money changer and the seat of those trading in dove . and he say to them it be in the writing my house be to be name a house of prayer but you be make it a hole of thief . and the blind and the broken in body come to him in the temple and he make them well . but when the chief priest and the scribe saw the work of power which he do and the child cry out in the temple glory to the son of david they be angry and say to him have you any idea what these be say ? and jesus say to them yes have you not see in the writing from the lip of child and baby at the breast you have make your praise complete ? and he go away from them and go out of the town to bethany and be there for the night . now in the morning when he be come back to the town he have a desire for food . and see a fig tree by the wayside he come to it and saw nothing on it but leave only and he say to it let there be no fruit from you from this time forward for ever . and straight away the fig tree become dry and dead . and when the disciple saw it they be surprise say how do the fig tree become dry in so short a time ? and jesus in answer say to them truly i say to you if you have faith without doubt not only may you do what have be do to the fig tree but even if you say to this mountain be take up and put into the sea it will be do . and all thing whatever you make request for in prayer have faith you will get . and when he have come into the temple the chief priest and those in authority over the people come to him while he be teach and say by what authority do you do these thing ? and who give you this authority ? and jesus say to them in answer i will put one question to you and if you give me the answer i will say by what authority i do these thing . the baptism of john where do it come from ? from heaven or from men ? and they be reason among themselves say if we say from heaven he will say to u why then do you not have faith in him ? but if we say from men we be in fear of the people because all take john to be a prophet . and they make answer and say we have no idea . then he say to them and i will not say to you by what authority i do these thing . but how do it seem to you ? a man have two son and he come to the first and say son go and do work today in the vine garden . and he say in answer i will not but later change his decision he go . and he come to the second and say the same . and he make answer and say i go sir and go not . which of the two do his father 's pleasure ? they say the first . jesus say to them truly i say to you that tax farmer and loose woman be go into the kingdom of god before you . for john come to you in the way of righteousness and you have no faith in him but the tax farmer and the loose woman have faith in him and you when you saw it do not even have regret for your sin so a to have faith in him . give ear to another story . a master of a house make a vine garden and put a wall round it and make a place for crush out the wine and make a tower and let it out to field worker and go into another country . and when the time for the fruit come near he send his servant to the workman to get the fruit . and the workman make an attack on his servant give blow to one put another to death and stone another . again he send other servant more in number than the first and they do the same to them . but after that he send his son to them say they will have respect for my son . but when the workman saw the son they say among themselves this be he who will one day be the owner of the property come let u put him to death and take his heritage . and they take him and drive him out of the vine garden put him to death . when then the lord of the vine garden come what will he do to those workman ? they say to him he will put those cruel men to a cruel death and will let out the vine garden to other workman who will give him the fruit when it be ready . jesus say to them do you never see in the writing the stone which the builder put on one side the same have be make the chief stone of the building this be the lord 's do and it be a wonder in our eye ? for this reason i say to you the kingdom of god will be take away from you and will be give to a nation produce the fruit of it . any man fall on this stone will be break but he on whom it come down will be crush to dust . and when his story come to the ear of the chief priest and the pharisee they saw that he be talk of them . and though they have a desire to take him they be in fear of the people because in their eye he be a prophet .and jesus talk to them again in story say the kingdom of heaven be like a certain king who make a feast when his son be marry and send out his servant to get in the guest to the feast and they would not come . again he send out other servant with order to say to the guest see i have make ready my feast my ox and my fat beast have be put to death and all thing be ready come to the feast . but they give no attention and go about their business one to his farm another to his trade and the rest put violent hand on his servant and do evil to them and put them to death . but the king be angry and he send his army and those who have put his servant to death he give to destruction burn down their town with fire . then he say to his servant the feast be ready but the guest be not good enough . go then to the cross road and get all those whom you see to come to the bride feast . and those servant go out into the street and get together all those whom they come across bad and good and the feast be full of guest . but when the king come in to see the guest he saw there a man who have not on a guest 's robe and he say to him friend how come you in here not have a guest 's robe ? and he have nothing to say . then the king say to the servant put cord round his hand and foot and put him out into the dark there will be weep and cry of sorrow . for out of all to whom the good news have come only a small number will get salvation . then the pharisee go and have a meeting to see how they might make use of his word to take him . and they send to him their disciple with the herodians say master we see that you be true and that you be teach the true way of god and have no fear of anyone because you have no respect for a man 's position . give u then your opinion of this be it right to give tax to caesar or not ? but jesus saw their trick and say oh false one why be you attempt to put me in the wrong ? let me see the tax money . and they give him a penny . and he say to them whose be this image and name on it ? they say to him caesar 's . then he say to them give to caesar the thing which be caesar 's and to god the thing which be god 's . and hear it they be full of wonder and go away from him . on the same day there come to him the sadducee who say that there be no come back from the dead and they put a question to him say master moses say if a man at the time of his death have no child let his brother take his wife and get a family for his brother now there be among u seven brother and the first be marry and at his death have no seed give his wife to his brother in the same way the second and the third up to the seventh . and last of all the woman come to her end . when they come back from the dead then whose wife will she be of the seven ? because they all have her . but jesus say to them in answer you be in error not have knowledge of the writing or of the power of god . for when they come back from the dead there be no husband and wife but they be a the angel in heaven . but about the dead come back to life have you no knowledge of what be say to you by god in the writing i be the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob ? god be not the god of the dead but of the living . and the people hear it be surprise at his teaching . but the pharisee hear how the mouth of the sadducee have be stop come together and one of them a teacher of the law put a question to him test him and say master which be the chief rule in the law ? and he say to him have love for the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind . this be the first and great rule . and a second like it be this have love for your neighbour a for yourself . on these two rule all the law and the prophet be base . now while the pharisee be together jesus put a question to them say what be your opinion of the christ ? whose son be he ? they say to him the son of david . he say to them how then do david in the spirit give him the name of lord say the lord say to my lord be seat at my right hand till i put under your foot all those who be against you ? if david then give him the name of lord how be he his son ? and no one be able to give him an answer and so great be their fear of him that from that day no one put any more question to him .then jesus say to the people and to his disciple the scribe and the pharisee have the authority of moses all thing then which they give you order to do these do and keep but do not take their work a your example for they say and do not . they make hard law and put great weight on men 's back but they themselves will not put a finger to them . but all their work they do so a to be see by men for they make wide their phylactery and the edge of their robe and the thing desire by them be the first place at feast and the chief seat in the synagogue and word of respect in the market place and to be name by men teacher . but you may not be name teacher for one be your teacher and you be all brother . and give no man the name of father on earth because one be your father who be in heaven . and you may not be name guide because one be your guide even christ . but let the great among you be your servant . and whoever make himself high will be make low and whoever make himself low will be make high . but a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! because you be shut the kingdom of heaven against men for you do not go in yourselves and those who be go in you keep back . a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! for you go about land and sea to get one disciple and have him you make him twice as much a son of hell a yourselves . a curse be on you blind guide who say whoever take an oath by the temple it be nothing but whoever take an oath by the gold of the temple he be responsible . you foolish one and blind which be great the gold or the temple which make the gold holy ? and whoever take an oath by the altar it be nothing but whoever take an oath by the offering which be on it he be responsible . you blind one which be great the offering or the altar which make the offering holy ? he then who take an oath by the altar take it by the altar and by all thing on it . and he who take an oath by the temple take it by the temple and by him whose house it be . and he who take an oath by heaven take it by the seat of god and by him who be seat on it . a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! for you make men give a tenth of all sort of sweet smelling plant but you give no thought to the more important thing of the law righteousness and mercy and faith but it be right for you to do these and not to let the others be undone . you blind guide who take out a fly from your drink but make no trouble over a camel . a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! for you make clean the outside of the cup and of the plate but inside they be full of violent behaviour and uncontrolled desire . you blind pharisee first make clean the inside of the cup and of the plate so that the outside may become equally clean . a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! for you be like the rest place of the dead which be make white and seem beautiful on the outside but inside be full of dead men 's bone and of all unclean thing . even so you seem to men to be full of righteousness but inside you be all false and full of wrongdoing . a curse be on you scribe and pharisee false one ! because you put up building for housing the dead body of the prophet and make fair the last resting place of good men and say if we have be live in the day of our father we would not have take part with them in the blood of the prophet . so that you be witness against yourselves that you be the son of those who put the prophet to death . make full then the measure of your father . you snake offspring of snake how will you be keep from the punishment of hell ? for this reason i send you prophet and wise men and scribe some of them you will put to death and put on the cross and to some of them you will give blow in your synagogue drive them from town to town so that on you may come all the blood of the upright on the earth from the blood of upright abel to the blood of zachariah son of barachiah whom you put to death between the temple and the altar . truly i say to you all these thing will come on this generation . o jerusalem jerusalem put to death the prophet and stone those who be send to her ! again and again would i have take your child to myself a a bird take her young one under her wing and you would not ! see your house be make waste . for i say to you you will not see me from this time till you say a blessing on him who come in the name of the lord .and jesus go out of the temple and on the way his disciple come to him point out the building of the temple . but he answer say to them see you not all these thing ? truly i say to you that here there will not be one stone rest on another which will not be pull down . and while he be seat on the mountain of olive the disciple come to him privately say make clear to u when will these thing be ? and what will be the sign of your come and of the end of the world ? and jesus say to them in answer take care that you be not trick . for people will come in my name say i be the christ and a number will be turn from the true way through them . and news will come to you of war and talk of war do not be trouble for these thing have to be but it be still not the end . for nation will be move against nation and kingdom against kingdom and men will be without food and the earth will be shake in different place but all these thing be the first of the trouble . then they will be cruel to you and will put you to death and you will be hat by all nation because of my name . and number of people will be turn from the right way and will give one another up and have hate for one another . and a number of false prophet will come cause error . and because wrongdoing will be increase the love of most people will become cold . but he who go through to the end will get salvation . and this good news of the kingdom will be give through all the world for a witness to all nation and then the end will come . when then you see in the holy place the unclean thing which make destruction of which word be give by daniel the prophet let this be clear to the reader then let those who be in judaea go in flight to the mountain let not him who be on the house top go down to take anything out of his house and let not him who be in the field go back to get his coat . but it will be hard for woman who be with child and for those with baby at the breast in those day . and say a prayer that your flight may not be in the winter or on a sabbath . because in those day there will be great sorrow such a there have not be from the start of the world till now or ever will be . and if those day have not be make short there would have be no salvation for any but because of the saint those day will be make short . then if any man say to you see here be the christ or here do not put faith in him for there will come up false christ and false prophet who will do great sign and wonder so that if possible even the saint might be trick . see i have make it clear to you before it come about . if then they say to you see he be in the waste land go not out see he be in the inner room put no faith in it . because a in a thunderstorm the bright light come from the east be see even in the west so will be the come of the son of man . wherever the dead body be there will the eagle come together . but straight away after the trouble of those day the sun will be make dark and the moon will not give her light and the star will come down from heaven and the power of heaven will be move and then the sign of the son of man will be see in heaven and then all the nation of the earth will have sorrow and they will see the son of man come on the cloud of heaven with power and great glory . and he will send out his angel with a great sound of a horn and they will get his saint together from the four wind from one end of heaven to the other . now take an example from the fig tree when her branch have become soft and put out it leaf you be certain that the summer be near even so when you see all these thing you may be certain that he be near even at the door . truly i say to you this generation will not come to an end till all these thing be complete . heaven and earth will come to an end but my word will not come to an end . but of that day and hour no one have knowledge not even the angel in heaven or the son but the father only . and a be the day of noah so will be the come of the son of man . because a in those day before the overflowing of the water they be feast and take wife and get marry till the day when noah go into the ark and they have no care till the water come and take them all away so will be the come of the son of man . then two men will be in the field one be take and one let go two woman will be crush grain one be take and one let go . be watch then ! for you have no knowledge on what day your lord will come . but be certain of this that if the master of the house have have knowledge of the time when the thief be come he would have be watch and would not have let his house be break into . be ready then for at a time which you have no thought of the son of man will come . who be the true and wise servant whom his lord have put over those in his house to give them their food at the right time ? a blessing on that servant who will be do so when his lord come . truly i say to you he will put him over all he have . but if that evil servant say in his heart my lord be a long time in coming and be cruel to the other servant take his pleasure with those who be overcome with wine the lord of that servant will come in a day when he be not look for him and in an hour of which he have no knowledge and will have him cut in two and will give him a part in the fate of the false one there will be weep and cry of sorrow .then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins the friend of the bride who take their light and go out with the purpose of meet the husband . and five of them be foolish and five be wise . for the foolish when they take their light take no oil with them . but the wise take oil in their vessel with their light . now the husband be a long time in come and they all go to sleep . but in the middle of the night there be a cry the husband come ! go out to him . then all those virgin get up and make ready their light . and the foolish say to the wise give u of your oil for our light be go out . but the wise make answer say there may not be enough for u and you it would be good for you to go to the trader and get oil for yourselves . and while they go to get oil the master come and those who be ready go in with him to the feast and the door be shut . after that the other virgin come say lord lord let u in . but he make answer and say truly i say to you i have no knowledge of you . keep watch then because you be not certain of the day or of the hour . for it be a when a man about to take a journey get his servant together and give them his property . and to one he give five talent to another two to another one to everyone a he be able and he go on his journey . straight away he who have be give the five talent go and do trade with them and make five more . in the same way he who have be give the two get two more . but he who be give the one go away and put it in a hole in the earth and keep his lord 's money in a secret place . now after a long time the lord of those servant come and make up his account with them . and he who have the five talent come with his other five talent say lord you give into my care five talent see i have get five more . his lord say to him well do good and true servant you have be true in a small thing i will give you control over great thing take your part in the joy of your lord . and he who have the two talent come and say lord you give into my care two talent see i have get two more . his lord say to him well do good and true servant you have be true in a small thing i will give you control over great thing take your part in the joy of your lord . and he who have have the one talent come and say lord i have knowledge that you be a hard man get in grain where you have not put seed and make profit for which you have do no work and i be in fear and go away and put your talent in the earth here be what be yours . but his lord in answer say to him you be a bad and unready servant if you have knowledge that i get in grain where i do not put seed and make profit for which i have do no work why then do you not put my money in the bank and at my come i would have get back what be mine with interest ? take away then his talent and give it to him who have the ten talent . for to everyone who have will be give and he will have more but from him who have not even what he have will be take away . and put out the servant who be of no profit into the outer dark there will be weep and cry of sorrow . but when the son of man come in his glory and all the angel with him then will he be seat in his glory and before him all the nation will come together and they will be part one from another a the sheep be part from the goat by the keeper . and he will put the sheep on his right but the goat on the left . then will the king say to those on his right come you who have the blessing of my father into the kingdom make ready for you before the world be for i be in need of food and you give it to me i be in need of drink and you give it to me i be wander and you take me in i have no clothing and you give it to me when i be ill or in prison you come to me . then will the upright make answer to him say lord when do we see you in need of food and give it to you ? or in need of drink and give it to you ? and when do we see you wander and take you in ? or without clothing and give it to you ? and when do we see you ill or in prison and come to you ? and the king will make answer and say to them truly i say to you because you do it to the least of these my brother you do it to me . then will he say to those on the left go from me you curse one into the eternal fire which be ready for the evil one and his angel for i be in need of food and you give it not to me i be in need of drink and you give it not to me i be wander and you take me not in without clothing and you give me no clothing ill and in prison and you come not to me . then will they make answer say lord when do we see you in need of food or drink or wandering or without clothing or ill or in prison and do not take care of you ? then will he make answer to them say truly i say to you because you do it not to the least of these you do it not to me . and these will go away into eternal punishment but the upright into eternal life .and when jesus have come to the end of all these word he say to his disciple after two day be the passover and the son of man will be give up to the death of the cross . then the chief priest and the ruler of the people come together in the house of the high priest who be name caiaphas . and they make design together to take jesus by some trick and put him to death . but they say not while the feast be go on for fear of trouble among the people . now when jesus be in bethany in the house of simon the leper there come to him a woman have a bottle of perfume of great price and she put the perfume on his head when he be seat at table . but when the disciple saw it they be angry say to what purpose be this waste ? for we might have get much money for this and give it to the poor . but jesus see it say to them why be you trouble the woman ? she have do a kind act to me . for the poor you have ever with you but me you have not for ever . for in put this perfume on my body she do it to make me ready for my last resting place . truly i say to you wherever this good news go out in all the world what this woman have do will be talk of in memory of her . then one of the twelve who be name juda iscariot go to the chief priest and say what will you give me if i give him up to you ? and the price be fix at thirty bit of silver . and from that time he be watch for a chance to give him into their hand . now on the first day of unleavened bread the disciple come to jesus say where be we to make ready for you to take the passover meal ? and he say to them go into the town to such a man and say to him the master say my time be near i will keep the passover at your house with my disciple . and the disciple do a jesus have say to them and they make ready the passover . now when evening be come he be seat at table with the twelve disciple and while they be take food he say truly i say to you that one of you will be false to me . and they be very say and say to him one by one be it i lord ? and he make answer and say he who put his hand into the plate with me the same will be false to me . the son of man go even a the writing say of him but a curse be on that man through whom the son of man be give up it would have be well for that man if he have never come into the world . and juda who be false to him make answer and say be it i master ? he say to him yes . and when they be take food jesus take bread and after bless it he give the broken bread to the disciple and say take it this be my body . and he take a cup and have give praise he give it to them say take of it all of you for this be my blood of the testament which be give for men for the forgiveness of sin . but i say to you that from now i will not take of this fruit of the vine till that day when i take it new with you in my father 's kingdom . and after a song of praise to god they go out to the mountain of olive . then say jesus to them all of you will be turn away from me this night for it be say in the writing i will put to death the keeper of the sheep and the sheep of the flock will be put to flight . but after i be come back from the dead i will go before you into galilee . but peter make answer and say to him though all may be turn away from you i will never be turn away . jesus say to him truly i say to you that this night before the hour of the cock 's cry you will say three time that you have no knowledge of me . peter say to him even if i be put to death with you i will not be false to you . so say all the disciple . then come jesus with them to a place name gethsemane and say to his disciple be seat here while i go over there for prayer . and he take with him peter and the two son of zebedee and become sad and very troubled . then say he to them my soul be very sad even to death keep watch with me here . and he go forward a little and fall down on his face in prayer he say o my father if it be possible let this cup go from me but let not my pleasure but yours be do . and he come to the disciple and see that they be sleep and say to peter what be you not able to keep watch with me one hour ? keep watch with prayer so that you may not be put to the test the spirit truly be ready but the flesh be feeble . again a second time he go away and say in prayer o my father if this may not go from me without my take it let your pleasure be do . and he come again and saw them sleep for their eye be tire . and he go away from them again and a third time say the same prayer . then he come to the disciple and say to them go on sleep now and take your rest for the hour be come and the son of man be give into the hand of evil men . up let u be go see he who give me up be near . and while he be still talk judas one of the twelve come and with him a band arm with sword and stick from the chief priest and those in authority over the people . now the false one have give them a sign say the one to whom i give a kiss that be he take him . and straight away he come to jesus and say master ! and give him a kiss . and jesus say to him friend do that for which you have come . then they come and put hand on jesus and take him . and one of those who be with jesus put out his hand and take out his sword and give the servant of the high priest a blow cut off his ear . then say jesus to him put up your sword again into it place for all those who take the sword will come to death by the sword . do it not seem possible to you that if i make request to my father he will even now send me an army of angel ? but how then would the writing come true which say that so it have to be ? in that hour jesus say to the people have you come out a against a thief with sword and stick to take me ? i be teach every day in the temple and you take me not . but all this have take place so that the writing of the prophet might come true . then all his disciple go from him in flight . and those who have make jesus prisoner take him away to the house of caiaphas the high priest where the scribe and those in authority over the people have come together . but peter go after him at a distance to the house of the high priest and go in and take his seat with the servant to see the end . now the chief priest and all the sanhedrin be look for false witness against jesus so that they might put him to death and they be not able to get it though a number of false witness come . but later there come two who say this man say i be able to give the temple of god to destruction and to put it up again in three day . and the high priest get up and say to him have you no answer ? what be it which these say against you ? but jesus say not a word . and the high priest say to him i put you on oath by the living god that you will say to u if you be the christ the son of god . jesus say to him you say so but i say to you from now you will see the son of man seat at the right hand of power and come on the cloud of heaven . then the high priest violently part his robe say he have say evil against god what more need have we of witness ? for now his word against god have come to your ear what be your opinion ? they make answer and say it be right for him to be put to death . then they put shame on him and be cruel to him and some give him blow say be a prophet o christ and say who give you a blow ! now peter be seat in the open square outside the house and a servant girl come to him say you be with jesus the galilaean . but he say before them all that it be false say i have no knowledge of what you say . and when he have go out into the doorway another saw him and say to those who be there this man be with jesus the nazarene . and again he say with an oath i have no knowledge of the man . and after a little time those who be near come and say to peter truly you be one of them because your talk be witness against you . then with curse and oath he say i have no knowledge of the man . and straight away there come the cry of a cock . and the word of jesus come back to peter when he say before the hour of the cock 's cry you will say three time that you have no knowledge of me . and he go out weep bitterly .now when it be morning all the chief priest and those in authority take think together with the purpose of put jesus to death . and they put cord on him and take him away and give him up to pilate the ruler . then juda who be false to him see that he be to be put to death in his regret take back the thirty bit of silver to the chief priest and those in authority say i have do wrong in give into your hand an upright man . but they say what be that to u ? it be your business . and he put down the silver in the temple and go out and put himself to death by hang . and the chief priest take the silver and say it be not right to put it in the temple store for it be the price of blood . and they make a decision to get with the silver the potter 's field a a place for the dead of other country . for this cause that field be name the field of blood to this day . then come true that which be say by jeremiah the prophet and they take the thirty bit of silver the price of him who be value by the child of israel and they give them for the potter 's field a i have word from the lord . and jesus be before the ruler who put a question to him be you the king of the jew ? and jesus say to him you say so . but when the chief priest and those in authority make statement against him he give no answer . then say pilate to him do you give no attention to what their witness say against you ? and he give him no answer not even a word so that the ruler be greatly surprised . now at the feast it be the way for the ruler to let free to the people one prisoner at their selection . and they have then an important prisoner whose name be barabbas . so when they come together pilate say to them whom will you have ? barabbas or jesus who be name christ ? for he saw that for envy they have give him up . and while he be on the judge 's seat his wife send to him say have nothing to do with that upright man for i have have much trouble this day in a dream because of him . now the chief priest and those in authority get the people to make request for barabbas and for jesus to be put to death . but the ruler make answer and say to them which of the two be it your pleasure that i let go free ? and they say barabbas . pilate say to them what then be i to do with jesus who be name christ ? they all say let him be put to death on the cross . and he say why what evil have he do ? but they give loud cry say to the cross with him ! so when pilate saw that he be able to do nothing but that trouble be work up he take water and wash his hand before the people say the blood of this upright man be not on my hand you be responsible . and all the people make answer and say let his blood be on u and on our child . then he let barabbas go free but after have jesus whip he give him up to be put to death on the cross . then the ruler 's arm men take jesus into the open square and get all their band together . and they take off his clothing and put on him a red robe . and they make a crown of thorn and put it on his head and put a rod in his right hand and they go down on their knee before him and make sport of him say long life to the king of the jew . and they put shame on him and give him blow on the head with the rod . and when they have make sport of him they take the robe off him and put his clothing on him and take him away to put him on the cross . and while they be come out they saw a man of cyrene simon by name and they make him go with them so that he might take up his cross . and when they come to the place name golgotha that be to say dead man 's head they give him wine mixed with bitter drink and after taste it he take no more . and when they have put him on the cross they make division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance . and they be seat there watch him . and they put up over his head the statement of his crime in write this be jesus the king of the jew . then two thief be put on cross with him one on the right and one on the left . and those who go by say bitter word to him shake their head and say you who would give the temple to destruction and put it up again in three day get yourself free if you be the son of god come down from the cross . in the same way the chief priest make sport of him with the scribe and those in authority say a saviour of others he have no salvation for himself . if he be the king of israel let him now come down from the cross and we will have faith in him . he put his faith in god let god be his saviour now if he will have him for he say i be the son of god . and the thief who be on the cross say evil word to him . now from the sixth hour it be dark over all the land till the ninth hour . and about the ninth hour jesus give a loud cry say eli eli lama sabachthani ? that be my god my god why be you turn away from me ? and some of those who be near by hear it say this man be cry to elijah . and straight away one of them go quickly and take a sponge and make it full of bitter wine and put it on a rod and give him drink . and the rest say let him be let u see if elijah will come to his help . and jesus give another loud cry and give up his spirit . and the curtain of the temple be part in two from end to end and there be an earth shock and the rock be break and the rest place of the dead come open and the body of a number of sleep saint come to life and come out of their resting place after he have come again from the dead they go into the holy town and be see by a number of people . now the captain and those who be with him watch jesus when they saw the earth shock and the thing which be do be in great fear and say truly this be a son of god . and a number of woman be there watch from a distance who have come with jesus from galilee wait on his need . among whom be mary magdalene and mary the mother of james and joses and the mother of the son of zebedee . and in the evening there come a man of wealth from arimathaea joseph by name who be a disciple of jesus this man go in to pilate and make a request for the body of jesus . then pilate give order for it to be give to him . and joseph take the body fold it in clean linen and put it in the resting place which have be cut out of the rock for himself and after roll a great stone to the door of it he go away . and mary magdalene be there and the other mary seat by the place of the dead . now on the day after the get ready of the passover the chief priest and pharisee come together to pilate say sir we have in mind how that false man say while he be still live after three day i will come again from the dead . give order then that the place where his body be may be make safe till the third day for fear that his disciple come and take him away secretly and say to the people he have come back from the dead and the last error will be bad than the first . pilate say to them you have watchman go and make it as safe a you be able . so they go and make safe the place where his body be put a stamp on the stone and the watchman be with them .now late on the sabbath when the dawn of the first day of the week be near mary magdalene and the other mary come to see the place where his body be . and there be a great earth shock for an angel of the lord come down from heaven and roll back the stone take his seat on it . his form be shin like the light and his clothing be white a snow and for fear of him the watchman be shake and become a dead men . and the angel say to the woman have no fear for i see that you be search for jesus who be put to death on the cross . he be not here for he have come to life again even a he say . come see the lord 's resting place . and go quickly and give his disciple the news that he have come back from the dead and be go before you into galilee there you will see him a i have say to you . and they go away quickly with fear and great joy to give his disciple the news . and on the way jesus come to them say be glad . and they come and put their hand on his foot and give him worship . then say jesus to them have no fear go and give word to my brother to go into galilee and there they will see me . now while they be go some of the watchman come into the town and give news to the chief priest of all the thing which have take place . and when they have come together with those in authority and have make their decision they give much money to the watchman say say his disciple come by night and take him away secretly while we be sleep . and if this come to the ruler 's ear we will see that he do not make you responsible . so they take the money and do a they have be order and this account have be current among the jew till the present time . but the eleven disciple go into galilee to the mountain where jesus have give them order to go . and when they saw him they give him worship but some be in doubt . and jesus come to them and say all authority have be give to me in heaven and on earth . go then and make disciple of all the nation give them baptism in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy spirit teach them to keep all the rule which i have give you and see i be ever with you even to the end of the world .the first word of the good news of jesus christ the son of god . even a it be say in the book of isaiah the prophet see i send my servant before your face who will make ready your way the voice of one cry in the waste land make ready the way of the lord make his road straight john come and give baptism in the waste land preach baptism a a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose heart be change . and there go out to him all the people of judaea and all those of jerusalem and they be give baptism by him in the river jordan say that they be sinner . and john be clothe in camel 's hair with a leather band about him and his food be locust and honey . and he say to them all there be one come after me who be great than i whose shoe i be not good enough to undo . i have give you baptism with water but he will give you baptism with the holy spirit . and it come about in those day that jesus come from nazareth of galilee and be give baptism by john in the jordan . and straight away come up out of the water he saw the heaven break open and the spirit come down on him a a dove and a voice come out of heaven you be my dearly love son with whom i be well pleased . and straight away the spirit send him out into the waste land . and he be in the waste land for forty day be test by satan and he be with the beast and the angel take care of him . now after john have be put in prison jesus come into galilee preach the good news of god and say the time have come and the kingdom of god be near let your heart be turn from sin and have faith in the good news . and go by the sea of galilee he saw simon and andrew the brother of simon put a net into the sea for they be fisherman . and jesus say to them come after me and i will make you fisher of men . and they go straight from their net and come after him . and go on a little farther he saw jam the son of zebedee and john his brother who be in their boat stitch up their net . and he say come after me and they go away from their father zebedee who be in the boat with the servant and come after him . and they come to capernaum and on the sabbath he go into the synagogue and give teaching . and they be full of wonder at his teaching because he give it a one have authority and not like the scribe . and there be in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit and he give a cry say what have we to do with you jesus of nazareth ? have you come to put an end to u ? i see well who you be the holy one of god . and jesus say to him sharply be quiet and come out of him . and the unclean spirit shake him violently and cry with a loud voice come out of him . and they be all greatly surprise so that they put question to one another say what be this ? a new teaching ! with authority he give order even to the unclean spirit and they do what he say . and news of him go out quickly everywhere into all part of galilee round about . and when they come out of the synagogue they go into the house of simon and andrew with james and john . now simon 's wife 's mother be ill with a burning heat and they give him word of her and he come and take her by the hand lift her up and she become well and take care of their need . and in the evening at sundown they take to him all who be diseased and those who have evil spirit . and all the town have come together at the door . and a number who be ill with different disease he make well and send out evil spirit but he do not let the evil spirit say anything because they have knowledge of him . and in the morning a long time before daylight he get up and go out to a quiet place and there he give himself up to prayer . and simon and those who be with him come after him . and when they come up with him they say to him everyone be look for you . and he say to them let u go to other part into the near town so that i may give teaching there because for this purpose i come . and he go into their synagogue in every part of galilee preaching and drive out evil spirit . and a leper come to him and go down on his knee before him make a request say if it be your pleasure you have the power to make me clean . and be move with pity he put out his hand and touch him say to him it be my pleasure be make clean . and straight away the disease go from him and he be make clean . and he send him away say to him very sharply see that you say nothing to any man but go and let the priest see you and make yourself clean by an offering of the thing order by moses for a witness to them . but he go out and make it public give an account of it everywhere so that jesus be no longer able to go openly into a town but be outside in the waste land and they come to him from every part .and when he come into capernaum again after some day the news go about that he be in the house . and a great number have come together so that there be no long room for them no not even about the door and he give them teach . and four men come to him with one on a bed who have no power of move . and when they be unable to get near him because of all the people they get the roof uncover where he be and when it be break up they let down the bed on which the man be . and jesus see their faith say to him son you have forgiveness for your sin . but there be certain of the scribe seat there and reason in their heart why do this man say such thing ? he have no respect for god from whom do forgiveness come but from god only ? and jesus have knowledge in his spirit of their thought say to them why be you reason about these thing in your heart ? which be the simpler to say to a man who be ill you have forgiveness for your sin or get up take up your bed and go ? but so that you may see that the son of man have authority for the forgiveness of sin on earth he say to the man i say to you get up take up your bed and go to your house . and he get up and straight away take up the bed and go out before them all so that they be all full of wonder and give glory to god say we have never see anything like this . and he go out again by the seaside and all the people come to him and he give them teach . and when he go by he saw levi the son of alphaeus seat at the place where tax be take and he say to him come with me . and he get up and go with him . and it come about that he be seat at meat in his house and a number of tax farmer and sinner be at table with jesus and his disciple for there be a great number of them and they come after him . and the scribe of the pharisee when they saw that he be take food with the tax farmer and sinner say to his disciple why do he take food and drink with such men ? and jesus hearing it say to them those who be well have no need of a medical man but those who be ill i have come not to get the upright but sinner . and john 's disciple and the pharisee be take no food and they come and say to him why do john 's disciple and the disciple of the pharisee go without food but your disciple do not ? and jesus say to them will the friend of a newly marry man go without food while he be with them ? as long a they have him with them they will not go without food . but the day will come when the husband will be take away from them and then they will go without food . no man put a bit of new cloth on an old coat or the new by pull away from the old make a bad hole . and no man put new wine into old wine skin or the skin will be burst by the wine and the wine and the skin will be waste but new wine have to be put into new wine skin . and it come about that on the sabbath day he be go through the grain field and while they be walk his disciple take the head of grain . and the pharisee say to him why be they do what it be not right to do on the sabbath ? and he say to them have you no knowledge of what david do when he have need and be without food he and those who be with him ? how he go into the house of god when abiathar be high priest and take for food the holy bread which only the priest may take and give it to those who be with him ? and he say to them the sabbath be make for man and not man for the sabbath so that the son of man be lord even of the sabbath .and he go again into the synagogue and there be a man there whose hand be dead . and they be watch him to see if he would make him well on the sabbath day so that they might have something against him . and he say to the man get up and come forward . and he say to them be it right to do good on the sabbath or to do evil ? to give life or to put to death ? but they say nothing . and look round on them he be angry be sad because of their hard heart and he say to the man put out your hand . and he put it out and his hand be make well . and the pharisee go out and straight away make design with the herodians about how they might put him to death . and jesus go away with his disciple to the sea and a great number from galilee come after him and from judaea and from jerusalem and from idumaea and the other side of jordan and the country about tyre and sidon a great number hear what great thing he do come to him . and he make a request to his disciple to have a little boat ready for him so that he might not be crush by the people for he have make such a great number well that all those who be diseased be fall down before him for the purpose of touch him . and the unclean spirit whenever they saw him go down before him cry out and say you be the son of god . and he give them special order not to say who he be . and he go up into the mountain and sent for those whom it be his pleasure to have with him and they go to him . and he take twelve to be with him so that he might send them out a preacher and give them the power of drive out evil spirit to simon he give the second name of peter and to jam the son of zebedee and john the brother of james he give the second name of boanerges which be son of thunder and andrew and philip and bartholomew and matthew and thomas and jam the son of alphaeus and thaddaeus and simon the zealot and judas iscariot who be false to him . and he go into a house . and the people come together again so that they be not even able to take bread . and when his friend have news of it they go out to get him say he be off his head . and the scribe who come down from jerusalem say he have beelzebub and by the ruler of evil spirit he send evil spirit out of men . and turn to them he say to them in the form of a story how be it possible for satan to put out satan ? if there be division in a kingdom that kingdom will come to destruction and if there be division in a house that house will come to destruction and if satan be at war with himself and there be division in him he will not keep his place but will come to an end . but no one be able to go into the house of the strong man and take his good without first put cord round the strong man and then he will take his good . truly i say to you the son of men will have forgiveness for all their sin and for all the evil word they say but whoever say evil thing against the holy spirit will never have forgiveness but the evil he have do will be with him for ever because they say he have an unclean spirit . and his mother and brother come and be outside and send for him request to see him . and a great number be seat round him and they say to him see your mother and your brother be outside look for you . and he say in answer who be my mother and my brother ? and look round at those who be seat about him he say see my mother and my brother ! whoever do god 's pleasure the same be my brother and sister and mother .and again he be teach by the seaside . and a very great number of people have come to him so that he get into a boat on the sea and take his seat and all the people be on the land by the seaside . and he give them teach about a number of thing in the form of story and say to them in his teach give ear a man go out to put seed in the earth and while he be do it some be drop by the wayside and the bird come and take it for food . and some go on the stone where it have not much earth and it come up straight away because the earth be not deep and when the sun be high it be burn and because it have no root it become dry and dead . and some go among the thorn and the thorn come up and it have no room for growth and give no fruit . and some fall on good earth give fruit come up and increase and give thirty sixty and a hundred time a much . and he say to them whoever have ear let him give ear . and when he be by himself those who be round him with the twelve put question to him about the purpose of the story . and he say to them to you be give the secret of the kingdom of god but to those who be outside all thing be give in the form of story so that see they may see and it will not be clear to them and hear it they will not get the sense for fear that they may be turn again to me and have forgiveness . and he say to them if you be not clear about this story how will you be clear about the others ? the seed be the word . and these be they by the wayside where the word be plant and when they have give ear the evil one come straight away and take away the word which have be plant in them . and in the same way these be they who be plant on the stone who when the word have come to their ear straight away take it with joy and they have no root in themselves but go on for a time then when trouble come or pain because of the word they quickly become full of doubt . and others be those plant among the thorn these be they who have give ear to the word and the care of this life and the deceit of wealth and the desire for other thing come in put a stop to the growth of the word and it give no fruit . and these be they who be plant on the good earth such a give ear to the word and take it into their heart and give fruit thirty and sixty and a hundred time a much . and he say to them when the light come in do people put it under a vessel or under the bed and not on it table ? there be nothing cover which will not be see openly and nothing have be make secret which will not come to light . if any man have ears let him give ear . and he say to them take care what you give ear to in the same measure a you give you will get and more will be give to you . he who have to him will be give and he who have not from him will be take even that which he have . and he say such be the kingdom of god a if a man put seed in the earth and go to sleep and get up night and day and the seed come to growth though he have no idea how . the earth give fruit by herself first the leaf then the head then the full grain . but when the grain be ready he quickly send men to get it cut because the time for cut have come . and he say what picture may we give of the kingdom of god or with what story may we make it clear ? it be like a grain of mustard seed which when it be put in the earth be small than all the seed on the earth but when it be plant it come up and become tall than all the plant and put out great branch so that the bird of heaven be able to take rest in it shade . and with a number of such story he give them his teach a they be able to take it and without a story he say nothing to them but privately to his disciple he make all thing clear . and on that day when the evening have come he say to them let u go over to the other side . and go away from the people they take him with them a he be in the boat . and other boat be with him . and a great storm of wind come up and the wave come into the boat so that the boat be now become full . and he himself be in the back of the boat sleep on the cushion and they awake him say master be it nothing to you that we be in danger of destruction ? and he come out of his sleep and give strong order to the wind and say to the sea peace be at rest . and the wind go down and there be a great calm . and he say to them why be you full of fear ? have you still no faith ? and their fear be great and they say one to another who then be this that even the wind and the sea do his order ?and they come to the other side of the sea into the country of the gerasenes . and when he have get out of the boat straight away there come to him from the place of the dead a man with an unclean spirit . he be live in the place of the dead and no man be able to keep him down no not with a chain because he have frequently be prisoned in chain and iron band and the chain have be part and the band break by him and no man be strong enough to make him quiet . and all the time by day and by night in the place of the dead and in the mountain he be cry out and cut himself with stone . and when he saw jesus from far off he go quickly to him and give him worship and cry out with a loud voice he say what have i to do with you jesus son of the most high god ? in god 's name do not be cruel to me . for jesus have say to him come out of the man you unclean spirit . and jesus say what be your name ? and he make answer my name be legion because there be a great number of u . and he make strong prayer to him not to send them away out of the country . now on the mountain side there be a great herd of pig get their food . and they say to him send u into the pig so that we may go into them . and he let them do it . and the unclean spirit come out and go into the pig and the herd go rush down a sharp slope into the sea about two thousand of them and they come to their death in the sea . and their keeper go run and give an account of it in the town and in the country . and people come to see what have take place . and they come to jesus and saw the man in whom have be the evil spirit seat clothed and with full use of his sens and they be full of fear . and those who have see it give them an account of what have be do to him who have the evil spirit and of the fate of the pig . and they make a request to him to go out of their country . and when he be get into the boat the man in whom have be the evil spirit have a great desire to come with him . and he would not let him but say to him go to your house to your friend and give them news of the great thing the lord have do for you and how he have mercy on you . and he go on his way and make public in the country of decapolis what great thing jesus have do for him and all men be full of wonder . and when jesus have go over again in the boat to the other side a great number of people come to him and he be by the sea . and one of the ruler of the synagogue jairus by name come and see him go down at his foot and make strong prayer to him say my little daughter be near to death it be my prayer that you will come and put your hand on her so that she may be make well and have life . and he go with him and a great number of people go after him and come round him . and a woman who have have a flow of blood for twelve year and have undergone much at the hand of a number of medical men and have give all she have and be no good but even bad when she have news of the thing which jesus do go among the people come after him and put her hand on his robe . for she say if i may only put my hand on his robe i will be make well . and straight away the fountain of her blood be stop and she have a feeling in her body that her disease have go and she be well . and straight away jesus be conscious that power have go out of him and turn to the people he say who be touch my robe ? and his disciple say to him you see the people round you on every side and you say who be touch me ? and on his look round to see her who have do this thing the woman shake with fear conscious of what have be do to her come and fall on her face before him give him a true account of everything . and he say to her daughter your faith have make you well go in peace and be free from your disease . and while he be still talk they come from the ruler of the synagogue 's house say your daughter be dead why be you still trouble the master ? but jesus give no attention to their word say to the ruler of the synagogue have no fear only have faith . and he do not let anyone come with him but peter and james and john the brother of james . and they come to the house of the ruler of the synagogue and he saw people run this way and that and weeping and cry loudly . and when he have go in he say to them why be you make such a noise and weep ? the child be not dead but sleep . and they be laugh at him . but he have send them all out take the father of the child and her mother and those who be with him and go in where the child be . and take her by the hand he say to her talitha cumi which be my child i say to you get up . and the young girl get up straight away and be walk about she be twelve year old . and they be overcome with wonder . and he give them special order that they be not to say anything of this and he say that some food be to be give to her .and he go away from there and come into his country and his disciple go with him . and when the sabbath day have come he be teach in the synagogue and a number of people hear him be surprise say from where do this man get these thing ? and what be the wisdom give to this man and what be these work of power do by his hand ? be not this the woodworker the son of mary and brother of james and joses and juda and simon ? and be not his sister here with u ? and they be bitter against him . and jesus say to them a prophet be nowhere without honour but in his country and among his relation and in his family . and he be unable to do any work of power there but only to put his hand on one or two person who be ill and make them well . and he be greatly surprise because they have no faith . and he go about the country place teach . and he give order to the twelve and send them out two by two and he give them authority over the unclean spirit and he say that they be to take nothing for their journey but a stick only no bread no bag no money in their pocket they be to go with common shoe on their foot and not to take two coat . and he say to them wherever you go into a house make that your rest place till you go away . and whatever place will not take you in and will not give ear to you when you go away put off the dust from your foot a a witness against them . and they go out preach the need for a change of heart in men . and they send out a number of evil spirit and put oil on a great number who be ill and make them well . and king herod have news of him because his name be on the lip of all and he say john the baptist have come back from the dead and for this reason these power be work in him . but others say it be elijah . and others say it be a prophet even like one of the prophet . but herod when he have news of it say john whom i put to death have come back from the dead . for herod himself have send men out to take john and put him in prison because of herodias his brother philip 's wife whom he have take for himself . for john say to herod it be wrong for you to have your brother 's wife . and herodias be bitter against him desire to put him to death but she be not able for herod be in fear of john be conscious that he be an upright and holy man and keep him safe . and hear him he be much troubled and he give ear to him gladly . and the chance come when herod on his birthday give a feast to his lord and the high captain and the chief men of galilee and when the daughter of herodias herself come in and do a dance herod and those who be at table with him be pleased with her and the king say to the girl make a request for anything and i will give it you . and he take an oath say to her whatever be your desire i will give it to you even half of my kingdom . and she go out and say to her mother what be my request to be ? and she say the head of john the baptist . and she come in quickly to the king and say my desire be that you give me straight away on a plate the head of john the baptist . and the king be very sad but because of his oath and those who be with him at table he would not say 'no ' to her . and straight away the king send out one of his arm men and give him an order to come back with the head and he go and take off john 's head in prison and come back with the head on a plate and give it to the girl and the girl give it to her mother . and when his disciple have news of it they come and take up his body and put it in it last resting place . and the twelve come together to jesus and they give him an account of all the thing they have do and all they have be teach . and he say to them come away by yourselves to a quiet place and take a rest for a time . because there be a great number come and go and they have no time even for food . and they go away in the boat to a waste place by themselves . and the people saw them go and a number of them have knowledge who they be go run there together on foot from all the town and get there before them . and he get out and saw a great mass of people and he have pity on them because they be like sheep without a keeper and he give them teach about a number of thing . and at the end of the day his disciple come to him and say this place be waste land and it be late send them away so that they may go into the country and small town round about and get some food for themselves . but he say to them in answer give them food yourselves . and they say to him be we to go and get bread for two hundred penny and give it to them ? and he say to them how much bread have you ? go and see . and when they have see they say five cake of bread and two fish . and he make them all be seat in group on the green grass . and they be place in group by hundred and by fifty . and he take the five cake of bread and the two fish and look up to heaven he say word of blessing over them and when the cake be break he give them to the disciple to put before the people and he make division of the two fish among them all . and they all take of the food and have enough . and they take up twelve basket full of the broken bit and of the fish . and those who take of the bread be five thousand men . and straight away he make his disciple get into the boat and go before him to the other side to beth saida while he himself send the people away . and after he have send them away he go up into a mountain for prayer . and by even the boat be in the middle of the sea and he by himself on the land . and see that they have trouble in get their boat through the water because the wind be against them about the fourth watch of the night he come to them walk on the sea and he would have go past them but they when they saw him walk on the sea take him for a spirit and give a loud cry for they all saw him and be trouble . but straight away he say to them take heart it be i have no fear . and he go to them into the boat and the wind go down and they be full of wonder in themselves for it be not clear to them about the bread but their heart be hard . and when they have go across they come to gennesaret and get their boat to land . and when they have get out of the boat the people quickly have news of him and go run through all the country round about and take on their bed those who be ill to where it be say that he be . and wherever he go into small town or great town or into the country they take those who be ill into the market place request him that they might put their hand even on the edge of his robe and all those who do so be make well .and there come together to him the pharisee and certain of the scribe who have come from jerusalem and have see that some of his disciple take their bread with unclean that be unwashed hand . now the pharisee and all the jew do not take food without wash their hand with care keep the old rule which have be hand down to them and when they come from the market place they take no food till their hand be wash and a number of other order there be which have be hand down to them to keep washing of cup and pot and brass vessel . and the pharisee and the scribe put the question to him why do your disciple not keep the rule of the father but take their bread with unwashed hand ? and he say well do isaiah say of you you false one these people give me honour with their lip but their heart be far from me . but their worship be to no purpose while they give a their teach the rule of men . for turn away from the law of god you keep the rule of men . and he say to them truly you put on one side the law of god so that you may keep the rule which have be hand down to you . for moses say give honour to your father and mother and he who say evil of father or mother let him have the punishment of death but you say if a man say to his father or his mother that by which you might have have profit from me be corban that be to say give to god you no longer let him do anything for his father or his mother make the word of god of no effect by your rule which you have give and a number of other such thing you do . and turn to the people again he say to them give ear to me all of you and let my word be clear to you there be nothing outside the man which go into him be able to make him unclean but the thing which come out of the man be those which make the man unclean . and when he have go into the house away from all the people his disciple put question to him about the say . and he say to them have even you so little wisdom ? do you not see that whatever go into a man from outside be not able to make him unclean because it go not into the heart but into the stomach and go out with the waste ? he say this make all food clean . and he say that which come out of the man that make the man unclean . because from inside from the heart of men come evil thought and unclean pleasures the taking of good and of life break faith between husband and wife the desire of wealth wrongdoing deceit sin of the flesh an evil eye angry word pride foolish act all these evil thing come from inside and make the man unclean . and he go away from there to the country of tyre and sidon . and he go into a house desire that no man might have knowledge of it and he be not able to keep it secret . but a woman whose little daughter have an unclean spirit have have news of him come straight away and go down at his foot . now the woman be a greek a syro phoenician by birth and she make a request to him that he would send the evil spirit out of her daughter . and he say to her let the child first have their food for it be not right to take the child 's bread and give it to the dog . but she say to him in answer yes lord even the dog under the table take the bit drop by the child . and he say to her for this say go your way the evil spirit have go out of your daughter . and she go away to her house and saw the child on the bed and the evil spirit go out . and again he go out from tyre and come through sidon to the sea of galilee through the country of decapolis . and they come to him with one who have no power of hearing and have trouble in talk and they make a request to him to put his hand on him . and he take him on one side from the people privately and put his finger into his ear and he put water from his mouth on the man 's tongue with his finger and look up to heaven he take a deep breath and say to him ephphatha that be be open . and his ear become open and the band of his tongue be make loose and his word become clear . and he give them order not to give news of it to anyone but the more he make this request so much the more they make it public . and they be overcome with wonder say he have do all thing well he even give back the power of hearing and the power of talk to those who have be without them .in those day again when there be a great mass of people and they have no food he make his disciple come to him and say to them i have pity for these people because they have be with me now three day and have no food if i send them away to their house with no food they will be overcome by weariness on the way and some of them have come from far . and his disciple say in answer how will it be possible to get enough bread for these men here in a waste place ? and he put the question how much bread have you ? and they say seven cake . and he make the people be seat on the earth and he take the seven cake and have give praise he give the broken bread to his disciple to put before them and they put it before the people . and they have some small fish and bless them he have them put before the people in the same way . and they take the food and have enough and they take up seven basket full of the broken bit . and there be about four thousand people and he send them away . and he get into the boat with his disciple straight away and come into the country of dalmanutha . and the pharisee come out and put question to him request from him a sign from heaven test him . and he be very sad in spirit and say why be this generation look for a sign ? truly i say to you no sign will be give to this generation . and he go away from them and again get into the boat and go across to the other side . and they have take no think to get bread and they have only one cake of bread with them in the boat . and he say to them take care to be on the watch against the leaven of the pharisee and the leaven of herod . and they say to one another we have no bread . and jesus hearing it say to them why be you reason among yourselves because you have no bread ? do you still not see and be it still not clear to you ? be your heart so hard ? have eye do you not see ? and have ear have you no hearing ? and have you no memory ? when i make a division of the five cake of bread among the five thousand what number of basket full of broken bit do you take up ? they say to him twelve . and when the seven among the four thousand what number of basket full of broken bit do you take up ? and they say to him seven . and he say to them be it still not clear to you ? and they come to beth saida . and they take a blind man to him request him to put his hand on him . and he take the blind man by the hand and go with him out of the town and when he have put water from his mouth on his eye and put his hand on him he say do you see anything ? and look up he say i see men i see them like tree walk . then again he put his hand on his eye and look hard he be able to see and saw all thing clearly . and he send him away to his house say do not even go into the town . and jesus go out with his disciple into the little towns round caesarea philippi and on the way he put a question to his disciple say who do men say that i be ? and they make answer john the baptist and others elijah but others one of the prophet . and he say to them but who do you say i be ? peter say in answer you be the christ . and he put them under order not to say this of him to anyone . and teach them he say that the son of man would have to undergo much and be hat by those in authority and the chief priest and the scribe and be put to death and after three day come back from the dead . and he say this openly . and peter take him and be protest . but he turn about and see his disciple say sharply to peter get out of my way satan for your mind be not on the thing of god but on the thing of men . and turn to the mass of people with his disciple he say to them if any man have the desire to come after me let him give up all other desire and take up his cross and come after me . whoever have a desire to keep his life will have it take from him and whoever give up his life because of me and the good news will keep it . what profit have a man if he get all the world with the loss of his life ? and what would a man give in exchange for his life ? whoever have a feeling of shame because of me and my word in this false and evil generation the son of man will have a feeling of shame because of him when he come in the glory of his father with the holy angel .and he say to them truly i say to you there be some here who will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of god come with power . and after six day jesus take with him peter and james and john and make them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves and he be change in form before them and his clothing become shining very white a no cleaner on earth would make it . and there come before them elijah with moses and they be talk with jesus . and peter say to jesus master it be good for u to be here and let u make three tent one for you one for moses and one for elijah . because he be not certain what to say for they be in great fear . and a cloud come over them and a voice come out of the cloud say this be my dearly love son give ear to him . and suddenly look round about they saw no one any long but jesus only with themselves . and while they be come down from the mountain he give them order not to give word to any man of the thing they have see till the son of man have come back from the dead . and they keep the say questioning among themselves what the come back from the dead might be . and they put a question to him say why do the scribe say that elijah have to come first ? and he say to them truly elijah do come first and put all thing in order and how be it say in the writing that the son of man will go through much sorrow and be make a nothing ? but i say to you that elijah have come and they have do to him whatever they be pleased to do even a the writing say about him . and when they come to the disciple they saw a great mass of people about them and scribe question them . and straight away all the people when they saw him be full of wonder and run to him give him worship . and he say what be you question them about ? and one of the number say to him in answer master i come to you with my son who have in him a spirit which take away his power of talk and wherever it take him it put him down violently stream at the lip and twist with pain and his strength go from him and i make a request to your disciple to send it out and they be not able . and he say to them in answer o generation without faith how long will i have to be with you ? how long will i put up with you ? let him come to me . and they take him to him and when he saw him the spirit in him straight away become violent and he go down on the earth roll about and stream at the lip . and jesus question the father say how long have he be like this ? and he say from a child . and frequently it have send him into the fire and into the water for his destruction but if you be able to do anything have pity on u and give u help . and jesus say to him if you be able ! all thing be possible to him who have faith . straight away the father of the child give a cry say i have faith make my feeble faith stronger . and when jesus saw that the people come run together he give order to the unclean spirit say to him you spirit who be the cause of his loss of voice and hearing i say to you come out of him and never again go into him . and after cry out and shake him violently it come out and the child become like one dead so that most of them say he be dead . but jesus take him by the hand lift him up and he get up . and when he have go into the house his disciple say to him privately why be we unable to send it out ? and he say to them nothing will make this sort come out but prayer . and they go out from there through galilee and it be his desire that no man might have knowledge of it for he be give his disciple teach and say to them the son of man be give up into the hand of men and they will put him to death and when he be dead after three day he will come back from the dead . but the saying be not clear to them and they be in fear of question him about it . and they come to capernaum and when he be in the house he put the question to them what be you talk about on the way ? but they say nothing because they have have an argument between themselves on the way about who be the great . and seat himself he make the twelve come to him and he say to them if any man have the desire to be first he will be last of all and servant of all . and he take a little child and put him in the middle of them and take him in his arm he say to them whoever will give honour to one such little child in my name give honour to me and whoever give honour to me give honour not to me but to him who send me . john say to him master we saw one drive out evil spirit in your name and we say that he might not because he be not one of u . but jesus say say not so for there be no man who will do a great work in my name and be able at the same time to say evil of me . he who be not against u be for u . whoever give you a cup of water because you be christ 's truly i say to you he will in no way be without his reward . and whoever be a cause of trouble to one of these little one who have faith in me it would be good for him if a great stone be put round his neck and he be drop into the sea . and if your hand be a cause of trouble to you let it be cut off it be well for you to go into life with one hand than to have two hand and go into hell into the eternal fire . and if your foot be a cause of trouble to you let it be cut off it be well for you to go into life with one foot than to have two foot and go into hell . and if your eye be a cause of trouble to you take it out it be well for you to go into the kingdom of god with one eye than have two eye to go into hell where their worm be ever living and the fire be not put out . everyone will be salt with fire . salt be good but if the taste go from it how will you make it salt again ? have salt in yourselves and be at peace one with another .and he get up and go into the country of judaea on the other side of jordan and great number of people come together to him again and a be his way he give them teach . and pharisee come to him test him with the question be it right for a man to put away his wife ? and he say to them in answer what do moses say you be to do ? and they say to him moses let u give her a statement in writing and be free from her . but jesus say to them because of your hard heart he give you this law . but from the first male and female make he them . for this cause will a man go away from his father and mother and be join to his wife and the two will become one flesh so that they be no longer two but one flesh . let not that which have be join together by god be part by man . and in the house the disciple put question to him again about this thing . and he say to them whoever put away his wife and take another be false to his wife and if she herself put away her husband and take another she be false to her husband . and they take to him little child so that he might put his hand on them and the disciple say sharp word to them . and when jesus saw it he be angry and say to them let the little child come to me and do not keep them away for of such be the kingdom of god . truly i say to you whoever do not put himself under the kingdom of god like a little child will not come into it at all . and he take them in his arm and give them a bless put his hand on them . and while he be go out into the way a man come run to him and go down on his knee say good master what have i to do so that i may have eternal life ? and jesus say to him why do you say i be good ? no one be good but one and that be god . you have knowledge of what be say in the law do not put any one to death do not be untrue in married life do not take what be not yours do not give false witness do not get money by deceit give honour to your father and mother . and he say to him master all these law i have keep from the time when i be young . and jesus look on him and love him say there be one thing need go get money for your good and give it to the poor and you will have wealth in heaven and come with me . but his face become sad at the say and he go away sorrow for he be one who have much property . and jesus look round about say to his disciple how hard it be for those who have wealth to come into the kingdom of god ! and the disciple be full of wonder at his word . but jesus say to them again child how hard it be for those who put faith in wealth to come into the kingdom of god ! it be simpler for a camel to go through a needle 's eye than for a man of wealth to come into the kingdom of god . and they be greatly surprised say to him who then may have salvation ? jesus look on them say with men it be impossible but not with god for all thing be possible with god . peter say to him see we have give up everything and come after you . jesus say truly i say to you there be no man who have give up house or brother or sister or mother or father or child or land because of me and the good news who will not get a hundred time a much now in this time house and brother and sister and mother and child and land though with great trouble and in the world to come eternal life . but a great number who be first will be last and those who be last will be first . and they be on the way go up to jerusalem and jesus be go before them and they be full of wonder but those who come after him be in fear . and again he take the twelve and give them word of the thing which be to come on him say see we go up to jerusalem and the son of man will be give up to the chief priest and the scribe and they will give an order for his death and will give him up to the gentile and they will make sport of him and put shame on him and give him cruel blow and will put him to death and after three day he will come back from the dead . and there come to him james and john the son of zebedee say to him master will you give u whatever may be our request ? and he say to them what would you have me do for you ? and they say to him let u be seat one at your right hand and one at your left in your glory . but jesus say to them you have no knowledge of what you be say . be you able to take of my cup ? or to undergo the baptism which i be to undergo ? and they say to him we be able . and jesus say to them you will take of the cup from which i take and the baptism which i be about to undergo you will undergo but to be seat at my right hand or at my left be not for me to give but it be for those for whom it have be make ready . and hear this the ten become very angry with james and john . and jesus make them come to him and say to them you see that those who be make ruler over the gentile be lord over them and their great one have authority over them . but it be not so among you but whoever have a desire to become great among you let him be your servant and whoever have a desire to be first among you let him be servant of all . for truly the son of man do not come to have servant but to be a servant and to give his life for the salvation of men . and they come to jericho and when he be go out of jericho with his disciple and a great number of people the son of timaeus bartimaeus a blind man be seat by the wayside with his hand out for money . and when it come to his ear that it be jesus of nazareth he give a cry and say jesus son of david have mercy on me . and some of them turn in protest give him an order to be quiet but he go on cry out all the more son of david have mercy on me . and jesus come to a stop and say let him come . and cry out to the blind man they say to him be comfort come he have send for you . and he put off his coat get up quickly and come to jesus . and jesus say to him what would you have me do to you ? and the blind man say master make me able to see . and jesus say to him go on your way your faith have make you well . and straight away he be able to see and go after him in the way .and when they come near to jerusalem to beth phage and bethany at the mountain of olive he send two of his disciple and say to them go into the little town opposite and when you come to it you will see a young as with a cord round his neck on which no man have ever be seat let him loose and come back with him . and if anyone say to you why be you do this ? say the lord have need of him and will send him back straight away . and they go away and saw a young as by the door outside in the open street and they be get him loose . and some of those who be there say to them what be you do take the as ? and they say to them the word which jesus have say and they let them go . and they take the young as to jesus and put their clothing on him and he get on his back . and a great number put down their clothing in the way and others put down branch which they have take from the field . and those who go in front and those who come after be cry glory a blessing on him who come in the name of the lord a blessing on the come kingdom of our father david glory in the high . and he go into jerusalem into the temple and after look round about on all thing it be now even he go out to bethany with the twelve . and on the day after when they have come out from bethany he be in need of food . and see a fig tree in the distance with leaf he go to see if by chance it have anything on it and when he come to it he saw nothing but leave for it be not the time for the fruit . and he say to it let no man take fruit from you for ever . and his disciple take note of his word . and they come to jerusalem and he go into the temple and send out those who be trade there overturn the table of the money changer and the seat of those who be offer dove for money and he would not let any man take a vessel through the temple . and he give them teaching and say to them be it not in the writing my house be to be name a house of prayer for all the nation ? but you have make it a hole of thief . and it come to the ear of the chief priest and scribe and they take think how they might put him to death be in fear of him because all the people be full of wonder at his teaching . and every evening he go out of the town . and when they be go by in the morning they saw the fig tree dead from the root . and peter have a memory of it say to him master see the tree which be curse by you be dead . and jesus answering say to them have god 's faith . truly i say to you whoever say to this mountain be take up and be put into the sea and have no doubt in his heart but have faith that what he say will come about he will have his desire . for this reason i say to you whatever you make a request for in prayer have faith that it have be give to you and you will have it . and whenever you make a prayer let there be forgiveness in your heart if you have anything against anyone so that you may have forgiveness for your sin from your father who be in heaven . and they come again to jerusalem and while he be walk in the temple there come to him the chief priest and the scribe and those in authority and they say to him by what authority do you do these thing ? or who give you authority to do these thing ? and jesus say to them i will put to you one question give me an answer and i will say by what authority i do these thing . the baptism of john be it from heaven or from men ? give me an answer . and they give think to it among themselves say if we say from heaven he will say why then do you not have faith in him ? but if we say from men they be in fear of the people because all take john to be truly a prophet . and they say in answer to jesus we have no idea . and jesus say to them and i will not say to you by what authority i do these thing .and he give them teach in the form of story . a man have a vine garden plant and put a wall about it and make a place for crush out the wine and put up a tower and let it out to field worker and go into another country . and when the time come he send a servant to get from the workman some of the fruit of the garden . and they take him and give him blow and send him away with nothing . and again he send to them another servant and they give him wound on the head and be very cruel to him . and he send another and they put him to death and a number of others whip some and put some to death . he still have one a dearly love son he send him last to them say they will have respect for my son . but those workman say among themselves this be he who will one day be the owner of the property come let u put him to death and the heritage will be ours . and they take him and put him to death push his body out of the garden . what then will the master of the garden do ? he will come and put the workman to death and will give the garden into the hand of others . have you not see this which be in the writing the stone which the builder put on one side the same be make the chief stone of the building this be the lord 's do and it be a wonder in our eye ? and they make attempt to take him but they be in fear of the people because they saw that the story be against them and they go away from him . then they send to him certain of the pharisee and the herodians so that they might make use of his word to take him by a trick . and when they have come they say to him master we be certain that you be true and have no fear of anyone you have no respect for a man 's position but you be teach the true way of god be it right to give tax to caesar or not ? be we to give or not to give ? but he conscious of their false heart say to them why do you put me to the test ? give me a penny so that i may see it . and they give him one . and he say to them whose be this image and name on it ? and they say to him caesar 's . and jesus say to them give to caesar the thing which be caesar 's and to god the thing which be god 's . and they be full of wonder at him . and there come to him sadducee who say there be no come back from the dead and they put a question to him say master in the law moses say if a man 's brother come to his end and have a wife still live and no child it be right for his brother to take his wife and get a family for his brother . there be seven brother and the first take a wife and at his death there be no offspring and the second take her and at his death there be no offspring and the third the same and all the seven have no seed . last of all the woman herself come to her death . in the future life when they come back from the dead whose wife will she be ? for the seven have her for a wife . jesus say to them be not this the reason for your error that you have no knowledge of the holy writing or of the power of god ? when they come back from the dead they do not get marry but be like the angel in heaven . but a to the dead come back to life have you not see in the book of moses about the burning thorn tree how god say to him i be the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob ? he be not the god of the dead but of the living you be greatly in error . and one of the scribe come and hear their argument together and see that he have give them a good answer put the question to him which law be the first of all ? jesus say in answer the first be give ear o israel the lord our god be one lord and you be to have love for the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength . the second be this have love for your neighbour a for yourself . there be no other law great than these . and the scribe say to him truly master you have well say that he be one and there be no other but he and to have love for him with all the heart and with all the mind and with all the strength and to have the same love for his neighbour a for himself be much more than all form of offering . and when jesus saw that he give a wise answer he say to him you be not far from the kingdom of god . and every man after that be in fear of question him any more . and jesus when he be teach in the temple say how do the scribe say that the christ be the son of david ? david himself say in the holy spirit the lord say to my lord be seat at my right hand till i put those who be against you under your foot . david himself give him the name of lord and how then be he his son ? and the common people give ear to him gladly . and in his teaching he say be on your watch against the scribe whose pleasure it be to go about in long robe and be respect in the market place and to have the chief seat in the synagogue and the first place at feast who take away the property of widow and before the eye of men make long prayer these will be judge more hardly . and he take a seat by the place where the money be keep and saw how the people put money into the box and a number who have wealth put in much . and there come a poor widow and she put in two little bit of money which make a farthing . and he make his disciple come to him and say to them truly i say to you this poor widow have put in more than all those who be put money into the box because they all put in something out of what they have no need for but she out of her need put in all she have even all her living .and when he be go out of the temple one of his disciple say to him master see what stone and what building ! and jesus say to him do you see these great building ? there be not one stone here rest on another which will not be overturn . and while he be seat on the mountain of olive opposite the temple peter and james and john and andrew say to him privately say when these thing will be and what will be the sign when these thing be all about to be do . and jesus say to them take care that you be not trick by anyone . people will come in my name say i be he and a number will be turn from the true way . and when you have news of war and talk of war do not be trouble these thing have to be but it be still not the end . nation will go to war with nation and kingdom with kingdom there will be earth shock in different place there will be time when there be no food these thing be the first of the trouble . but take care for they will give you up to the sanhedrin and in synagogue you will be whip and you will be take before ruler and king because of me for a sign to them . and the good news have first to be give to all the nation . and when you be take and give up to be judge do not be trouble about what to say but whatever be give to you in that hour say because it be not you who say it but the holy spirit . and brother will give up brother to death and the father his child and child will go against their father and mother and put them to death . and you will be hat by all men because of my name but he who go through to the end will have salvation . but when you see the unclean thing which make destruction in the place where it have no right to be let this be clear to the reader then let those who be in judaea go quickly to the mountain and let him who be on the house top not go down or go in to take anything out of his house and let not him who be in the field go back to take his coat . and it will be hard for woman who be with child and for her who have a baby at the breast in those day . and say a prayer that it may not be in the winter . for in those day there will be sorrow such a there have not be from the time when god make the world till now and will not ever be again . and if the lord have not make the time short no flesh would have be keep from destruction but because of the saint he have make the time short . and then if any man say to you see here be christ or see there have no faith in it because there will be false christ and false prophet and they will give sign and wonder in the hope of turn even the saint from the true way . but take care see i have make all thing clear to you before the time . but in those day after that time of trouble the sun will be make dark and the moon will not give her light and the star will be fall from heaven and the power which be in the heaven will be move . and then they will see the son of man come in cloud with great power and glory . and then he will send out the angel and will get together his saint from the four wind from the farthest part of the earth to the farthest part of heaven . take an example from the fig tree when it branch become soft and put out their leaf you see that the summer be near even so when you see these thing take place you may be certain that he be near even at the door . truly i say to you this generation will not come to an end till all these thing be complete . heaven and earth will come to an end but my word will not come to an end . but of that day or that hour no one have knowledge not even the angel in heaven or the son but the father . take care keep watch with prayer for you be not certain when the time will be . it be a when a man who be in another country for a time have go away from his house and give authority to his servant and to everyone his work give the porter an order to keep watch . so you be to keep watch because you be not certain when the master of the house be come in the evening or in the middle of the night or at the cock 's cry or in the morning for fear that come suddenly he see you sleep . and what i say to you i say to all keep watch .it be now two day before the feast of the passover and the unleavened bread and the chief priest and the scribe make design how they might take him by deceit and put him to death but they say not while the feast be go on for fear there may be trouble among the people . and while he be in bethany in the house of simon the leper seat at table there come a woman with a bottle of perfumed oil of great price and when the bottle be break she put the perfume on his head . but some of them be angry among themselves say for what purpose have this oil be waste ? we might have get more than three hundred penny for it and give the money to the poor . and they say thing against her among themselves . but jesus say let her be why be you trouble her ? she have do a kind act to me . the poor you have ever with you and whenever you have the desire you may do them good but me you have not for ever . she have do what she be able she have put oil on my body to make it ready for it last resting place . and truly i say to you wherever the good news go out through all the earth what this woman have do will be talk of in memory of her . and judas iscariot who be one of the twelve go away to the chief priest so that he might give him up to them . and hear what he say they be glad and give him their word to make him a payment of money . and he take thought how he might best give him up to them . and on the first day of unleavened bread when the passover lamb be put to death his disciple say to him where be we to go and make ready for you to take the passover meal ? and he send two of his disciple and say to them go into the town and there will come to you a man with a vessel of water go after him and wherever he go in say to the owner of the house the master say where be my guest room where i may take the passover with my disciple ? and he will take you up himself to a great room with a table and seat there make ready for u . and the disciple go out and come into the town and saw that it be a he have say and they make ready the passover . and when it be even he come with the twelve . and while they be seat take food jesus say truly i say to you one of you will be false to me one who be take food with me . they be sad and say to him one by one be it i ? and he say to them it be one of the twelve one who be put his bread with me into the same plate . the son of man go even a the writing say of him but curse be that man through whom the son of man be give up ! it would have be well for that man if he have never be give birth . and while they be take food he take bread and after bless it he give the broken bread to them and say take it this be my body . and he take a cup and when he have give praise he give it to them and they all have a drink from it . and he say to them this be my blood of the testament which be give for men . truly i say to you i will take no more of the fruit of the vine till the day when i take it new in the kingdom of god . and after a song of praise to god they go out to the mountain of olive . and jesus say to them you will all be turn away from me for it be in the writing i will put the keeper of the sheep to death and the sheep will be put to flight . but after i have come back from the dead i will go before you into galilee . but peter say to him though the others may be turn away from you i will not . and jesus say to him truly i say to you that you today even this night before the cock 's second cry will say three time that you have no knowledge of me . but he say with passion if i have to be put to death with you i will not be false to you . and they all say the same . and they come to a place which be name gethsemane and he say to his disciple be seat here while i say a prayer . and he take with him peter and james and john and grief and great trouble come on him . and he say to them my soul be very sad even to death be here a little time and keep watch . and he go forward a little and fall down on the earth make request that if possible the hour might go from him . and he say abba father all thing be possible to you take away this cup from me but even so let not my pleasure but yours be do . and he come and saw them sleep and say to peter simon be you sleep ? be you not able to keep watch one hour ? keep watch with prayer so that you may not be put to the test the spirit truly be ready but the flesh be feeble . and again he go away and say a prayer use the same word . and again he come and saw them sleep because their eye be very tired and they have nothing to say in answer . and he come the third time and say to them go on sleep now and take your rest it be enough the hour have come see the son of man be give up into the hand of evil men . get up let u be go see he who give me up be near . and straight away while he be still talk judas one of the twelve come and with him a great band with sword and stick from the chief priest and the scribe and those in authority . now he who have be false to him have give them a sign say the one to whom i give a kiss that be he take him and get him away safely . and when he have come he go straight to him and say master and give him a kiss . and they put their hand on him and take him . but a certain one of those who be near take out his sword and give the servant of the high priest a blow cut off his ear . and jesus say to them have you come out a against a thief with sword and stick to take me ? i be with you every day in the temple teaching and you do not take me but this be do so that the writing may come true . and they all go away from him in fear . and a certain young man go after him with only a linen cloth about his body and they put their hand on him but he get away unclothe without the linen cloth . and they take jesus away to the high priest and there come together with him all the chief priest and those in authority and the scribe . and peter have come after him at a distance even into the house of the high priest and he be seat with the captain warm himself in the light of the fire . now the chief priest and all the sanhedrin be look for witness against jesus so that they might put him to death and they be unable to get any . for a number give false witness against him and their witness be not in agreement . then some get up and give false witness against him say he say in our hearing i will put an end to this temple which be make with hand and in three day i will make another without hand . and even so their witness be not in agreement . and the high priest get up in the middle of them and say to jesus do you say nothing in answer ? what be it which these say against you ? but he keep quiet and say nothing . again the high priest question him say be you the christ the son of the holy one ? and jesus say i be and you will see the son of man seat at the right hand of power and come with the cloud of heaven . and the high priest violently part his robe say what more need have we of witness ? his word against god have come to your ear what be your opinion ? and they all say it be right for him to be put to death . and some put shame on him and cover his face give him blow and say to him now say what be to come and the captain take him and give him blow with their hand . and while peter be down in the open square of the building one of the servant girl of the high priest come and see peter warm himself by the fire she give him a look and say you be with this nazarene even jesus . but he say i have no knowledge of him or of what you be say and he go out into the doorway and there come the cry of a cock . and the girl saw him and say again to those who be near this be one of them . but again he say it be not so . and after a little time again those who be near say to peter truly you be one of them for you be a galilaean . but with curse and oath he say i have no knowledge of the man about whom you be talk . and in the same minute the cock give a second cry . and it come to peter 's mind how jesus have say to him before the cock 's second cry you will say three time that you have no knowledge of me . and at this thought he be overcome with weeping .and the first thing in the morning the chief priest with those in authority and the scribe and all the sanhedrin have a meeting and put cord round jesus and take him away and give him up to pilate . and pilate put a question to him be you the king of the jew ? and he answer say to him you say so . and the chief priest say a number of thing against him . and pilate again put a question do you say nothing in answer ? see how much evil they say you have do . but jesus give no more answer so that pilate be full of wonder . now at the feast every year he let one prisoner go free at their request . and there be one name barabbas in prison with those who have go against the government and in the fight have take life . and the people go up request him to do a he have do for them in other year . and pilate say in answer to them be it your desire that i let the king of the jew go free ? for he saw that the chief priest have give him up through envy . but the people be move by the chief priest to make him let barabbas go free . and pilate again say in answer to them what then be i to do to him to whom you give the name of the king of the jew ? and they say again loudly to the cross with him ! and pilate say to them why what evil have he do ? but their cry be the louder to the cross ! and pilate desiring to do what be please to the people let barabbas go free and give up jesus when he have be whip to be put to death on the cross . and the men of the army take him away into the square in front of the building which be the praetorium and they get together all the band . and they put a purple robe on him and twist a crown of thorn they put it on him and a if honour him they say long life to the king of the jew ! and they give him blow on the head with a stick and put shame on him and go down on their knee give him worship . and when they have make sport of him they take the purple robe off him and put his clothing on him . and they take him out to put him to death on the cross . and they make one simon of cyrene the father of alexander and rufus who be go by come from the country go with them so that he might take his cross . and they take him to the place name golgotha which be dead man 's head . and they give him wine mixed with myrrh but he do not take it . and he be nail to the cross and they make a division of his clothing among them put to the decision of chance what everyone be to take . and it be the third hour when they put him on the cross . and the statement of his crime be put in write on the cross the king of the jew . and they put two thief on cross with him one on his right side and one on his left . and those who go by make sport of him shake their head and say ha ! you who give the temple to destruction and put it up again in three day keep yourself from death and come down from the cross . in the same way the chief priest laugh at him among themselves with the scribe say a saviour of others he have no salvation for himself . let the christ the king of israel come down now from the cross so that we may see and have belief . and those who be put on cross with him say evil thing against him . and when the sixth hour have come it be dark over all the land till the ninth hour . and at the ninth hour jesus say in a loud voice eloi eloi lama sabachthani ? which be my god my god why be you turn away from me ? and some of those who be near hear it say see he be cry to elijah . and one of them go quickly and get a sponge full of bitter wine put it on a rod and give it to him for drink say let be let u see if elijah will come to take him down . and jesus give a loud cry and give up his spirit . and the curtain of the temple be part in two from end to end . and when the captain who be near saw how he give up his spirit he say truly this man be a son of god . and there be woman watch from a distance among them be mary magdalene and mary the mother of james the less and of joses and salome who go with him when he be in galilee and take care of him and a number of other woman who come up with him to jerusalem . and when it be even because it be the time of get ready that be the day before the sabbath there come joseph of arimathaea a responsible man in high honour who be himself wait for the kingdom of god and he go in to pilate without fear and make a request for the body of jesus . and pilate be surprised that he be dead and send for the captain he put a question to see if he have be dead for long . and when he have news of it from the captain he let joseph have the body . and he get a linen cloth and take him down put the linen cloth round him and put him in a place for the dead which have be cut out of a rock and a stone be roll against the door . and mary magdalene and mary the mother of joses saw where he be put .and when the sabbath be past mary magdalene and mary the mother of james and salome get spice so that they might come and put them on him . and very early after dawn on the first day of the week they come at the time of the come up of the sun to the place where the body have be put . and they be say among themselves who will get the stone roll away from the door for u ? and look up they saw that the stone be roll back and it be of great size . and when they go in they saw a young man seat on the right side dress in a white robe and they be full of wonder . and he say to them do not be trouble you be look for jesus the nazarene who have be put to death on the cross he have come back from the dead he be not here see the place where they put him ! but go say to his disciple and to peter he go before you into galilee there you will see him a he say to you . and they go out quickly from the place because fear and great wonder have come on them and they say nothing to anyone because they be full of fear that ... now when he come back from the dead early on the first day of the week he go first to mary magdalene from whom he have send out seven evil spirit . she go and give news of it to those who have be with him while they be sorrow and weep . and they when it come to their ear that he be live and have be see by her have no belief in it . and after these thing he be see in another form by two of them while they be walk on their way into the country . and they go away and give news of it to the rest and they have no belief in what be say . and later he be see by the eleven themselves while they be take food and he say sharp word to them because they have no faith and their heart be hard and because they have no belief in those who have see him after he have come back from the dead . and he say to them go into all the world and give the good news to everyone . he who have faith and be give baptism will get salvation but he who have not faith will be judge . and these sign will be with those who have faith in my name they will send out evil spirit and they will make use of new language they will take up snake and if there be poison in their drink it will do them no evil they will put their hand on those who be ill and they will get well . so then the lord jesus after he have say these word to them be take up into heaven and take his seat at the right hand of god . and they go out preach everywhere the lord work with them and give witness to the word by the sign which come after . so be it .a a number of attempt have be make to put together in order an account of those event which take place among u a they be hand down to u by those who saw them from the first and be preacher of the word it seem good to me have make observation with great care of the direction of event in their order to put the fact in write for you most noble theophilus so that you might have certain knowledge of those thing about which you be give teach . in the day of herod king of judaea there be a certain priest by name zacharias of the order of abijah and he have a wife of the family of aaron and her name be elisabeth . they be upright in the eye of god keep all the rule and order of god and do no wrong . and they be without child because elisabeth have never give birth and they be at that time very old . now it come about that in his turn he be act a priest before god and a be the way of the priest he have to go into the temple to see to the burning of perfume . and all the people be offer prayer outside at the time of the burning of perfume . and he saw an angel of the lord in his place on the right side of the altar . and zacharias be trouble when he saw him and fear come on him . but the angel say have no fear zacharias for your prayer have come to the ear of god and your wife elisabeth will have a son and his name will be john . and you will be glad and have great delight and number of people will have joy at his birth . for he will be great in the eye of the lord he will not take wine or strong drink and he will be full of the spirit of god from his birth . and through him great number of the child of israel will be turn to the lord their god . and he will go before his face in the spirit and power of elijah turn the heart of father to their child and wrongdoer to the way of righteousness to make ready a people whose heart have be turn to the lord . and zacharias say to the angel how may i be certain of this ? for i be an old man and my wife be far on in year . and the angel answer say i be gabriel whose place be before god i have be send to say these word to you and to give you this good news . now see you will be without voice or language till the day when these thing come about because you have not faith in my word which will have effect at the right time . and the people be wait for zacharias and be surprise because he be in the temple for such a long time . and when he come out he be not able to say anything and they saw that he have see a vision in the temple and he be make sign to them without word . and when the day of his work in the temple be end he go back to his house . after that time elisabeth be certain that she be to become a mother keep herself from men 's eye for five month say the lord have do this to me for his eye be on me to take away my shame in the eye of men . now in the sixth month the angel gabriel be send from god to a town in galilee name nazareth to a virgin who be to be marry to a man name joseph of the family of david and the name of the virgin be mary . and the angel come in to her and say peace be with you to whom special grace have be give the lord be with you . but she be greatly troubled at his word and say to herself what may be the purpose of these word ? and the angel say to her have no fear mary for you have god 's approval . and see you will give birth to a son and his name will be jesus . he will be great and will be name the son of the most high and the lord god will give him the kingdom of david his father he will have rule over the house of jacob for ever and of his kingdom there will be no end . and mary say to the angel how may this be because i have have no knowledge of a man ? and the angel in answer say to her the holy spirit will come on you and the power of the most high will come to rest on you and so that which will come to birth will be name holy son of god . even now elisabeth who be of your family be to be a mother though she be old and this be the sixth month with her who be without child . for there be nothing which god be not able to do . and mary say i be the servant of the lord may it be to me a you say . and the angel go away . then mary get up and go quickly into the high land to a town of judah and go into the house of zacharias and take elisabeth in her arm . and when the voice of mary come to the ear of elisabeth the baby make a sudden move inside her then elisabeth be full of the holy spirit and she say with a loud voice may bless be on you among woman and a blessing on the child of your body . how be it that the mother of my lord come to me ? for truly when the sound of your voice come to my ear the baby in my body make a sudden move for joy . happy will she be who have faith that the thing which the lord have say to her will be do . and mary say my soul give glory to god my spirit be glad in god my saviour . for he have have pity on his servant though she be poor and lowly place and from this hour will all generation give witness to the blessing which have come to me . for he who be strong have do great thing for me and holy be his name . his mercy be for all generation in whom be the fear of him . with his arm he have do act of power he have put to flight those who have pride in their heart . he have put down king from their seat lift up on high the men of low degree . those who have no food he make full of good thing the men of wealth he send away with nothing in their hand his help he have give to israel his servant so that he might keep in mind his mercy to abraham and his seed for ever a he give his word to our father . and mary be with her for about three month and then go back to her house . now it be time for elisabeth to give birth and she have a son . and it come to the ear of her neighbour and relation that the lord have be very good to her and they take part in her joy . and on the eighth day they come to see to the circumcision of the child and they would have give him the name of zacharias his father 's name but his mother make answer and say no his name be john . and they say not one of your relation have that name . and they make sign to his father to say what name be to be give to him . and he send for write material and put down his name be john and they be all surprise . and straight away his mouth be open and his tongue be free and he give praise to god . and fear come on all those who be live round about them and there be much talk about all these thing in all the hill country of judaea . and all who have word of them keep them in their mind and say what will this child be ? for the hand of the lord be with him . and his father zacharias be full of the holy spirit and with the voice of a prophet say these word praise be to the lord the god of israel for he have come to his people and make them free lift up a horn of salvation for u in the house of his servant david a he say by the mouth of his holy prophet from the early time salvation from those who be against u and from the hand of those who have hate for u to do act of mercy to our father and to keep in mind his holy word the oath which he make to abraham our father that we be make free from the fear of those who be against u might give him worship in righteousness and holy living before him all our day . and you child will be name the prophet of the most high you will go before the face of the lord to make ready his way to give knowledge of salvation to his people through the forgiveness of sin because of the love mercy of our god by which the dawn from heaven have come to u to give light to those in dark place and in the shade of death so that our foot may be guide into the way of peace . and the child become tall and strong in spirit and he be live in the waste land till the day when he come before the eye of israel .now it come about in those day that an order go out from caesar augustus that there be to be a numbering of all the world . this be the first numbering which be make when quirinius be ruler of syria . and all men go to be number everyone to his town . and joseph go up from galilee out of the town of nazareth into judaea to beth lehem the town of david because he be of the house and family of david to be put on the list with mary his future wife who be about to become a mother . and while they be there the time come for her to give birth . and she have her first son and fold him in linen she put him to rest in the place where the cattle have their food because there be no room for them in the house . and in the same country there be keeper of sheep in the field watch over their flock by night . and an angel of the lord come to them and the glory of the lord be shin round about them and fear come on them . and the angel say have no fear for truly i give you good news of great joy which will be for all the people for on this day in the town of david a saviour have come to birth who be christ the lord . and this be the sign to you you will see a young child fold in linen in the place where the cattle have their food . and suddenly there be with the angel a great band of spirit from heaven give praise to god and say glory to god in the high and on the earth peace among men with whom he be well pleased . and when the angel have go away from them into heaven the keeper of the sheep say to one another let u go now to beth lehem and see this thing which have come about which the lord have make clear to u . and they come quickly and saw mary and joseph and the child in the place where the cattle have their food . and when they saw it they give them an account of the thing which have be say to them about the child . and all those to whose ear it come be full of wonder at the thing say by the keeper of the sheep . but mary keep all these word in her heart and give much think to them . then the keeper of the sheep go back give glory and praise to god for all the thing which have come to their ear and which they have see a it have be say to them . and when after eight day the time come for his circumcision he be name jesus the name which the angel have give to him before his birth . and when the necessary day for make them clean by the law of moses have come to an end they take him to jerusalem to give him to the lord a it say in the law of the lord every mother 's first male child be to be holy to the lord and to make an offering a it be order in the law of the lord of two dove or other young bird . and there be then in jerusalem a man whose name be simeon and he be an upright man fear god and wait for the comfort of israel and the holy spirit be on him . and he have knowledge through the holy spirit that he would not see death till he have see the lord 's christ . and full of the spirit he come into the temple and when the father and mother come in with the child jesus to do with him what be order by the law then he take him in his arm and give praise to god and say now you be let your servant go in peace o lord a you have say for my eye have see your salvation which you have make ready before the face of all nation a light of revelation to the gentile and the glory of your people israel . and his father and mother be full of wonder at the thing which be say about him . and simeon give them his blessing and say to mary his mother see this child will be the cause of the downfall and the lift up of great number of people in israel and he will be a sign against which hard word will be say and a sword will go through your heart so that the secret thought of men may come to light . and there be one anna a woman prophet the daughter of phanuel of the family of asher she be very old and after seven year of married life she have be a widow for eighty four year she be in the temple at all time worship with prayer and go without food night and day . and come up at that time she give praise to god talk of him to all those who be wait for the freeing of jerusalem . and when they have do all the thing which be order by the law of the lord they go back to galilee to nazareth the town where they be live . and the child become tall and strong and full of wisdom and the grace of god be on him . and every year his father and mother go to jerusalem at the feast of the passover . and when he be twelve year old they go up a their way be to the feast and when the day of the feast come to an end and they be go back the boy jesus be still in jerusalem but they have no knowledge of it and in the belief that he be with some of their number they go a day 's journey and after look for him among their relation and friend and see that he be not there they go back to jerusalem to make search for him . and after three day they come across him in the temple seat among the wise men give ear to their word and put question to them . and all to whose ear it come be full of wonder at his knowledge and the answer which he give . and when they saw him they be surprise and his mother say to him son why have you do this to u ? see your father and i have be look for you with sorrow . and he say to them why be you look for me ? be it not clear to you that my right place be in my father 's house ? and his word seem strange to them . and he go down with them and come to nazareth and do a he be order and his mother keep all these word in her heart . and jesus be increase in wisdom and in year and in grace before god and men .now in the fifteenth year of the rule of tiberius caesar pontius pilate be ruler of judaea and herod be king of galilee his brother philip king of the country of ituraea and trachonitis and lysanias king of abilene when anna and caiaphas be high priest the word of the lord come to john the son of zacharias in the waste land . and he come into all the country round about jordan preach baptism a a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose heart be change . a it say in the book of the word of isaiah the prophet the voice of one cry in the waste land make ready the way of the lord make his road straight . every valley will be lift up and all the mountain and hill make low and the twist will be make straight and the rough way smooth and all flesh will see the salvation of god . so he say to the people who go out to him for baptism you offspring of snake at whose word be you go in flight from the wrath to come ? make clear by your act that your heart have be change and do not say to yourselves we have abraham for our father for i say to you that god be able from these stone to make child of abraham . and even now the axe be put to the root of the tree and every tree which do not have good fruit will be cut down and put into the fire . and the people put question to him say what have we to do ? and he make answer and say to them he who have two coat let him give to him who have not even one and he who have food let him do the same . then tax farmer come to him for baptism and say to him master what have we to do ? and he say to them do not make an attempt to get more money than the right amount . and men of the army put question to him say and what have we to do ? and he say to them do no violent act to any man and do not take anything without right and let your payment be enough for you . and while the people be wait and all men be question in their heart about john if he be the christ or not john make answer say to them all truly i give you baptism with water but one be come who be great than i whose shoe i be not good enough to undo he will give you baptism with the holy spirit and with fire in whose hand be the instrument with which he will make clean his grain he will put the good grain in his store but the waste will be burn in the fire which will never be put out . and so comfort them with these and other word he give the good news to the people but herod the king because john have make a protest on account of herodias his brother 's wife and other evil thing which herod have do do this most evil thing of all and have john shut up in prison . now it come about that when all the people have be give baptism jesus have have baptism with them be in prayer when the heaven be open the holy spirit come down in the form of a dove and a voice come from heaven say you be my dearly love son with whom i be well pleased . and jesus at this time be about thirty year old be the son a it seem of joseph the son of heli the son of matthat the son of levi the son of melchi the son of jannai the son of joseph the son of mattathias the son of amos the son of nahum the son of esli the son of naggai the son of maath the son of mattathias the son of semein the son of josech the son of joda the son of joanan the son of rhesa the son of zerubbabel the son of shealtiel the son of neri the son of melchi the son of addi the son of cosam the son of elmadam the son of er the son of jesus the son of eliezer the son of jorim the son of matthat the son of levi the son of symeon the son of juda the son of joseph the son of jonam the son of eliakim the son of melea the son of menna the son of mattatha the son of nathan the son of david the son of jesse the son of obed the son of boaz the son of salmon the son of nahshon the son of amminadab the son of arni the son of hezron the son of perez the son of judah the son of jacob the son of isaac the son of abraham the son of terah the son of nahor the son of serug the son of reu the son of peleg the son of eber the son of shelah the son of cainan the son of arphaxad the son of shem the son of noah the son of lamech the son of methuselah the son of enoch the son of jar the son of mahalaleel the son of cainan the son of enos the son of seth the son of adam the son of god .and jesus full of the holy spirit come back from the jordan and be guide by the spirit in the waste land for forty day be test by the evil one . and he have no food in those day and when they come to an end he be in need of food . and the evil one say to him if you be the son of god give order to this stone to become bread . and jesus make answer to him it have be say in the writing bread be not man 's only need . and he take him up and let him see all the kingdom of the earth in a minute of time . and the evil one say i will give you authority over all these and the glory of them for it have be give to me and i give it to anyone at my pleasure . if then you will give worship to me it will all be yours . and jesus in answer say to him it have be say in the writing give worship to the lord your god and be his servant only . and he take him to jerusalem and put him on the high point of the temple and say to him if you be the son of god let yourself go down from here for it be say in the writing he will give his angel order to take care of you and in their hand they will keep you up so that your foot may not be crush against a stone . and jesus make answer and say to him it be say in the writing you may not put the lord your god to the test . and when all these test be end the evil one go away from him for a time . and jesus come back to galilee in the power of the spirit and the news of him go through all the country round about . and he be teach in their synagogue and all men give him praise . and he come to nazareth where he have be a a child and he go a his way be into the synagogue on the sabbath and get up to give a reading . and the book of the prophet isaiah be give to him and open the book he come on the place where it be say the spirit of the lord be on me because i be mark out by him to give good news to the poor he have send me to make well those who be break hearted to say that the prisoner will be let go and the blind will see and to make the wounded free from their chain to give knowledge that the year of the lord 's good pleasure be come . and shut the book he give it back to the servant and take his seat and the eye of all in the synagogue be fix on him . then he say to them today this word have come true in your hearing . and they be all give witness with wonder to the word of grace which come from his mouth and they say be not this the son of joseph ? and he say to them without doubt you will say to me let the medical man make himself well the thing which to our knowledge be do at capernaum do them here in your country . and he say to them truly i say to you no prophet be honour in his country . truly i say to you there be a number of widow in israel in the day of elijah when the heaven be shut up for three year and six month and there be no food in the land but elijah be not send to one of them but only to zarephath in the land of sidon to a woman who be a widow . and there be a number of leper in israel in the time of elisha the prophet and not one of them be make clean but only naaman the syrian . and all who be in the synagogue be very angry when these thing be say to them . and they get up and take him out of the town to the edge of the mountain on which their town be so that they might send him down to his death . but he come through them and go on his way . and he come down to capernaum a town of galilee and he be give them teach on the sabbath . and they be surprise at his teach for his word be with authority . and there be a man in the synagogue who have an unclean spirit and he give a loud cry and say let u be ! what have we to do with you jesus of nazareth ? have you come to put an end to u ? i have knowledge who you be the holy one of god . and jesus say to him be quiet and come out of him . and when the evil spirit have put him down on the earth in the middle of them he come out of him have do him no damage . and wonder come on them all and they say to one another what be these word ? for with authority and power he give order to the evil spirit and they come out . and there be much talk about him in all the place round about . and he get up and go out of the synagogue and go into the house of simon . and simon 's wife 's mother be very ill with a burning heat and in answer to their prayer for her he go near her and with a sharp word he give order to the disease and it go away from her and straight away she get up and take care of their need . and at sundown all those who have anyone ill with any sort of disease take them to him and he put his hand on every one of them and make them well . and evil spirit come out of a number of them cry out and say you be the son of god . but he give them sharp order not to say a word because they have knowledge that he be the christ . and when it be day he come out and go to a waste place and great number of people come look for him and they come to him and would have keep him from go away . but he say to them i have to give the good news of the kingdom of god in other town because that be why i be send . and he be teach in the synagogue of galilee .now it come about that while the people come push to be near him and to have knowledge of the word of god he be by a wide stretch of water name gennesaret and he saw two boat by the edge of the water but the fisherman have go out of them and be wash their net . and he get into one of the boat the property of simon and make a request to him to go a little way out from the land . and be seat he give the people teach from the boat . and when his talk be end he say to simon go out into deep water and let down your net for fish . and simon answering say master we be work all night and we take nothing but at your word i will let down the net . and when they have do this they get such a great number of fish that it seem a if their net would be break and they make sign to their friend in the other boat to come to their help . and they come and the two boat be so full that they be go down . but simon when he saw it go down at the knee of jesus and say go away from me o lord for i be a sinner . for he be full of wonder and so be all those who be with him at the number of fish which they have take and so be james and john the son of zebedee who be work with simon . and jesus say to simon have no fear from this time forward you will be a fisher of men . and when they have get their boat to the land they give up everything and go after him . and it come about that while he be in one of the town there be a leper there and when he saw jesus he go down on his face in prayer to him say lord if it be your pleasure you have power to make me clean . and he put out his hand to him and say it be my pleasure be clean . and straight away his disease go from him . and he give him order say nothing to any man but let the priest see you and give an offering so that you may be make clean a the law of moses say and for a witness to them . but news of him go out all the more in every direction and great number of people come together to give hearing to his word and to be make well from their disease . but he go away by himself to a waste place for prayer . and it come about that on one of these day he be teach and some pharisee and teacher of the law be seat there who have come from every town of galilee and judaea and from jerusalem and the power of the lord be with him to make those who be ill free from their disease . and some men have with them on a bed a man who be ill without power of move and they make attempt to get him in and put him before jesus . and because of the mass of people there be no way to get him in so they go up on the top of the house and let him down through the roof on his bed into the middle in front of jesus . and see their faith he say man you have forgiveness for your sin . and the scribe and pharisee be have an argument say who be this who have no respect for god ? who be able to give forgiveness for sin but god only ? but jesus who have knowledge of their thought say to them why be you reason in your heart ? which be the simpler to say you have forgiveness for your sin or to say get up and go ? but so that you may see that on earth the son of man have authority for the forgiveness of sin he say to the man who be ill i say to you get up and take up your bed and go into your house . and straight away he get up before them and take up his bed and go away to his house give praise to god . and wonder overcame them all and they give glory to god and they be full of fear say we have see strange thing today . and after these thing he go out and saw levi a tax farmer seat at the place where tax be take and say to him come after me . and give up his business he get up and go after him . and levi make a great feast for him in his house and a great number of tax farmer and others be seat at table with them . and the pharisee and their scribe make protest against his disciple say why do you take food and drink with tax farmer and sinner ? and jesus answering say to them those who be well have no need of a medical man but those who be ill. i have come not to get the upright but sinner so that they may be turn from their sin . and they say to him the disciple of john frequently go without food and make prayer and so do the disciple of the pharisee but your disciple take food and drink . and jesus say be you able to make the friend of the newly marry man go without food when he be with them ? but the day will come when he will be take away from them and then they will go without food . and he say to them in a story no man take a bit of cloth from a new coat and put it on to an old coat for so the new coat would be damage and the bit from the new would not go well with the old . and no man put new wine into old wine skin for fear that the skin will be burst by the new wine and the wine be let out and the skin come to destruction . but new wine have to be put into new wine skin . and no man have have old wine have any desire for new for he say the old be well .now it come about that on the sabbath he be go through the field of grain and his disciple take the head of the grain for food crush them in their hand . but some of the pharisee say why do you do what it be not right to do on the sabbath ? and jesus say have you not see in the writing what david do when he be in need of food he and those who be with him how he go into the house of god and take for food the holy bread which only the priest may take and give it to those who be with him ? and he say the son of man be lord even of the sabbath . and it come about on another sabbath that he go into the synagogue and be teach there . and a man be there whose right hand be dead . and the scribe and pharisee be watch him to see if he would make him well on the sabbath so that they might be able to say something against him . but he have knowledge of their thought and he say to the man whose hand be dead get up and come into the middle . and he get up and come forward . and jesus say i put the question to you be it right to do good on the sabbath or to do evil ? to give life or to take it away ? and look round on all of them he say to him put out your hand . and he do so and his hand be make well . but they be full of wrath and be talk together about what they might do to jesus . and it come about in those day that he go out to the mountain for prayer and he be all night in prayer to god . and the day come and turn to his disciple he make a selection from among them of twelve to whom he give the name of apostle simon to whom he give the name of peter and andrew his brother and james and john and philip and bartholomew and matthew and thomas and jam the son of alphaeus and simon who be name the zealot and judas the son of james and juda iscariot he who be false to him . and he come down with them to a level place and a great band of his disciple and a very great number of people from all judaea and jerusalem and from the part of tyre and sidon by the sea come to give hearing to him and to be make well from their disease and those who be trouble with unclean spirit be make well . and all the people be desire to be touch by him for power come from him and make them all well . and turn his eye to his disciple he say happy be you who be poor for the kingdom of god be yours . happy be you who be in need of food now for you will be make full . happy be you who be weep now for you will be glad . happy be you when men have hate for you and put you away from among them and say angry word to you turn away in disgust at your name because of the son of man . be glad in that day and be lift up for joy for your reward in heaven will be great for their father do these same thing to the prophet . but unhappy be you who have wealth for you have be comfort now . unhappy be you who be full of food now for you will be in need . unhappy be you who be laugh now for you will be cry in sorrow . unhappy be you when all men give you their approval for so their father do to the false prophet . but i say to you who give ear to me have love for those who be against you do good to those who have hate for you give bless to those who give you curse say prayer for those who be cruel to you . if a man give you a blow on one side of your face then let the other side be turn to him from him who take away your coat do not keep back your robe . give to everyone who come with a request and if a man take away your property make no attempt to get it back again . do to others a you would have them do to you . if you have love for those who have love for you what credit be it to you ? for even sinner have love for those who have love for them . and if you do good to those who do good to you what credit be it to you ? for even sinner do the same . and if you let those have the use of your money from whom you be hop to get it back what credit be it to you ? even sinner do so to sinner hop to get back as much a they give . but be love to those who be against you and do them good and give them your money not give up hope and your reward will be great and you will be the son of the most high for he be kind to evil men and to those who have hard heart . be full of pity even a your father be full of pity . be not judge of others and you will not be judge do not give punishment to others and you will not get punishment yourselves make others free and you will be make free give and it will be give to you good measure crush down full and run over they will give to you . for in the same measure a you give it will be give to you again . and he give them teach in the form of a story say be it possible for one blind man to be guide to another ? will they not go fall together into a hole ? the disciple be not great than his master but everyone whose learning be complete will be like his master . and why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother 's eye but take no note of the bit of wood which be in your eye ? how will you say to your brother brother let me take the grain of dust out of your eye when you yourself do not see the bit of wood in your eye ? o false one ! first take the wood out of your eye and then you will see clearly to take the dust out of your brother 's eye . for no good tree give bad fruit and no bad tree give good fruit . for every tree be judge by it fruit . men do not get fig from thorn or grape from blackberry plant . the good man out of the good store of his heart give good thing and the evil man out of his evil store give evil for out of the full store of the heart come the word of the mouth . why do you say to me lord lord and do not the thing which i say ? everyone who come to me and give ear to my word and do them i will make clear to you what he be like he be like a man build a house who go deep and put the base of it on a rock and when the water come up and the river be drive against that house it be not move because the building be good . but he who give hear without do be like a man build a house on the earth without a base for it and when the force of the river come against it straight away it come down and the destruction of that house be great .after he have come to the end of all his word in the hearing of the people he go into capernaum . and a certain captain have a servant who be very dear to him this servant be ill and near to death . and when news of jesus come to his ear he send to him ruler of the jew request that he would come and make his servant well . and they when they come to jesus make their request warmly say it be right for you to do this for him because he be a friend to our nation and himself have put up a synagogue for u . and jesus go with them . and when he be not far from the house the man send friend to him say lord do not give yourself trouble for i be not important enough for you to come into my house and i have the feeling that i be not even good enough to come to you but say the word only and my servant will be well . for i myself be a man under authority have men under me and i say to this one go and he go and to another come and he come and to my servant do this and he do it . and when these thing be say to jesus he be surprised and turn to the mass of people come after him say i have not see such great faith no not in israel . and when those who be send come back to the house they saw that the servant be well . and it come about after a little time that he go to a town name nain and his disciple go with him and a great number of people . now when he come near the door of the town a dead man be be take out the only son of his mother who be a widow and a great number of people from the town be with her . and when the lord saw her he have pity on her and say to her be not sad . and he come near and put his hand on the stretcher where the dead man be and those who be move it come to a stop . and he say young man i say to you get up . and the dead man get up and word come from his lip . and he give him to his mother . and fear come on all and they give praise to god say a great prophet be among u and god have give think to his people . and this story about him go through all judaea and the place round about . and the disciple of john give him an account of all these thing . then john send two of his disciple to the lord say be you he who be to come or be we wait for another ? and when the men come to him they say john the baptist have send u to you say be you he who be to come or be we wait for another ? at that time he make a number of people free from their disease and their pain and from evil spirit and to others who be blind he give back the use of their eye . and answer them he say go back and give news to john of what you have see and the thing which have come to your ear the blind now see those who have no power in their leg be walk leper be make clean those who have no hearing now have their ear open dead men come to life again and the poor have the good news give to them . and a blessing will be on him who have no doubt about me . and when the men who be send by john have go away he say to the people about john what do you go out into the waste land to see ? a tall stem move in the wind ? but what do you go out to see ? a man in soft clothing ? see now those who have beautiful clothing and delicate food be in king ' house . but what do you go out to see ? a prophet ? yes i say to you and more than a prophet . this be he of whom it have be say see i send my servant before your face who will make ready your way before you . i say to you among all the son of woman not one be great than john but he who be least in the kingdom of god be great than he . and all the people and the tax farmer to whom john have give baptism when they have knowledge of these thing give glory to god . but the pharisee and the teacher of the law be against the purpose of god for themselves not have have his baptism . what comparison be i to make of the men of this generation ? what be they like ? they be like child who be seat in the market place cry out to one another and say we make music for you but you do not take part in the dance we give cry of sorrow but you be not sad . for john the baptist come take no food or drink and you say he have an evil spirit . the son of man come feasting and you say here be a lover of food and wine a friend of tax farmer and sinner . but wisdom be judge to be right by all her child . and one of the pharisee make a request that he would take a meal with him . and he go into the pharisee 's house and take his seat at the table . and there be a woman in the town who be a sinner and when she have news that he be a guest in the pharisee 's house she take a bottle of perfume and go in and take her place at the back of him near his foot weep so that his foot be wash with the drop from her eye and with her hair she make them dry and kiss his foot she put the perfume on them . now when the pharisee in whose house he be saw it he say to himself this man if he be a prophet would be conscious what sort of woman this be who have put her hand on him that she be a sinner . and jesus answering say simon i have something to say to you . and he say master say on . and he say two men be in debt to a certain man of business one have a debt of five hundred penny and the other of fifty . when they be unable to make payment he make the two of them free of their debt . which of them now will have the great love for him ? simon in answer say it seem he whose debt be great . and he say your decision be right . and turn to the woman he say to simon you see this woman ? i come into your house you do not give me water for my foot but she have be wash my foot with the drop from her eye and dry them with her hair . you do not give me a kiss but she from the time when i come in have go on kiss my foot . you put no oil on my head but she have put perfume on my foot . and so i say to you she will have forgiveness for her sin which be great in number because of her great love but he who have small need of forgiveness give little love . and he say to her you have forgiveness for your sin . and those who be seat at table with him say to themselves who be this who even give forgiveness of sin ? and he say to the woman by your faith you have salvation go in peace .and it come about after a short time that he go through town and country give the good news of the kingdom of god and with him be the twelve and certain woman who have be make free from evil spirit and disease mary name magdalene from whom seven evil spirit have go out and joanna the wife of chuza herod 's chief house servant and susanna and a number of others who give him of their wealth for his need . and when a great number of people come together and men from every town go out to him he give them teach in the form of a story a man go out to put in seed and while he be do it some be drop by the wayside and it be crush under foot and be take by the bird of heaven . and some go on the rock and when it come up it become dry and dead because it have no water . and some go among thorn and the thorn come up with it and it have no room for growth . and some fall on good earth come up and give fruit a hundred time a much . and with these word he say in a loud voice he who have ear let him give ear . and his disciple put question to him about the point of the story . and he say to you be give knowledge of the secret of the kingdom of god but to the others they be give in story so that see they may not see and though they give hear the sense will not be clear to them . now this be the point of the story the seed be the word of god . those by the side of the road be those who have give hearing then the evil one come and take away the word from their heart so that they may not have faith and get salvation . and those on the rock be those who with joy give hearing to the word but have no root they have faith for a time and when the test come they give up . and those which go among thorn be those who have give hearing and go on their way but they be overcome by care and wealth and the pleasure of life and they give no fruit . and those in the good earth be those who have give ear to the word keep it with a good and true heart and in quiet strength give fruit . no man when the light be light put a cover over it or put it under a bed but he put it on it table so that those who come in may see the light . for nothing be put out of view which will not be make clear and nothing be secret of which the knowledge will not come to light . so take care how you give hear for to him who have will be give and from him who have not will be take even what he seem to have . and his mother and his brother come to him and they be not able to get near him because of the great number of people . and someone say to him your mother and your brother be outside desire to see you . but he say to them in answer my mother and my brother be those who have knowledge of the word of god and do it . now it come about on one of those day that he get into a boat with his disciple and he say to them let u go over to the other side of the water and they put out the boat . but while they be sail he go to sleep and a storm of wind come down on the sea and the boat become full of water and they be in danger . then they come to him and awake him out of his sleep say master master destruction be near . and he when he be awake give order to the wind and the roll wave and the storm come to an end and all be calm . and he say to them where be your faith ? and fear and wonder overcome them and they say to one another who then be this who give order even to the wind and the water and they do what he say ? and they come to the country of the gerasenes which be opposite galilee . and when he have come to the land there come to him a certain man from the town who have evil spirit and for a long time he have have no clothing on and be not live in a house but in the place of the dead . and when he saw jesus he give a loud cry and go down on the earth before him and in a loud voice say what have i to do with you jesus son of the most high god ? do not be cruel to me . for he give an order to the evil spirit to come out of the man . for frequently it would take a grip of him and he be keep under control and prisoned with chain but part the chain in two he would be send by the driving of the evil spirit into waste place . and jesus say to him what be your name ? and he say legion for a number of spirit have go into him . and they make a request to him that he would not give them an order to go away into the deep . now there be a great herd of pig in that place get food on the mountain and the evil spirit make a request to him that he would let them go into the pig and he let them . and the evil spirit come out of the man and go into the pig and the herd go rush down a sharp slope into the water and come to destruction . and when the men who take care of them saw what have come about they go quickly and give news of it in the town and the country . and they go out to see what have take place and they come to jesus and saw the man out of whom the evil spirit have go seat clothed and with full use of his sens at the foot of jesus and fear come on them . and those who have see it give them an account of how the man who have the evil spirit be make well . and all the people of the country of the gerasenes make a request to him to go away from them for they be in great fear and he get into a boat and go back . but the man from whom the evil spirit have go out have a great desire to be with him but he send him away say go back to your house and let them have news of all the great thing which god have do for you . and he go away give word through all the town of the great thing which jesus have do for him . and when jesus go back the people be glad to see him for they be all wait for him . then there come a man name jairus who be a ruler in the synagogue and he go down at the foot of jesus desire him to come to his house for he have an only daughter about twelve year old and she be near to death . but while he be on his way the people be push to be near him . and a woman who have have a flow of blood for twelve year and have give all her money to medical men and not one of them be able to make her well come after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe and straight away the flowing of her blood be stop . and jesus say who be touch me ? and when they all say it be not i peter and those who be with him say master the people be push round you on every side . but jesus say someone be touch me for i have the feeling that power have go out from me . and when the woman saw that she be not able to keep it secret she come shake with fear and fall down before him she make clear before all the people the reason for her touch him and how she be make well straight away . and he say to her daughter your faith have make you well go in peace . while he be still talk someone come from the house of the ruler of the synagogue say your daughter be dead do not go on trouble the master . but jesus at these word say to him have no fear only have faith and she will be make well . and when he come to the house he do not let any man go in with him but only peter and john and james and the father of the girl and her mother . and all the people be weep and cry for her but he say do not be sad for she be not dead but sleep . and they be laugh at him be certain that she be dead . but he take her hand say to her my child get up . and her spirit come back to her and she get up straight away and he give order that food be to be give to her . and her father and mother be full of wonder but he give order to them to say nothing about it to anyone .and get the twelve together he give them power and authority over all evil spirit and over diseases to make them well . and he send them out to be preacher of the kingdom of god and to make well those who be ill. and he say to them take nothing for your journey no stick or bag or bread or money and do not take two coat . and if you go into a house let that house be your rest place till you go away . and if any people will not take you in when you go away from that town put off it dust from your foot for a witness against them . and they go away journey through all the town preach the good news and make people free from disease in all place . now herod the king have news of all these thing and he be in doubt because it be say by some people that john have come back from the dead and by some that elijah have come and by others that one of the old prophet have come back to life . and herod say i put john to death but who be this of whom such story be give to me ? and he have a desire to see him . and the twelve when they come back give him an account of what they have do . and he take them with him and go away from the people to a town name beth saida . but the people get news of it go after him and he be pleased to see them and give them teach about the kingdom of god and make those well who be in need of it . and the day go on and the twelve come to him and say send these people away so that they may go into the town and the country round about and get resting place and food for themselves for we be in a waste place . but he say give them food yourselves . and they say we have only five cake of bread and two fish if we do not go and get food for all these people . for there be about five thousand men . and he say to his disciple make them be seat in group about fifty to a group . and they do so and make them all be seat . and he take the five cake of bread and the two fish and look up to heaven he say word of blessing over them and when they have be break he give them to the disciple to give to the people . and they all take the food and have enough and they take up of the broken bit which be over twelve basket full . and it come about that when he be in prayer by himself and the disciple be with him he put a question to them say who do the people say i be ? and they answer say john the baptist but others say elijah and others that one of the old prophet have come back . and he say but who do you say that i be ? and peter answering say the christ of god . but he give them special order not to say this to any man say the son of man will undergo much and be put on one side by the ruler and the chief priest and the teacher of the law and be put to death and on the third day he will come back to life . and he say to them all if any man have a desire to come after me let him give up all and take up his cross every day and come after me . for whoever have a desire to keep his life will have it take from him but whoever give up his life because of me will keep it . for what profit will a man have if he get all the world but undergoes loss or destruction himself ? for if any man have a feeling of shame because of me or of my word the son of man will have shame because of him when he come in his glory and the glory of the father and of the holy angel . but truly i say to you some of those who be here now will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of god . and about eight day after he have say these thing he take peter and john and james with him and go up into the mountain for prayer . and while he be in prayer his face be change and his clothing become white and shin . and two men moses and elijah be talk with him who be see in glory and be talk of his death which be about to take place in jerusalem . now peter and those who be with him be overcome with sleep but when they be fully awake they saw his glory and the two men who be with him . and when they be about to go away from him peter say to jesus master it be good for u to be here let u make three tent one for you and one for moses and one for elijah have no knowledge of what he be say . and while he say these thing the shade of a cloud come over them and they be full of fear when they go into the cloud . and there be a voice from the cloud say this be my son the man of my selection give ear to him . and after the voice be go they saw that jesus be by himself . and they keep quiet and say nothing at that time to anyone of the thing which they have see . and on the day after when they come down from the mountain a great band of people come to him . and a man from among them cry out say master i make a request to you give a thought to my son for he be my only child and see a spirit take him and suddenly he give a cry twist in pain and streaming at the lip and when it go away from him at last he be mark a from blow . and i make a request to your disciple to send it out of him but they be not able to do it . and jesus say o generation without faith and false in heart how long will i have to be with you and put up with you ? let your son come here . and while he be come he be push violently down and twist by the evil spirit . but jesus give sharp order to the unclean spirit and make the boy well and give him back to his father . and they be full of wonder at the great power of god . but while they be all wonder at all the thing which he do he say to his disciple let these word go deep into your ear for the son of man will be give up into the hand of men . but this say be not clear to them and it sense be keep secret from them so that they be not able to see it and they have fear of question him about it . now there be a discussion among them about which of them would be the great . but when jesus saw the reasoning of their heart he take a small child and put him by his side and say to them whoever give honour to this child in my name give honour to me and whoever give honour to me give honour to him who send me for whoever be least among you all that man be great . and john answering say master we saw a man drive out evil spirit in your name and we do not let him do it because he be not one of u . but jesus say to him let him do it for he who be not against you be for you . and it come about that when the day be near for him to be take up his face be turn to go to jerusalem and he send men before and they come to a small town of samaria to make ready for him . but they would not have him there because he be clearly go to jerusalem . and when his disciple james and john saw this they say lord may we send fire from heaven and put an end to them ? but turn round he say sharp word to them . and they go to another small town . and when they be on the way a certain man say to him i will come after you wherever you go . and jesus say to him fox have hole and the bird of the air have rest place but the son of man have nowhere to put his head . and he say to another come after me . but he say lord let me first go and give the last honour to my father . but he say to him let the dead take care of their dead it be for you to go and give news of the kingdom of god . and another man say i will come with you lord but first let me say a last good day to those who be at my house . but jesus say no man have put his hand to the plough and look back be good enough for the kingdom of god .now after these thing the lord make selection of seventy others and send them before him two together into every town and place where he himself be about to come . and he say to them there be much grain ready to be cut but not enough worker so make prayer to the lord of the grain field that he will send worker to get in the grain . go on your way see i send you out like lamb among wolf . take no bag for money or for food and no shoe say no word to any man on the way . and whenever you go into a house first say peace be to this house . and if a son of peace be there your peace will be with him but if not it will come back to you again . and keep in that same house take what food and drink they give you for the worker have a right to his reward . do not go from house to house . and into whatever town you go if they take you in take whatever food be give to you and make well those in it who be ill and say to them the kingdom of god be near to you . but if you go into a town where they will not have you go out into the street of it and say even the dust of your town which be on our foot we put off a a witness against you but be certain of this that the kingdom of god be near . i say to you it will be well in that day for sodom than for that town . a curse be on you chorazin ! a curse be on you beth saida ! for if such work of power have be do in tyre and sidon as have be do in you they would have be turn from their sin in day go by seat in the dust . but it will be good for tyre and sidon in the day of judge than for you . and you capernaum be you not lift up to heaven ? you will go down to hell . whoever give ear to you give ear to me and whoever be against you be against me and whoever be against me be against him who send me . and the seventy come back with joy say lord even the evil spirit be under our power in your name . and he say i be watch for satan fall from heaven like a star . see i have give you power to put your foot on snake and evil beast and over all the strength of him who be against you and nothing will do you damage . do not be glad however because you have power over spirit but because your name be record in heaven . in that same hour he be full of joy in the holy spirit and say i give praise to you o father lord of heaven and earth because you have keep these thing secret from the wise and the men of learning and have make them clear to little child for so o father it be please in your eye . all thing have be give to me by my father and no one have knowledge of the son but only the father and of the father but only the son and he to whom the son will make it clear . and turn to the disciple he say privately happy be the eye which see the thing you see for i say to you that number of prophet and king have have a desire to see the thing which you see and have not see them and to have knowledge of the thing which have come to your ear and they have it not . and a certain teacher of the law get up and put him to the test say master what have i to do so that i may have eternal life ? and he say to him what do the law say in your reading of it ? and he answer say have love for the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind and for your neighbour a for yourself . and he say you have give the right answer do this and you will have life . but he desire to put himself in the right say to jesus and who be my neighbour ? and jesus answer him say a certain man be go down from jerusalem to jericho and he get into the hand of thief who take his clothing and give him cruel blow and when they go away he be half dead . and by chance a certain priest be go down that way and when he saw him he go by on the other side . and in the same way a levite when he come to the place and saw him go by on the other side . but a certain man of samaria journeying that way come where he be and when he saw him he be move with pity for him and come to him and put clean linen round his wound with oil and wine and he put him on his beast and take him to a house and take care of him . and the day after he take two penny and give them to the owner of the house and say take care of him and if this money be not enough when i come again i will give you whatever more be need . which of these three men in your opinion be neighbour to the man who come into the hand of thief ? and he say the one who have mercy on him . and jesus say go and do the same . now while they be on their way he come to a certain town and a woman name martha take him into her house . and she have a sister by name mary who take her seat at the lord 's foot and give attention to his word . but martha have her hand full of the work of the house and she come to him and say lord be it nothing to you that my sister have let me do all the work ? say to her that she be to give me some help . but the lord answering say to her martha martha you be full of care and trouble about such a number of thing little be need or even one thing only for mary have take that good part which will not be take away from her .and it come about that he be in prayer in a certain place and when he come to an end one of his disciple say to him lord will you give u teach about prayer a john do to his disciple ? and he say to them when you say your prayer say father may your name be keep holy and your kingdom come . give u every day bread for our need . may we have forgiveness for our sin a we make free all those who be in debt to u . and let u not be put to the test . and he say to them which of you have a friend would go to him in the middle of the night and say to him friend let me have three cake of bread because a friend of mine have come to me on a journey and i have nothing to put before him and he from inside the house would say in answer do not be a trouble to me the door be now shut and my child be with me in bed it be not possible for me to get up and give to you ? i say to you though he will not get up and give to him because he be his friend still if he keep on make his request he will get up and give him as much a he have need of . and i say to you make request and they will be answer what you be search for you will get when you give the sign the door will be open to you . for to everyone who make a request it will be give and he who be search will get his desire and to him who give the sign the door will be open . and which of you be a father will give a stone to his son who make request for bread ? or for a fish will give him a snake ? or for an egg will give him a scorpion ? if then you who be evil be able to give good thing to your child how much more will your father in heaven give the holy spirit to those who make request to him ? and he be send an evil spirit out of a man who be without the power of talk . and it come about that when the spirit have go the man have the power of talk and the people be full of wonder . but some of them say he send out evil spirit by beelzebul the ruler of evil spirit . and others test him be look for a sign from heaven from him . but he have knowledge of their thought say to them every kingdom in which there be division be make waste and a house in which there be division come to destruction . if then satan be at war with himself how will he keep his kingdom ? because you say that i send evil spirit out of men by the help of beelzebul . and if i by beelzebul send out evil spirit by whose help do your son send them out ? so let them be your judge . but if i by the finger of god send out evil spirit then the kingdom of god have overtake you . when the strong man arm keep watch over his house then his good be safe but when one who be strong make an attack on him and overcome him he take away his instrument of war in which he have put his faith and make division of his good . he who be not with me be against me and he who will not give me help in get people together be drive them away . the unclean spirit when he have go out of a man go through dry place look for rest and when he do not get it he say i will go back to my house from which i come . and when he come he see that it have be make fair and clean . then he go and get seven other spirit more evil than himself and they go in and take their place there and the last condition of that man be bad than the first . and it come about that when he say these thing a certain woman among the people say in a loud voice happy be the body which give you birth and the breast from which you take milk . but he say more happy be they who give hearing to the word of god and keep it . and when a great number of people come together to him he say this generation be an evil generation it be look for a sign and no sign will be give to it but the sign of jonah . for even a jonah become a sign to the ninevites so will the son of man be to this generation . the queen of the south will come up on the day of judging and give her decision against the men of this generation for she come from the end of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of solomon and now something great than solomon be here . the men of nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation for they be turn away from their sin at the preaching of jonah but now something great than jonah be here . no man when the light have be light put it in a secret place or under a vessel but on it table so that those who come in may see the light . the light of the body be the eye when your eye be true all your body be full of light but when it be evil your body be dark . so take care that the light which be in you be not dark . if then all your body be light with no part of it dark it will be completely full of light a when a flame with it bright shin give you light . now while he be talk a pharisee make a request that he would come to a meal with him and he go in and take his seat at the meal . and when the pharisee saw it he be surprised because he come to the meal without first wash himself . and the lord say to him you pharisee make the outside of the cup and the plate clean but inside you be thief and full of evil . o you foolish one ! do not he who make the outside in the same way make the inside ? but if you give to the poor such thing a you be able then all thing be clean to you . but a curse be on you pharisees ! for you make men give a tenth of every sort of plant and give no thought to right and the love of god but it be right for you to do these thing and not let the others be undone . a curse be on you pharisees ! for your desire be for the most important seat in the synagogue and for word of respect say to you in the market place . a curse be on you ! for you be like the rest place of dead men which be not see and men go walk over them without knowledge of it . and one of the teacher of the law answer say to him master in say this you give a bad name to u a to them . and he say a curse be on you teacher of the law ! for while other men be crush under the weight of the rule you make for them you yourselves do not put so much a one finger to them . a curse be on you ! for you make rest place for the body of the prophet but your father put them to death . so you be witness and give approval to the work of your father for they put them to death and you make their last resting place . for this reason the wisdom of god have say i will send them prophet and teacher and to some of them they will give death and cruel pain so that punishment may come on this generation for the blood of all the prophet which be give from the early day from the blood of abel to the blood of zachariah who be put to death between the altar and the temple . yes i say to you it will come on this generation . a curse be on you teacher of the law ! for you have take away the key of knowledge you do not go in yourselves and you get in the way of those who be go in . and when he have come out of that place the scribe and the pharisee come round him angrily question him about more thing and watch him for a chance to get something from his word which might be use against him .at that time when thousand of the people have come together in such number that they be crush one another he say first to his disciple have nothing to do with the leaven of the pharisee which be deceit . but nothing be cover up which will not come to light or secret which will not be make clear . so whatever you have say in the dark will come to men 's hearing in the light and what you have say secretly inside the house will be make public from the house top . and i say to you my friend have no fear of those who may put the body to death and be able to do no more than that . but i will make clear to you of whom you be to be in fear of him who after death have power to send you to hell yes truly i say have fear of him . be not five sparrow give in exchange for two farthing ? and god have every one of them in mind . but even the hair of your head be number . have no fear you be of more value than a flock of sparrow . and i say to you that to everyone who give witness to me before men the son of man will give witness before the angel of god . but if anyone say before men that he have no knowledge of me i will say that i have no knowledge of him before the angel of god . and if anyone say a word against the son of man he will have forgiveness but for him who say evil word against the holy spirit there will be no forgiveness . and when they take you before the synagogue and the authority and the ruler take no thought about what answer you will give or what you will say for the holy spirit will make clear to you in that very hour what to say . and one of the people say to him master give an order to my brother to make division of the heritage with me . but he say man who make me a judge or a maker of decision for you ? and he say to them take care to keep yourselves free from the desire for property for a man 's life be not make up of the number of thing which he have . and he say to them in a story the land of a certain man of great wealth be very fertile and he say to himself what be to be do ? for i have no place in which to put all my fruit . and he say this i will do i will take down my store house and make great one and there i will put all my grain and my good . and i will say to my soul soul you have a great amount of good in store enough for a number of year be at rest take food and wine and be happy . but god say to him you foolish one tonight i will take your soul from you and who then will be the owner of all the thing which you have get together ? so that be what come to the man who get wealth for himself and have not wealth in the eye of god . and he say to his disciple for this reason i say to you take no thought for your life about what food you will take or for your body how it may be clothe . be not life more than food and the body than it clothing ? give thought to the raven they do not put seed into the earth or get together grain they have no store house or building and god give them their food of how much great value be you than the bird ! and which of you by take thought be able to make himself any taller ? if then you be not able to do even that which be least why be you troubled about the rest ? give thought to the flower they do no work they make no thread and still i say to you even solomon in all his glory be not clothe like one of these . but if god give such clothing to the grass in the field which today be live and tomorrow will be burn in the oven how much more will he give clothing to you o men of little faith ? and do not give overmuch think to your food and drink and let not your mind be full of doubt . for the nation of the world go in search of all these thing but your father have knowledge that you have need of them . but let your chief care be for his kingdom and these other thing will be give to you in addition . have no fear little flock for it be your father 's good pleasure to give you the kingdom . give what property you have in exchange for money and give the money to the poor make for yourselves money bag which will not get old wealth store up in heaven which will be yours for ever where thief will not come nor worm put it to destruction . for where your wealth be there will your heart be . be ready dress a for a journey with your light burning . and be like men who be look for their lord when he come back from the bride feast so that when he come to the door it will be open to him quickly . happy be those servant who be watch when the lord come truly i say to you he will make himself their servant and place them at the table he will come out and give them food . and if he come in the second division of the night or in the third and they be watch for him happy be those servant . but be certain of this that if the master of the house have have knowledge of the time when the thief be come he would have be watch and would not have let his house be break into . so be ready for the son of man be come at a time when you be not look for him . and peter say to him lord be these word say to u only or to all men ? and the lord say who then be the wise and responsible servant whom his lord will put in control of his family to give them their food at the right time ? happy be that servant who when his lord come be do so . truly i say to you he will put him in control of all his good . but if that servant say to himself my lord be a long time come and go about give blow to the men servant and the woman servant feast and take overmuch wine the lord of that servant will come at a time when he be not look for him and at an hour when he be not ready for him and he will have him cut in two and will give him his part in the fate of those who have no faith and the servant who have knowledge of his lord 's desire and be not ready for him and do not do a he be order will be give a great number of blow but he who without knowledge do thing for which punishment be give will get only a small number of blow . the man to whom much be give will have to give much if much be give into his care of him more will be request . i come to send a fire on the earth and it may even now have be light . but there be a baptism which i have to undergo and how be i keep back till it be complete ! be it your opinion that i have come to give peace on earth ? i say to you no but division for from this time a family of five in one house will be on opposite side three against two and two against three . they will be at war the father against his son and the son against his father mother against daughter and daughter against mother mother in law against daughter in law and daughter in law against mother in law . then he say to the people when you see a cloud come up in the west straight away you say there will be rain and so it be . and when you see a south wind blowing you say there will be heat and so it be . o false one ! the face of the earth and the heaven be clear to you how be it that the sign of these time be not a clear to you ? and why be you in your heart unable to be judge of what be right ? for if anyone have a cause at law against you and you be go with him before the ruler make an attempt on the way to come to an agreement with him for if you do not he may take you before the judge and the judge will give you up to the police and they will put you in prison . i say to you you will not come out of it till you have make payment to the very last farthing .now some people who be there at that time give him an account of how the blood of some galilaean have be mix by pilate with their offering . and he in answer say to them be you of the opinion that these galilaean be bad than all other galilaean because these thing be do to them ? i say to you it be not so but if your heart be not change you will all come to the same end . or those eighteen men who be crush by the fall of the tower of siloam be they bad than all the other men live in jerusalem ? i say to you it be not so but if your heart be not change you will all come to an end in the same way . and he make up this story for them a certain man have a fig tree in his garden and he come to get fruit from it and there be no fruit . and he say to the gardener see for three year i have be look for fruit from this tree and i have not have any let it be cut down why be it take up space ? and he say lord let it be for this year and i will have the earth turn up round it and put animal waste on it to make it fertile and if after that it have fruit it be well if not let it be cut down . and he be teach in one of the synagogue on the sabbath . and there be a woman who have have a disease for eighteen year she be bent and be not able to make herself straight . and when jesus saw her he say to her woman you be make free from your disease . and he put his hand on her and she be make straight and give praise to god . and the ruler of the synagogue be angry because jesus have make her well on the sabbath and he say to the people there be six day in which men may do work so come on those day to be make well and not on the sabbath . but the lord give him an answer and say o you false men ! do you not every one of you on the sabbath let loose his ox and his as and take it to the water ? and be it not right for this daughter of abraham who have be in the power of satan for eighteen year to be make free on the sabbath ? and when he say these thing those who be against him be sham and all the people be full of joy because of the great thing which be do by him . then he say what be the kingdom of god like ? what comparison may i make of it ? it be like a grain of mustard seed which a man take and put in his garden and it become a tree and the bird of heaven make their resting place in it branch . and again he say what be the kingdom of god like ? it be like leaven which a woman put into three measure of meal and it be all leaven . and he go on his way through town and country place teach and journey to jerusalem . and someone say to him lord will only a small number have salvation ? and he say to them do your best to go in by the narrow door for i say to you a number will make the attempt to go in but will not be able to do so . when the master of the house have get up and the door have be shut and you still outside give blow on the door say lord let u in he will make answer and say i have no knowledge of where you come from . then you will say we have take food and drink with you and you be teach in our street . but he will say truly i have no knowledge of you or where you come from go away from me you worker of evil . there will be weep and cry of sorrow when you see abraham isaac and jacob and all the prophet in the kingdom of god but you yourselves be shut outside . and they will come from the east and from the west from the north and from the south and take their place in the kingdom of god . and the last will be first and the first will be last . at that time certain pharisee come to him and say go away from this place because herod 's purpose be to put you to death . and he say go and say to that fox i send out evil spirit and do work of mercy today and tomorrow and on the third day my work will be complete . but i have to go on my way today and tomorrow and the third day for it be not right for a prophet to come to his death outside jerusalem . o jerusalem jerusalem put to death the prophet and stone those who be send to her ! again and again would i have take your child to myself a a bird take her young one under her wing but you would not ! now see your house be waste and i say to you you will not see me again till you say a blessing on him who come in the name of the lord .and it come about that when he go into the house of one of the chief pharisee on the sabbath to have a meal they be watch him . and a certain man be there who have a disease . and jesus answering say to the scribe and pharisee be it right to make people well on the sabbath or not ? but they say nothing . and he make him well and send him away . and he say to them which of you whose ox or as have get into a water hole will not straight away get him out on the sabbath ? and they have no answer to that question . and he give teach in the form of a story to the guest who come to the feast when he saw how they take the best seat say to them when you get a request to come to a feast do not take the best seat for a more important man than you may be come and then the giver of the feast will come to you and say give your place to this man and you with shame will have to take the low seat . but when you come go and take the low seat so that when the giver of the feast come he may say to you friend come up high and then you will have honour in the eye of all the others who be there . for every man who give himself a high place will be put down but he who take a low place will be lift up . and he say to the master of the house when you give a feast do not send for your friend and your brother and your family or your neighbour who have wealth for they may give a feast for you and so you will get a reward . but when you give a feast send for the poor and the blind and those who be break in body and you will have a blessing because they will not be able to give you any payment and you will get your reward when the upright come back from the dead . and hear these word one of those who be at table with him say to him happy be the man who will be a guest in the kingdom of god . and he say to them a certain man give a great feast and send word of it to a number of people . and when the time have come he send his servant to say to them come for all thing be now ready . and they all give reason why they be not able to come . the first say to him i have get a new field and it be necessary for me to go and see it i be full of regret that i be unable to come . and another say i have get some cattle and i be go to make a test of them i be full of regret that i be unable to come . and another say i have be marry and so i be not able to come . and the servant come back and give his master an account of these thing . then the master of the house be angry and say to the servant go out quickly into the street of the town and get the poor the blind and those who be break in body . and the servant say lord your order have be do and still there be room . and the lord say to the servant go out into the road and the field and make them come in so that my house may be full . for i say to you that not one of those who be request to come will have a taste of my feast . now a great number of people go with him . and turn round he say to them if any man come to me and have not hate for his father and mother and wife and child and brother and sister and even for his life he may not be my disciple . whoever do not take up his cross and come after me may not be my disciple . for which of you desire to put up a tower do not first give much thought to the price if he will have enough to make it complete ? for fear that if he make a start and be not able to go on with it to the end all who see it will be laugh at him and say this man make a start at building and be not able to make it complete . or what king go to war with another king will not first take thought if he will be strong enough with ten thousand men to keep off him who come against him with twenty thousand ? or while the other be still a great distance away he send representative request condition of peace . and so whoever be not ready to give up all he have may not be my disciple . for salt be good but if the taste go from it of what use be it ? it be no good for the land or for the place of waste no one have a use for it . he who have ear let him give ear .now all the tax farmer and sinner come near to give ear to him . and the pharisee and scribe be angry say this man give approval to sinner and take food with them . and he make a story for them say what man of you have a hundred sheep if one of them get loose and go away will not let the ninety nine be in the waste land by themselves and go after the wander one till he see where it be ? and when he have get it again he take it in his arm with joy . and when he get back to his house he send for his neighbour and friend say to them be glad with me for i have get back my sheep which have go away . i say to you that even so there will be more joy in heaven when one sinner be turn away from his wrongdoing than for ninety nine good men who have no need of a change of heart . or what woman have ten bit of silver if one bit have go from her hand will not get a light and go through her house search with care till she see it ? and when she have it again she get her friend and neighbour together say be glad with me for i have get back the bit of silver which have go from me . even so i say to you there be joy among the angel of god when one sinner be turn away from his wrongdoing . and he say a certain man have two son and the young of them say to his father father give me that part of your property which will be mine . and he make division of his good between them . and not long after the young son get together everything which be his and take a journey into a far away country and there all his money go in foolish living . and when everything be go there be no food to be have in that country and he be in need . and he go and put himself into the hand of one of the people of that country and he send him into his field to give the pig their food . and so great be his need that he would have be glad to take the pig ' food and no one give him anything . but when he come to his sens he say what number of my father 's servant have bread enough and more while i be near to death here through need of food ! i will get up and go to my father and will say to him father i have do wrong against heaven and in your eye i be no longer good enough to be name your son make me like one of your servant . and he get up and go to his father . but while he be still far away his father saw him and be move with pity for him and go quickly and take him in his arm and give him a kiss . and his son say to him father i have do wrong against heaven and in your eye i be no longer good enough to be name your son . but the father say to his servant get out the first robe quickly and put it on him and put a ring on his hand and shoe on his foot and get the fat young ox and put it to death and let u have a feast and be glad . for this my son who be dead be live again he have go away from me and have come back . and they be full of joy . now the old son be in the field and when he come near the house the sound of music and dance come to his ear . and he send for one of the servant question him about what it might be . and he say to him your brother have come and your father have have the young ox put to death because he have come back safely . but he be angry and would not go in and his father come out and make a request to him to come in . but he make answer and say to his father see all these year i have be your servant do your order in everything and you never give me even a young goat so that i might have a feast with my friend but when this your son come who have be waste your property with bad woman you put to death the fat young ox for him . and he say to him son you be with me at all time and all i have be yours . but it be right to be glad and to have a feast for this your brother who be dead be live again he have go away and have come back .and another time he say to the disciple there be a certain man of great wealth who have a servant and it be say to him that this servant be waste his good . and he send for him and say what be this which be say about you ? give me an account of all you have do for you will no longer be the manager of my property . and the servant say to himself what be i to do now that my lord take away my position ? i have not enough strength for work in the field and i would be sham if i make request for money from people in the street . i have come to a decision what to do so that when i be put out of my position they will take me into their house . and send for every one who be in debt to his lord he say to the first what be the amount of your debt to my lord ? and he say a hundred measure of oil . and he say take your account straight away and put down fifty . then he say to another what be the amount of your debt ? and he say a hundred measure of grain . and he say to him take your account and put down eighty . and his lord be pleased with the false servant because he have be wise for the son of this world be wiser in relation to their generation than the son of light . and i say to you make friend for yourselves through the wealth of this life so that when it come to an end you may be take into the eternal resting place . he who be true in a little be true in much he who be false in small thing be false in great . if then you have not be true in your use of the wealth of this life who will give into your care the true wealth ? and if you have not be true in your care of the property of other people who will give you that which be yours ? no man may be a servant to two master for he will have hate for the one and love for the other or he will keep to the one and have no respect for the other . you may not be servant of god and of wealth . and the pharisee who have a great love of money hear these thing be make sport of him . and he say you take care to seem right in the eye of men but god see your heart and those thing which be important in the opinion of men be evil in the eye of god . the law and the prophet be till john but then come the preaching of the kingdom of god and everyone make his way into it by force . but heaven and earth will come to an end before the small letter of the law may be drop out . everyone who put away his wife and take another be a false husband and he who be marry to a woman whose husband have put her away be no true husband to her . now there be a certain man of great wealth who be dress in fair clothing of purple and delicate linen and be shin and glad every day . and a certain poor man name lazarus be stretch out at his door full of wound desire the broken bit of food which come from the table of the man of wealth and even the dog come and put their tongue on his wound . and in time the poor man come to his end and angel take him to abraham 's breast . and the man of wealth come to his end and be put in the earth . and in hell be in great pain lift up his eye he saw abraham far away and lazarus on his breast . and he give a cry and say father abraham have mercy on me and send lazarus so that he may put the end of his finger in water and put it on my tongue for i be cruelly burn in this flame . but abraham say keep in mind my son that when you be live you have your good thing while lazarus have evil thing but now he be comfort and you be in pain . and in addition there be a deep division fix between u and you so that those who might go from here to you be not able to do so and no one may come from you to u . and he say father it be my request that you will send him to my father 's house for i have five brother and let him give them an account of these thing so that they may not come to this place of pain . but abraham say they have moses and the prophet let them give ear to what they say . and he say no father abraham but if someone go to them from the dead their heart would be change . and he say to him if they will not give attention to moses and the prophet they will not be move even if someone come back from the dead .and he say to his disciple it be necessary for cause of trouble to come about but unhappy be he by whom they come . it would be well for him if a great stone be put round his neck and he be drop into the sea before he make trouble for any of these little one . give attention to yourselves if your brother do wrong say a sharp word to him and if he have sorrow for his sin let him have forgiveness . and if he do you wrong seven time in a day and seven time come to you and say i have regret for what i have do let him have forgiveness . and the twelve say to the lord make our faith great . and the lord say if your faith be only as great a a grain of mustard seed you might say to this tree be root up and plant in the sea and it would be do . but which of you have a servant who be plough or keep sheep will say to him when he come in from the field come now and be seat and have a meal will he not say get a meal for me and make yourself ready and see to my need till i have have my food and drink and after that you may have yours ? do he give praise to the servant because he do what be order ? in the same way when you have do all the thing which be give you to do say there be no profit in u for we have only do what we be order to do . and it come about that when they be on the way to jerusalem he go through samaria and galilee . and when he go into a certain small town he come across ten men who be leper and they keep themselves at a distance say in loud voice jesus master have mercy on u . and when he saw them he say go and let the priest see you . and while they be go they be make clean . and one of them when he saw that he be clean turn back give praise to god in a loud voice and fall down on his face at the foot of jesus he give the credit to him and he be a man of samaria . and jesus say be there not ten men who be make clean ? where be the nine ? have not any of them come back to give glory to god but only this one from a strange land ? and he say to him get up and go on your way your faith have make you well . and when the pharisee put question to him about when the kingdom of god would come he give them an answer and say the kingdom of god will not come through observation and men will not say see it be here ! or there ! for the kingdom of god be among you . and he say to his disciple the time will come when you will have a great desire to see one of the day of the son of man but you will not see it . and if they say to you see it be there ! or it be here ! do not go away or go after them . for a in a thunderstorm the bright light be see from one end of the sky to the other so will the son of man be when his time come . but first he will have to undergo much and be put on one side by this generation . and a it be in the day of noah so will it be in the day of the son of man . they be feast and take wife and get marry till the day of the overflowing of the water when noah go into the ark and they all come to destruction . in the same way in the day of lot they be feast and trading they be plant and building but on the day when lot go out of sodom fire come down from heaven and destruction come on them all . so will it be in the day of the revelation of the son of man . on that day if anyone be on the roof of the house and his good be in the house let him not go down to take them away and let him who be in the field not go back to his house . keep in mind lot 's wife . if anyone make an attempt to keep his life it will be take from him but if anyone give up his life he will keep it . i say to you in that night there will be two men sleep in one bed and one will be take away and the other let go . two woman will be crush grain together one will be take away and the other let go . and they answer him say where lord ? and he say to them where the body be there will the eagle come together .and he make a story for them the point of which be that men be to go on make prayer and not get tired say there be a judge in a certain town who have no fear of god or respect for man and there be a widow in that town and she keep on come to him and say give me my right against the man who have do me wrong . and for a time he would not but later he say to himself though i have no fear of god or respect for man because this widow be a trouble to me i will give her her right for if not i will be completely tire out by her frequent come . and the lord say give ear to the word of the evil judge . and will not god do right in the cause of his saint whose cry come day and night to his ear though he be long in do it ? i say to you that he will quickly do right in their cause . but when the son of man come will there be any faith on earth ? and he make this story for some people who be certain that they be good and have a low opinion of others two men go up to the temple for prayer one a pharisee and the other a tax farmer . the pharisee take up his position say to himself these word god i give you praise because i be not like other men who take more than their right who be evil doer who be untrue to their wife or even like this tax farmer . twice in the week i go without food i give a tenth of all i have . the tax farmer on the other hand keep far away and not lift up even his eye to heaven make sign of grief and say god have mercy on me a sinner . i say to you this man go back to his house with god 's approval and not the other for everyone who make himself high will be make low and whoever make himself low will be make high . and they take their child to him so that he might put his hand on them but when the disciple saw it they say sharp word to them but jesus sent for them say let the child come to me and do not keep them away for of such be the kingdom of heaven . truly i say to you whoever do not put himself under the kingdom of god like a little child will not come into it at all . and a certain ruler put a question to him say good master what have i to do so that i may have eternal life ? and jesus say to him why do you say that i be good ? no one be good but only god . you have knowledge of what the law say do not be untrue to your wife do not put anyone to death do not take what be not yours do not give false witness give honour to your father and mother . and he say all these thing i have do from the time when i be a boy . and jesus hearing it say to him one thing you still have need of get money for your good and give it away to the poor and you will have wealth in heaven and come after me . but at these word he become very sad for he have great wealth . and jesus look at him say how hard it be for those who have wealth to get into the kingdom of god ! it be simpler for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a man who have much money to come into the kingdom of god . and those who be present say then who may have salvation ? but he say thing which be not possible with man be possible with god . and peter say see we have give up what be ours to come after you . and he say to them truly i say to you there be no man who have give up house or wife or brother or father or mother or child because of the kingdom of god who will not get much more in this time and in the world to come eternal life . and he take with him the twelve and say to them now we be go up to jerusalem and all the thing which be say by the prophet will be do to the son of man . for he will be give up to the gentile and will be make sport of and put to shame and he will be give cruel blow and put to death and on the third day he will come back to life . but they do not take in the sense of any of these word and what he say be not clear to them and their mind be not able to see it . and it come about that when he get near jericho a certain blind man be seat by the side of the road making request for money from those who go by . and hear the sound of a great number of people go by he say what be this ? and they say to him jesus of nazareth be go by . and he say in a loud voice jesus son of david have mercy on me . and those who be in front make protest and say to him be quiet but he say all the more o son of david have mercy on me . and jesus stopping give order that he be to come to him and when he come near he say to him what would you have me do for you ? and he say lord that i may be able to see again . and jesus say see again your faith have make you well . and straight away he be able to see and he go after him give glory to god and all the people when they saw it give praise to god .and he go into jericho and when he be go through it a man name zacchaeus who be the chief tax farmer and a man of wealth make an attempt to get a view of jesus and be not able to do so because of the people for he be a small man . and he go quickly in front of them and get up into a tree to see him for he be go that way . and when jesus come to the place look up he say to him zacchaeus be quick and come down for i be come to your house today . and he come down quickly and take him into his house with joy . and when they saw it they be all angry say he have go into the house of a sinner . and zacchaeus wait before him say to the lord see lord half of my good i give to the poor and if i have take anything from anyone wrongly i give him back four time as much . and jesus say to him today salvation have come to this house for even he be a son of abraham . for the son of man come to make search for those who be wander from the way and to be their saviour . and while they be give ear to these word he make another story for them because he be near jerusalem and because they be of the opinion that the kingdom of god be come straight away . so he say a certain man of high birth go into a far away country to get a kingdom for himself and to come back . and he send for ten of his servant and give them ten pound and say to them do business with this till i come . but his people have no love for him and send representative after him say we will not have this man for our ruler . and when he come back again have get his kingdom he give order for those servant to whom he have give the money to come to him so that he might have an account of what business they have do . and the first come before him say lord your pound have make ten pound . and he say to him you have do well o good servant because you have do well in a small thing you will have authority over ten town . and another come say your pound have make five pound . and he say you will be ruler over five town . and another come say lord here be your pound which i put away in a cloth because i be in fear of you for you be a hard man you take up what you have not put down and get in grain where you have not put seed . he say to him by the word of your mouth you will be judge you bad servant . you have knowledge that i be a hard man take up what i have not put down and get in grain where i have not put seed why then do you not put my money in a bank so that when i come i would get it back with interest ? and he say to the others who be near take the pound away from him and give it to the man who have ten . and they say to him lord he have ten pound . and i say to you that to everyone who have more will be give but from him who have not even what he have will be take away . and a for those who be against me who would not have me for their ruler let them come here and be put to death before me . and when he have say this he go on in front of them go up to jerusalem . and it come about that when he get near beth phage and bethany by the mountain which be name the mountain of olive he send two of the disciple say go into the little town in front of you and on go in you will see a young as fix with a cord on which no man have ever be seat let him loose and take him . and if anyone say to you why be you take him ? say the lord have need of him . and those whom he send go away and it be a he say . and when they be get the young ass the owner of it say to them why be you take the young as ? and they say the lord have need of him . and they take him to jesus and they put their clothing on the as and jesus get on to him . and while he go on his way they put their clothing down on the road in front of him . and when he come near the foot of the mountain of olive all the disciple with loud voice give praise to god with joy because of all the great work which they have see say a blessing on the king who come in the name of the lord peace in heaven and glory in the high . and some of the pharisee among the people say to him master make your disciple be quiet . and he say in answer i say to you if these men keep quiet the very stone will be cry out . and when he get near and saw the town he be overcome with weep for it say if you even you have knowledge today of the thing which give peace ! but you be not able to see them . for the time will come when your attacker will put a wall round you and come all round you and keep you in on every side and will make you level with the earth and your child with you and there will not be one stone rest on another in you because you do not see that it be your day of mercy . and he go into the temple and put out those who be trade there say to them it have be say my house be to be a house of prayer but you have make it a hole of thief . and every day he be teach in the temple . but the chief priest and the scribe and the ruler of the people be attempt to put him to death but they be not able to do anything because the people all keep near him be greatly interest in his word .and it come about on one of those day when he be teach the people in the temple and preach the good news that the chief priest and the scribe and the ruler of the people come to him and say make clear to u by what authority you do these thing and who give you this authority . and in answer he say to them i will put a question to you and do you give me an answer the baptism of john be it from heaven or of men ? and they say among themselves if we say from heaven he will say why do you not have faith in him ? but if we say of men we will be stone by the people for they be certain that john be a prophet . and they make answer that they have no idea where it come from . and jesus say and i will not make clear to you by what authority i do these thing . and he give the people this story a man make a vine garden and give the use of it to some field worker and go into another country for a long time . and at the right time he send a servant to the worker to get part of the fruit from the vine but the workman give him blow and send him away with nothing . and he send another servant and they give blow to him in the same way and put shame on him and send him away with nothing . and he send a third and they give him wound and put him out . and the lord of the garden say what be i to do ? i will send my dearly love son they may give respect to him . but when the workman saw him they say to one another this be he who will one day be the owner of the property let u put him to death and the heritage will be ours . and drive him out of the garden they put him to death . now what will the lord do to these workman ? he will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others . and when he say this they say may it not be so . but he look on them say be it not in the writing the stone which the builder put on one side the same have become the chief stone of the building ? everyone fall on that stone will be break but the man on whom the stone come down will be crush to dust . and the chief priest and the scribe make attempt to get their hand on him in that very hour and they be in fear of the people for they saw that he have make up this story against them . and they keep watch on him and send out secret representative who be act the part of good men in order that they might get something from his word on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler . and they put a question to him say master we be certain that your teaching and your word be right and that you have no respect for a man 's position but you be teach the true way of god be it right for u to make payment of tax to caesar or not ? but he saw through their trick and say to them let me see a penny . whose image and name be on it ? and they say caesar 's . and he say then give to caesar the thing which be caesar 's and to god the thing which be god 's . and they be not able to get anything from these word before the people but they be full of wonder at his answer and say nothing . and some of the sadducee come to him who say that there be no come back from the dead and they say to him master moses say that if a man 's brother come to his end have a wife but no child his brother be to take the wife and get a family for his brother . now there be seven brother and the first have a wife and come to his end have no child and the second and the third take her and in the same way all the seven without have any child come to their end . and last of all the woman come to her end . when they come back from the dead whose wife will she be ? for all the seven have her . and jesus say to them the son of this world be marry and have wife but those to whom be give the reward of the world to come and to come back from the dead have no wife and be not married and death have no more power over them for they be equal to the angel and be son of god be of those who will come back from the dead . but even moses make it clear that the dead come back to life say in the story of the burn thorn tree the lord the god of abraham the god of isaac and the god of jacob . now he be not the god of the dead but of the living for all men be live to him . and some of the scribe in answer to this say master you have say well . and they have fear of put any more question to him . and he say to them why do they say that the christ be the son of david ? for david himself say in the book of psalm the lord say to my lord take your seat at my right hand till i put under your foot all those who be against you . david then give him the name of lord so how be it possible for him to be his son ? and in the hearing of all the people he say to his disciple keep away from the scribe whose pleasure it be to go about in long robe and to have word of respect say to them in the market place and to take the chief seat in the synagogue and the first place at feast who take the property of widow and before the eye of men make long prayer they will get a great punishment .and look up he saw the men of wealth put their offering in the money box . and he saw a certain poor widow put in a farthing . and he say truly i say to you this poor widow have give more than all of them for they give out of their wealth have more than enough for themselves but she even out of her need have put in all her living . and some be talk about the temple how it be make fair with beautiful stone and with offering but he say a for these thing which you see the day will come when not one stone will be rest on another but all will be break down . and they say to him master when will these thing be ? and what sign will there be when these event be to take place ? and he say take care that you be not trick for a number of people will come in my name say i be he and the time be near do not go after them . and when news of war and troubled time come to your ear have no fear for these thing have to be but the end will not be now . then he say to them nation will be move against nation and kingdom against kingdom there will be great earth shock and outburst of disease in a number of place and men will be without food and there will be wonder and great sign from heaven . but before all this they will take you and be very cruel to you give you up to the synagogue and to prison take you before king and ruler because of my name . and it will be turn to a witness for you . so take care not to be trouble before the time come about what answer you will give for i will give you word and wisdom so that not one of those who be against you will be able to get the good of you or to put you in the wrong . but you will be give up even by your father and mother your brother and relation and friend and some of you will be put to death . and you will be hat by all men because of me . but not a hair of your head will come to destruction . by go through all these thing you will keep your life . but when you see army all round about jerusalem then be certain that her destruction be near . then let those who be in judaea go in flight to the mountain and those who be in the middle of the town go out and let not those who be in the country come in . for these be the day of punishment in which all the thing in the writing will be put into effect . it will be hard for woman who be with child and for her with a baby at the breast in those day . for great trouble will come on the land and wrath on this people . and they will be put to death with the sword and will be take a prisoner into all the nation and jerusalem will be crush under the foot of the gentile till the time of the gentile be complete . and there will be sign in the sun and moon and star and on the earth fear among the nation and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the wave men 's strength will go from them in fear and in wait for the thing which be come on the earth for the power of the heaven will be move . and then they will see the son of man come in a cloud with power and great glory . but when these thing come about let your head be lift up because your salvation be near . and he make a story for them see the fig tree and all the tree when they put out their young leave you take note of it and it be clear to you that summer be come . in the same way when you see these thing take place you may be certain that the kingdom of god be near . truly i say to you this generation will not come to an end till all thing be complete . heaven and earth will come to an end but my word will not come to an end . but give attention to yourselves for fear that your heart become over full of the pleasure of food and wine and the care of this life and that day may come on you suddenly and take you a in a net for so it will come on all those who be live on the face of all the earth . but keep watch at all time with prayer that you may be strong enough to come through all these thing and take your place before the son of man . and every day he be teach in the temple and every night he go out to the mountain which be name the mountain of olive to take his rest . and all the people come early in the morning to give ear to his word in the temple .now the feast of unleavened bread be near which be call the passover . and the chief priest and the scribe be look for a chance to put him to death but they go in fear of the people . and satan come into judas iscariot who be one of the twelve . and he go away and have a discussion with the chief priest and the ruler about how he might give him up to them . and they be glad and undertook to give him money . and he make an agreement with them to give him up to them if he get a chance when the people be not present . and the day of unleavened bread come when the passover lamb be put to death . and jesus send peter and john say go and make the passover ready for u so that we may take it . and they say to him where be we to get it ready ? and he say to them when you go into the town you will see a man come to you with a vessel of water go after him into the house into which he go . and say to the master of the house the master say where be the guest room where i may take the passover with my disciple ? and he will take you up to a great room with a table and seat there make ready . and they go and it be a he have say and they make the passover ready . and when the time have come he take his seat and the apostle with him . and he say i have have a great desire to keep this passover with you before i come to my death for i say to you i will not take it till it be make complete in the kingdom of god . and he take a cup and have give praise he say make division of this among yourselves for i say to you i will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of god have come . and he take bread and have give praise he give it to them when it have be break say this be my body which be give for you do this in memory of me . and in the same way after the meal he take the cup say this cup be the new testament make with my blood which be give for you . but the hand of him who be false to me be with me at the table . for it will be do to the son of man after the purpose of god but unhappy be that man by whom he be give up . and they be wonder among themselves which of them it be who would do this thing . and there be an argument among them about which of them be the great . and he say the king of the gentile be lord over them and those who have authority be give name of honour . but let it not be so with you but he who be great let him become like the young and he who be chief like a servant . for which be great the guest who be seat at a meal or the servant who be wait on him ? be it not the guest ? but i be among you a a servant . but you be those who have keep with me through my trouble and i will give you a kingdom a my father have give one to me so that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom and be seat like king judge the twelve tribe of israel . simon simon satan have make a request to have you so that he may put you to the test a grain be test but i have make prayer for you that your faith may not go from you and when you be turn again make your brother strong . and he say to him lord i be ready to go with you to prison and to death . and he say i say to you peter before the cock 's second cry today you will say three time that you have no knowledge of me . and he say to them when i send you out without money or bag or shoe be you in need of anything ? and they say nothing . and he say to them but now he who have a money bag or a bag for food let him take it and he who have not let him give his coat for money and get a sword . for i say to you that these word will be put into effect in me and he be number among the evil doer for what have be say in the writing about me have an end . and they say lord here be two sword . and he say it be enough . and he come out and go a his way be to the mountain of olive and the disciple go with him . and when he come to the place he say to them make a prayer that you may not be put to the test . and he go a little distance away from them and fall on his knee in prayer he say father if it be your pleasure take this cup from me but still let your pleasure not mine be do . and an angel from heaven come to him to give him strength . and be in great trouble of soul the force of his prayer become strong and great drop like blood come from him fall to the earth . and get up from prayer he come to the disciple and saw that they be sleep for sorrow . and he say why be you sleep ? get up and give yourselves to prayer so that you may not be put to the test . and while he be say these word there come a band of people and judas one of the twelve be in front of them and he come near to jesus to give him a kiss . but jesus say to him judas will you be false to the son of man with a kiss ? and when those who be with him saw what be come they say lord may we not make use of our sword ? and one of them give a blow to the servant of the high priest cut off his right ear . but jesus answering say put up with this at least . and touch his ear he make it well . and jesus say to the chief priest and the captain of the temple and the ruler who have come against him have you come out a against a thief with sword and stick ? when i be in the temple with you every day your hand be not stretch out against me but this be your hour and the authority of the dark power . and they make him a prisoner and take him away to the house of the high priest . but peter go after them at a distance . and a fire be light in the middle of the open square and they be seat together and peter be among them . and a certain woman servant see him in the light of the fire and look at him with attention say this man be with him . but he say woman it be not true i have no knowledge of him . and after a little time another saw him and say you be one of them and he say man i be not . and after about an hour another man say with decision certainly this man be with him for he be a galilaean . and peter say man i have no knowledge of these thing of which you be talk . and straight away while he be say these word there come the cry of a cock . and the lord turn give peter a look . and the word of the lord come to peter 's mind how he have say this night before the hour of the cock 's cry you will be false to me three time . and he go out weep bitterly . and the men in whose hand jesus be make sport of him and give him blow . and cover his eye they say to him be you prophet enough to say who give you that blow ? and they say a number of other evil thing against him . and when it be day the ruler of the people come together with the chief priest and the scribe and they take him before their sanhedrin say if you be the christ say so . but he say if i say so you will not have belief and if i put a question to you you will not give an answer . but in the future the son of man will be seat at the right hand of the power of god . and they all say be you then the son of god ? and he say you say that i be . and they say what more need have we of witness ? we have the very word of his mouth .and they all go and take him before pilate . and they make statement against him say this man have to our knowledge be teach our nation to do wrong and not to make payment of tax to caesar even say that he himself be christ a king . and pilate say to him be you the king of the jew ? and he say in answer you say so . and pilate say to the chief priest and the people in my opinion this man have do no wrong . but they become more violent than before say he have make trouble among the people teach through all judaea from galilee to this place . but at these word pilate say be the man a galilaean ? and when he saw that he be under the authority of herod he send him to herod who be in jerusalem himself at that time . now when herod saw jesus he be very glad have for a long time have a desire to see him for he have have account of him and be hop to see some wonder do by him . and he put a great number of question to him but he say nothing . and the chief priest and the scribe be there make statement against him violently . and herod with the men of his army put shame on him and make sport of him and dress him in shin robe he send him back to pilate . and that day herod and pilate become friend with one another for before they have be against one another . and pilate sent for the chief priest and the ruler and the people and say to them you say that this man have be teach the people evil thing now i after go into the question before you see nothing wrong in this man in connection with the thing which you have say against him and herod be of the same opinion for he have send him back to u for you see he have do nothing for which i might put him to death . and so i will give him punishment and let him go . but with loud voice they say all together put this man to death and make barabbas free . now this man be in prison because of an attack against the government in the town in which there have be loss of life . and pilate again say to them that it be his desire to let jesus go free . but cry out they say to the cross with him ! and he say to them a third time why what evil have he do ? i see no reason for put him to death i will give him punishment and let him go . but they go on cry out loudly let him be put to death on the cross . and they have their way . and pilate give his decision for their desire to be put into effect . and in answer to their request he let that man go free who have be in prison for act against the government and cause death and jesus he give up to their pleasure . and while they be take him away they put their hand on simon of cyrene who be come from the country and make him take the cross after jesus . and a great band of people go after him and of woman make sign of grief and weep for him . but jesus turning to them say daughter of jerusalem let not your weep be for me but for yourselves and for your child . for the day be come in which they will say happy be those who have have no child whose body have never give birth whose breast have never give milk . and they will say to the mountain come down on u and to the hill be a cover over u . for if they do these thing when the tree be green what will they do when it be dry ? and two others evil doer be take with him to be put to death . and when they come to the place which be name golgotha they put him on the cross and the evil doer one on the right side and the other on the left . and jesus say father let them have forgiveness for they have no knowledge of what they be do . and they make division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance . and the people be look on . and the ruler make sport of him say he be a saviour of others let him do something for himself if he be the christ the man of god 's selection . and the men of the army make sport of him come to him and give him bitter wine and say if you be the king of the jew get yourself free . and these word be put in writing over him this be the king of the jew . and one of the evil doer on the cross with bitter feeling say to him be you not the christ ? get yourself and u out of this . but the other protesting say have you no fear of god ? for you have a part in the same punishment and with reason for we have the right reward of our act but this man have do nothing wrong . and he say jesus keep me in mind when you come in your kingdom . and he say to him truly i say to you today you will be with me in paradise . and it be now about the sixth hour and all the land be dark till the ninth hour the light of the sun go out and the curtain in the temple be part in two . and jesus give a loud cry and say father into your hand i give my spirit and when he have say this he give up his spirit . and when the captain saw what be do he give praise to god say without doubt this be an upright man . and all the people who have come together to see it when they saw the thing which be do go back again make sign of grief . and all his friend and the woman who come with him from galilee be wait at a distance watch these thing . now there be a man name joseph a man of authority and a good and upright man he have not give his approval to their decision or their act of arimathaea a town of the jew who be wait for the kingdom of god this man go to pilate and make a request for the body of jesus . and he take it down and fold it in a linen cloth he put it in a place cut in the rock for a dead body and no one have ever be put in it . now it be the day of make ready and the sabbath be come on . and the woman who have come with him from galilee go after him and saw the place and how his body have be put to rest and they go back and get ready spice and perfume and on the sabbath they take their rest in agreement with the law .but on the first day of the week at dawn they come to the place where his body have be put take the spice which they have get ready . and they saw that the stone have be roll away . and they go in but the body of the lord jesus be not there . and while they be in doubt about it they saw two men in shin clothing by them and while their face be bent down to the earth in fear these say to them why be you look for the living among the dead ? he be not here he have come back to life have in mind what he say to you when he be still in galilee say the son of man will be give up into the hand of evil doer and be put to death on the cross and on the third day he will come back to life . and his word come back into their mind and they go away from that place and give an account of all these thing to the eleven disciple and all the others . now they be mary magdalene and joanna and mary the mother of james and the other woman with them say these thing to the apostle . but these word seem foolish to them and they have no belief in them . but peter get up and go to the place where the body have be put and look in he saw nothing but the linen cloth and he go to his house full of wonder at what have take place . and then two of them on that very day be go to a little town name emmaus which be about seven mile from jerusalem . and they be talk together about all those thing which have take place . and while they be talk and question together jesus himself come near and go with them . but their eye be not open that they might have knowledge of him . and he say to them what be you talk about together while you go ? then stop and look sadly at him one of them name cleopas say to him be you the only man living in jerusalem who have not have news of the thing which have take place there at this time ? and he say to them what thing ? and they say the thing to do with jesus of nazareth who be a prophet great in his act and his word before god and all the people and how the chief priest and our ruler give him up to be put to death on the cross . but we be hop that he would be the saviour of israel . in addition to all this he have now let three day go by from the time when these thing take place and certain woman among u give u cause for wonder for they go early to the place where his body have be put and it be not there then they come say that they have see a vision of angel who say that he be live . and some of those who be with u go to the place and saw that it be a the woman have say but him they do not see . and he say o foolish men ! how slow you be to give belief to what the prophet have say . be it not necessary for the christ to go through these thing and to come into his glory ? and he make clear to them all the thing in the writing from moses and from all the prophet which have to do with himself . and they come near the town to which they be go and he seem a if he be go on but they keep him back say do not go for evening be near the day be almost go . and he go in with them . and when he be seat with them at table he take the bread and say word of blessing and make division of it he give it to them . and then their eye be open and they have knowledge of him but he go from their view . and they say to one another be not our heart burn in u while he be talk to u on the way make clear to u the holy writing ? and that very hour they get up and go back to jerusalem where the eleven and the others have come together . and they say to them the lord have truly come back to life again and simon have see him . and they give an account of the thing which have take place on the way and how when he give them bread they have knowledge of him . and while they be say these thing he himself be among them and say to them peace be with you ! but they be full of fear be of the opinion that they be see a spirit . and he say to them why be you troubled and why be your heart full of doubt ? see my hand and my foot it be i myself put your hand on me and make certain for a spirit have not flesh and bone a you see that i have . and when he have say this he let them see his hand and his foot . and because for joy and wonder they be still in doubt he say to them have you any food here ? and they give him a bit of cooked fish . and before their eye he take a meal . and he say to them these be the word which i say to you when i be still with you how it be necessary for all the thing which be in the writing of moses and the prophet and in the psalm about me to be put into effect . then he make the holy writing clear to their mind . and he say to them so it be in the writing that the christ would undergo death and come back to life again on the third day and that teach about a change of heart and forgiveness of sin be to be give to jerusalem first and to all nation in his name . you be witness of these thing . and now i will send to you what my father have undertake to give you but do not go from the town till the power from heaven come to you . and he take them out till they be near bethany and lift up his hand he give them a blessing . and while he be do so he go from them and be take up into heaven . and they give him worship and go back to jerusalem with great joy . and they be in the temple at all time give praise to god .from the first he be the word and the word be in relation with god and be god . this word be from the first in relation with god . all thing come into existence through him and without him nothing be . what come into existence in him be life and the life be the light of men . and the light go on shin in the dark it be not overcome by the dark . there be a man sent from god whose name be john . he come for witness to give witness about the light so that all men might have faith through him . he himself be not the light he be send to give witness about the light . the true light which give light to every man be then come into the world . he be in the world the world which come into be through him but the world have no knowledge of him . he come to the thing which be his and his people do not take him to their heart . to all those who do so take him however he give the right of become child of god that be to those who have faith in his name whose birth be from god and not from blood or from an impulse of the flesh and man 's desire . and so the word become flesh and take a place among u for a time and we saw his glory such glory a be give to an only son by his father saw it to be true and full of grace . john give witness about him cry this be he of whom i say he who be come after me be put over me because he be in existence before me . from his full measure we have all be give grace on grace . for the law be give through moses grace and the true way of life be ours through jesus christ . no man have see god at any time the only son who be on the breast of the father he have make clear what god be . and this be the witness of john when the jew send priest and levite from jerusalem to him with the question who be you ? he say quite openly and straightforwardly i be not the christ . and they say to him what then ? be you elijah ? and he say i be not . be you the prophet ? and his answer be i be not . so they say to him who be you then ? we have to give some answer to those who send u . what have you to say about yourself ? he say i be the voice of one cry in the waste land make straight the way of the lord a say isaiah the prophet . those who have be send come from the pharisee . and they put this question to him say why then be you give baptism if you be not the christ or elijah or the prophet ? john 's answer be i give baptism with water but there be one among you of whom you have no knowledge it be he who be come after me i be not good enough to undo his shoe . these thing take place at bethany on the other side of the jordan where john be give baptism . the day after john see jesus come to him and say see here be the lamb of god who take away the sin of the world ! this be he of whom i say one be come after me who be put over me because he be in existence before me . i myself have no knowledge of him but i come give baptism with water so that he might be see openly by israel . and john give this witness say i saw the spirit come down from heaven like a dove and rest on him . i have no knowledge who he be but he who send me to give baptism with water say to me the one on whom you see the spirit come down and rest it be he who give baptism with the holy spirit . this i saw myself and my witness be that he be the son of god . the day after john be there again with two of his disciple and look at jesus while he be walk he say see there be the lamb of god ! hear what he say the two disciple go after jesus . and jesus turn round saw them come after him and say to them what be you look for ? they say to him rabbi which be to say master where be you live ? he say to them come and see . they go with him then and saw where he be live and they be with him all that day it be then about the tenth hour of the day . andrew simon peter 's brother be one of the two men who hear what john say go after jesus . early in the morning he come across his brother and say to him we have make discovery ! it be the messiah ! which be to say the christ . and he take him to jesus . look at him fixedly jesus say you be simon the son of john your name will be cephas which be to say peter . the day after this jesus have a desire to go into galilee . he come across philip and say to him come and be my disciple . now philip 's town be beth saida where andrew and peter come from . philip come across nathanael and say to him we have make a discovery ! it be he of whom moses in the law and the prophet be write jesus of nazareth the son of joseph . nazareth ! say nathanael be it possible for any good to come out of nazareth ? philip say to him come and see . jesus saw nathanael come to him and say of him see here be a true son of israel in whom there be nothing false . nathanael say to him where do you get knowledge of me ? in answer jesus say before philip be talk with you while you be still under the fig tree i saw you . nathanael say to him rabbi you be the son of god you be king of israel ! in answer jesus say to him you have faith because i say to you i saw you under the fig tree . you will see great thing than these . and he say to him truly i say to you all you will see heaven opening and god 's angel go up and come down on the son of man .on the third day two people be go to be marry at cana in galilee . the mother of jesus be there and jesus with his disciple come a guest . when they have not enough wine the mother of jesus say to him they have no wine . jesus say to her woman this be not your business my time be still to come . his mother say to the servant whatever he say to you do it . now six pot of stone every one take two or three firkin of water be place there for the purpose of wash a be the way of the jew . jesus say to the servant make the pot full of water . and they make them full to the top . then he say to them now take some and give it to the master of the feast . so they take it to him . after taste the water which have now become wine the master of the feast have no idea where it come from though it be clear to the servant who take the water out sent for the newly marry man and say to him every man first put out his best wine and when all have have enough he put out what be not so good but you have keep the good wine till now . this the first of his sign jesus do at cana in galilee and let his glory be see openly and his disciple put their faith in him . after this he go down to capernaum with his mother his brother and his disciple and they be there not more than two or three day . the time of the passover of the jew be near and jesus go up to jerusalem . and there in the temple he saw men trade in ox and sheep and dove and he saw the changer of money in their seat and he make a whip of small cord and put them all out of the temple with the sheep and the ox send in all direction the small money of the changer and overturn their table and to those who be trade in dove he say take these thing away do not make my father 's house a market . and it come to the mind of the disciple that the writing say i be on fire with passion for your house . then the jew put this question to him what sign of authority have you to give u see that you do these thing ? and jesus say to them send destruction on this temple and i will put it up again in three day . the jew say the building of this temple take forty six year and you will put it up in three day ! but his word be about that holy building which be his body . so when he have come back again from the dead the memory of these word come back to the disciple and they have faith in the holy writing and in the word which jesus have say . now while he be in jerusalem at the feast of the passover a great number of people come to have faith in his name after see the sign which he do . but jesus do not have faith in them because he have knowledge of them all . he have no need for any witness about man for he himself have knowledge of what be in man .now there be among the pharisee a man name nicodemus who be one of the ruler of the jew . he come to jesus by night and say to him rabbi we be certain that you have come from god a a teacher because no man would be able to do these sign which you do if god be not with him . jesus say to him truly i say to you without a new birth no man be able to see the kingdom of god . nicodemus say to him how be it possible for a man to be give birth when he be old ? be he able to go into his mother 's body a second time and come to birth again ? jesus say in answer truly i say to you if a man 's birth be not from water and from the spirit it be not possible for him to go into the kingdom of god . that which have birth from the flesh be flesh and that which have birth from the spirit be spirit . do not be surprise that i say to you it be necessary for you to have a second birth . the wind go where it pleasure take it and the sound of it come to your ear but you be unable to say where it come from and where it go so it be with everyone whose birth be from the spirit . and nicodemus say to him how be it possible for these thing to be ? and jesus answering say be you the teacher of israel and have no knowledge of these thing ? truly i say to you we say that of which we have knowledge we give witness of what we have see and you do not take our witness to be true . if you have no belief when my word be about the thing of earth how will you have belief if my word be about the thing of heaven ? and no one have ever go up to heaven but he who come down from heaven the son of man . a the snake be lift up by moses in the waste land even so it be necessary for the son of man to be lift up so that whoever have faith may have in him eternal life . for god have such love for the world that he give his only son so that whoever have faith in him may not come to destruction but have eternal life . god do not send his son into the world to be judge of the world he send him so that the world might have salvation through him . the man who have faith in him do not come up to be judge but he who have no faith in him have be judge even now because he have no faith in the name of the only son of god . and this be the test by which men be judge the light have come into the world and men have more love for the dark than for the light because their act be evil . the light be hat by everyone whose act be evil and he do not come to the light for fear that his act will be see . but he whose life be true come to the light so that it may be clearly see that his act have be do by the help of god . after these thing jesus and his disciple go into the land of judaea and there he be with them for some time give baptism . now john be then give baptism at aenon near salim because there be much water there and people come and be give baptism . for at this time john have not be put into prison . then a question come up between john 's disciple and a jew about wash . and they go to john and say to him rabbi the man who be with you on the other side of the jordan the man to whom you give witness be now give baptism and everyone be go to him . and this be john 's answer a man be unable to have anything if it be not give to him from heaven . you yourselves give witness that i say i be not the christ . what i say be i be send before the christ . he who have the bride be the husband but the husband 's friend whose place be by his side and whose ear be open to him be full of joy because of the husband 's voice such be my joy and it be complete . he have to become great while i become less . he who come from heaven be great than all others he who come from earth be of the earth and of the earth be his word he who come from heaven be over all . he give witness of what he have see and of what have come to his ear and no man take his witness a true . he who so take his witness have make clear his faith that god be true . for he whom god have send say god 's word and god do not give him the spirit by measure . the father have love for the son and have put all thing into his hand . he who have faith in the son have eternal life but he who have not faith in the son will not see life god 's wrath be rest on him .now when it be clear to the lord that word have come to the ear of the pharisee that jesus be make more disciple than john and be give them baptism though in fact it be his disciple who give baptism not jesus himself he go out of judaea into galilee again . and it be necessary for him to go through samaria . so he come to a town of samaria which be name sychar near to the bit of land which jacob give to his son joseph now jacob 's fountain be there . jesus be tire after his journey be rest by the fountain . it be about the sixth hour . a woman of samaria come to get water and jesus say to her give me some water . for his disciple have go to the town to get food . the woman of samaria say to him why do you a jew make a request for water to me a woman of samaria ? she say this because jew have nothing to do with the people of samaria . in answer jesus say if you have knowledge of what god give freely and who it be who say to you give me water you would make your prayer to him and he would give you living water . the woman say to him sir you have no vessel and the fountain be deep from where will you get the living water ? be you great than our father jacob who give u the fountain and take the water of it himself with his child and his cattle ? jesus say to her everyone who take this water will be in need of it again but whoever take the water i give him will never be in need of drink again for the water i give him will become in him a fountain of eternal life . the woman say to him sir give me this water so that i may not be in need again of drink and will not have to come all this way for it . jesus say to her go get your husband and come back here with him . in answer the woman say i have no husband . jesus say to her you have say rightly i have no husband you have have five husband and the man you have now be not your husband that be truly say . the woman say to him sir i see that you be a prophet . our father give worship on this mountain but you jews say that the right place for worship be in jerusalem . jesus say to her woman take my word for this the time be come when you will not give worship to the father on this mountain or in jerusalem . you give worship but without knowledge of what you be worship we give worship to what we have knowledge of for salvation come from the jew . but the time be come and be even now here when the true worshipper will give worship to the father in the true way of the spirit for these be the worshipper desire by the father . god be spirit then let his worshipper give him worship in the true way of the spirit . the woman say to him i be certain that the messiah who be name christ be come when he come he will make all thing clear to u . jesus say to her i who be talk to you be he . at that point the disciple come back and they be surprise to see him talk to a woman but not one of them say to him what be your purpose ? or why be you talk to her ? then the woman put down her water pot and go into the town and say to the people come and see a man who have be talk to me of everything i ever do ! be it possible that this be the christ ? so they go out of the town and come to him . while this be take place the disciple be say to jesus master take some food . but he say to them i have food of which you have no knowledge . so the disciple say one to another do anyone give him food ? jesus say my food be to do the pleasure of him who send me and to make his work complete . you would say four month from now be the time of the grain cutting . take a look i say to you at the field they be even now white for cut . he who do the cutting now have his reward he be get together fruit for eternal life so that he who do the planting and he who get in the grain may have joy together . in this the saying be a true one one do the planting and another get in the grain . i send you to get in grain which you have no hand in plant other men do that work and you take the reward . now a number of the people of that town have faith in him because of the woman 's witness he have be talk to me of everything i ever do . so when the people come to him they make request to him to be among them for a time and he be there two day . and a great number more of them come to have faith in him because of what he himself say . and they say to the woman now we have faith but not because of your story we ourselves have give ear to his word and we be certain that he be truly the saviour of the world . and after the two day he go on from there into galilee . for jesus himself say that a prophet have no honour in the country of his birth . so when he come into galilee the galilaean take him to their heart because of the thing which they have see him do in jerusalem at the feast they themselves have be there at the feast . so he come to cana in galilee where he have make the water wine . and there be a certain man of high position whose son be ill at capernaum . when it come to his ear that jesus have come from judaea into galilee he go to him and make a request that he would come down to his son who be near to death and make him well . then jesus say to him you will not have faith if you do not see sign and wonder . the man say sir come down before my boy be dead . and jesus say go in peace your son be live . the man have faith in the word which jesus say to him and go away . and while he be go down his servant come to him and say your boy be live . so he put a question to them a to the hour when he become well and they say to him the disease go from him yesterday at the seventh hour . it be clear then to the father that this be the very time at which jesus say to him your son be live . and he have faith in jesus he and all his family . now this be the second sign which jesus do after he have come out of judaea into galilee .after these thing there be a feast of the jew and jesus go up to jerusalem . now in jerusalem near the sheep market there be a public bath which in hebrew be name beth zatha . it have five doorway . in these doorway there be a great number of people with different disease some unable to see some without the power of walk some with wasted body . one man be there who have be ill for thirty eight year . when jesus saw him there on the floor it be clear to him that he have be now a long time in that condition and so he say to the man be it your desire to get well ? the ill man say in answer sir i have nobody to put me into the bath when the water be move and while i be on the way down some other person get in before me . jesus say to him get up take your bed and go . and the man become well straight away and take up his bed and go . now that day be the sabbath . so the jew say to the man who have be make well it be the sabbath and it be against the law for you to take up your bed . he say to them but he who make me well say to me take up your bed and go . then they put to him the question who be the man who say to you take it up and go ? now he who have be make well have no knowledge who it be jesus have go away because of the number of people who be in that place . after a time jesus come across him in the temple and say to him see you be well and strong do no more sin for fear a bad thing come to you . the man go away and say to the jew that it be jesus who have make him well . and for this reason the jew be turn against jesus because he be do these thing on the sabbath . but his answer be my father be still work even now and so i be work . for this cause the jew have an even great desire to put jesus to death because not only do he not keep the sabbath but he say god be his father so make himself equal with god . so jesus make answer and say truly i say to you the son be not able to do anything himself he be able to do only what he see the father do whatever the father do the son do it in the same way . for the father have love for the son and let him see everything which he do and he will let him see great work than these so that you may be full of wonder . in the same way a the father give life to the dead even so the son give life to those to whom he be pleased to give it . the father be not the judge of men but he have give all decision into the hand of the son so that all men may give honour to the son even a they give honour to the father . he who give no honour to the son give no honour to the father who send him . truly i say to you the man whose ear be open to my word and who have faith in him who send me have eternal life he will not be judge but have come from death into life . truly i say to you the time be come it have even now come when the voice of the son of god will come to the ear of the dead and those hear it will have life . for even a the father have life in himself so he have give to the son to have life in himself . and he have give him authority to be judge because he be the son of man . do not be surprise at this for the time be come when his voice will come to all who be in the place of the dead and they will come out those who have do good into the new life and those who have do evil to be judge . of myself i be unable to do anything a the voice come to me so i give a decision and my decision be right because i have no desire to do what be please to myself but only what be please to him who send me . if i give witness about myself my witness would not be true . there be another who give witness about me and i be certain that the witness he give about me be true . you send to john and he give true witness . but i have no need of a man 's witness i only say these thing so that you may have salvation . he be a burning and shin light and for a time you be ready to be happy in his light . but the witness which i have be great than that of john the work which the father have give me to do the very work which i be now do be a witness that the father have send me . and the father himself who send me have give witness about me . not one of you have ever give ear to his voice his form you have not see . and you have not keep his word in your heart because you have not faith in him whom he have send . you make search in the holy writing in the belief that through them you get eternal life and it be those writing which give witness about me . and still you have no desire to come to me so that you may have life . i do not take honour from men but i have knowledge of you that you have no love for god in your heart . i have come in my father 's name and your heart be not open to me . if another come with no other authority but himself you will give him your approval . how be it possible for you to have faith while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour which come from the only god ? put out of your mind the thought that i will say thing against you to the father the one who say thing against you be moses on whom you put your hope . if you have belief in moses you would have belief in me for his writing be about me . if you have no belief in his writing how will you have belief in my word ?after these thing jesus go away to the other side of the sea of galilee that be the sea of tiberias . and a great number of people go after him because they saw the sign which he do on those who be ill. then jesus go up the mountain and be seat there with his disciple . now the passover a feast of the jew be near . lift up his eye jesus saw a great number of people come to where he be and he say to philip where may we get bread for all these people ? this he say test him for he have no doubt what he himself would do . philip make answer bread to the value of two hundred penny would not be enough even to give everyone a little . one of his disciple andrew the brother of simon peter say to jesus there be a boy here with five barley cake and two fish but what be that among such a number ? jesus say let the people be seat . now there be much grass in that place . and those seat on the grass be about five thousand . then jesus take the cake and have give praise to god he give them to the people who be seat and the fish in the same way as much a they have need of . and when they have have enough jesus say to his disciple take up the broken bit which be over so that nothing may be waste . so they take them up twelve basket full of broken bit of the five cake which be over after the people have have enough . and when the people saw the sign which he have do they say truly this be the prophet who be to come into the world . now when jesus saw that the people be about to come and take him by force to make him a king he go away again up the mountain by himself . when even come the disciple go down to the sea and they take a boat and go across the sea in the direction of capernaum . by then it be dark and still jesus have not come to them . the sea be get rough because of a strong wind which be blow . after they have go three or four mile they saw jesus walk on the sea and come near to the boat and they have great fear . but he say to them it be i have no fear . then they readily take him into the boat and straight away the boat be at the land to which they be go . the day after the people who be on the other side of the sea saw that only one small boat have be there that jesus have not go in that boat with the disciple but that the disciple have go away by themselves . some other boat however come from tiberias near to the place where they have take the bread after the lord have give praise . so when the people saw that jesus be not there or his disciple they get into those boat and go over to capernaum look for jesus . and when they come across him on the other side of the sea they say rabbi when do you come here ? jesus answer them say truly i say to you you come after me not because you saw sign but because you be give the bread and have enough . let your work not be for the food which come to an end but for the food which go on for eternal life which the son of man will give to you for on him have god the father put his mark . then they say to him how may we do the work of god ? jesus answer say to them this be to do the work of god to have faith in him whom god have send . so they say what sign do you give u so that we may see and have faith in you ? what do you do ? our father have the manna in the waste land a the writing say he give them bread from heaven . jesus then say to them truly i say to you what moses give you be not the bread from heaven it be my father who give you the true bread from heaven . the bread of god be the bread which come down out of heaven and give life to the world . ah lord they say give u that bread for ever ! and this be the answer of jesus i be the bread of life . he who come to me will never be in need of food and he who have faith in me will never be in need of drink . but it be a i say to you you have see me and still you have no faith . whatever the father give to me will come to me and i will not send away anyone who come to me . for i have come down from heaven not to do my pleasure but the pleasure of him who send me . and this be the pleasure of him who send me that i be not to let out of my hand anything which he have give me but i be to give it new life on the last day . this i say be my father 's pleasure that everyone who see the son and have faith in him may have eternal life and i will take him up on the last day . now the jew say bitter thing about jesus because of his word i be the bread which come down from heaven . and they say be not this jesus the son of joseph whose father and mother we have see ? how be it then that he now say i have come down from heaven ? jesus make answer and say do not say thing against me one to another . no man be able to come to me if the father who send me do not give him the desire to come and i will take him up from the dead on the last day . the writing of the prophet say and they will all have teach from god . everyone whose ear have be open to the teaching of the father come to me . not that anyone have ever see the father only he who be from god he have see the father . truly i say to you he who have faith in me have eternal life . i be the bread of life . your father take the manna in the waste land and they be dead . the bread which come from heaven be such bread that a man may take it for food and never see death . i be the living bread which have come from heaven if any man take this bread for food he will have life for ever and more than this the bread which i will give be my flesh which i will give for the life of the world . then the jew have an angry discussion among themselves say how be it possible for this man to give u his flesh for food ? then jesus say to them truly i say to you if you do not take the flesh of the son of man for food and if you do not take his blood for drink you have no life in you . he who take my flesh for food and my blood for drink have eternal life and i will take him up from the dead at the last day . my flesh be true food and my blood be true drink . he who take my flesh for food and my blood for drink be in me and i in him . a the living father have send me and i have life because of the father even so he who take me for his food will have life because of me . this be the bread which have come down from heaven . it be not like the food which your father have they take of the manna and be dead but he who take this bread for food will have life for ever . jesus say these thing in the synagogue while he be teach at capernaum . then hear this a number of his disciple say this be a hard saying who be able to take in such teaching ? when jesus become conscious that his disciple be protest about what he say he say to them do this give you trouble ? what then will you say if you see the son of man go up to where he be before ? the spirit be the life giver the flesh be of no value the word which i have say to you be spirit and they be life . but still some of you have no faith . for it be clear to jesus from the first who they be who have no faith and who it be who would be false to him . and he say this be why i say to you no man be able to come to me if he be not give the power to do so by the father . because of what he say a number of the disciple go back and would no longer go with him . so jesus say to the twelve have you a desire to go away ? then simon peter give this answer lord to whom be we to go ? you have the word of eternal life and we have faith and be certain that you be the holy one of god . then jesus say do i not make a selection of you the twelve and one of you be a son of the evil one ? he be talk of juda the son of simon iscariot . it be he who be to be false to jesus one of the twelve .after this jesus go from place to place in galilee . he do not go about in judaea because the jew be look for a chance to put him to death . but the feast of the jew the feast of tent be near . so his brother say to him go away from here into judaea so that your disciple may see the work which you do . because no man do thing secretly if he have a desire that men may have knowledge of him . if you do these thing let yourself be see by all men . for even his brother have no belief in him . jesus say to them my time be still to come but any time be good for you . it be not possible for you to be hat by the world but i be hat by it because i give witness that what it do be evil . go you up to the feast i be not go up now to the feast because my time have not fully come . have say these thing to them he still keep in galilee . but after his brother have go up to the feast then he go up not publicly but in secret . at the feast the jew be look for him and say where be he ? and there be much discussion about him among the mass of the people . some say he be a good man but others say no he be give people false idea . but no man say anything about him openly for fear of the jew . now in the middle of the feast jesus go up to the temple and be teach . then the jew be surprised and say how have this man get knowledge of book ? he have never be to school . jesus give them this answer it be not my teaching but his who send me . if any man be ready to do god 's pleasure he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it come from from god or from myself . the man whose word come from himself be look for glory for himself but he who be look for the glory of him who send him that man be true and there be no evil in him . do not moses give you the law ? even so not one of you keep the law . why have you a desire to put me to death ? the people say in answer you have an evil spirit who have any desire to put you to death ? this be the answer of jesus i have do one work and you be all surprise at it . moses give you circumcision not that it come from moses but from the father and even on the sabbath you give a child circumcision . if a child be give circumcision on the sabbath so that the law of moses may not be break why be you angry with me because i make a man completely well on the sabbath ? let not your decision be base on what you see but on righteousness . then some of the people of jerusalem say be not this the man whose death be desire ? and here he be talk openly and they say nothing to him ! be it possible that the ruler have knowledge that this be truly the christ ? however it be clear to u where this man come from but when the christ come no one will have knowledge where he come from . then when he be teach in the temple jesus say with a loud voice you have knowledge of me and you have knowledge of where i come from and i have not come of myself but there be one who have send me he be true but you have no knowledge of him . i have knowledge of him because i come from him and he send me . then they have a desire to take him but no man put hand on him because his hour be still to come . and number of the people have belief in him and they say when the christ come will he do more sign than this man have do ? this discussion of the people come to the ear of the pharisee and the chief priest and the pharisee send servant to take him . then jesus say i will be with you a little long and then i go to him who send me . you will be look for me and you will not see me and where i be you may not come . so the jew say among themselves to what place be he go where we will not see him ? will he go to the jew live among the greek and become the teacher of the greek ? what be this say of his you will be look for me and will not see me and where i be you may not come ? on the last day the great day of the feast jesus get up and say in a loud voice if any man be in need of drink let him come to me and i will give it to him . he who have faith in me out of his body a the writing have say will come river of living water . this he say of the spirit which would be give to those who have faith in him the spirit have not be give then because the glory of jesus be still to come . when these word come to their ear some of the people say this be certainly the prophet . others say this be the christ . but others say not so will the christ come from galilee ? do not the writing say that the christ come of the seed of david and from beth lehem the little town where david be ? so there be a division among the people because of him . and some of them have a desire to take him but no man put hand on him . then the servant go back to the chief priest and pharisee who say to them why have you not get him with you ? the servant make answer no man ever say thing like this man . then the pharisee say to them have you like the others be give false idea ? have any of the ruler belief in him or any one of the pharisee ? but these people who have no knowledge of the law be curse . nicodemus he who have come to jesus before be himself one of them say to them be a man judge by our law before it have give him a hearing and have knowledge of what he have do ? this be their answer and do you come from galilee ? make search and you will see that no prophet come out of galilee . and every man go to his housebut jesus go to the mountain of olive . and early in the morning he come again into the temple and all the people come to him and he be seat teach them . now the scribe and pharisee come with a woman who have be take in the act of sin against the married relation and put her forward they say to him master this woman have be take in the very act of sin against the married relation . now in the law moses give direction that such woman be to be stone what do you say about it ? they say this test him so that they might have something against him . but jesus with his head bend down make letter on the floor with his finger . but when they go on with their question he get up and say to them let him among you who be without sin be the first to send a stone at her . and again with bent head he make letter on the floor . and when his word come to their ear they go out one by one start with the old even to the last because they be conscious of what be in their heart and jesus be there by himself with the woman before him . then jesus get up and see nobody but the woman he say to her where be the men who say thing against you ? do no one give a decision against you ? and she say no man lord . and jesus say and i do not give a decision against you go and never do wrong again . then again jesus say to them i be the light of the world he who come with me will not be walk in the dark but will have the light of life . so the pharisee say to him the witness you give be about yourself your witness be not true . jesus say in answer even if i give witness about myself my witness be true because i have knowledge of where i come from and where i be go but you have no knowledge of where i come from or of where i be go . you be judge from what you see i be judge no man . even if i be judge my decision be right because i be not by myself with me be the father who send me . even in your law it be say that the witness of two men be true . i give witness about myself and the father who send me give witness about me . then they say to him where be your father ? jesus say in answer you have no knowledge of me or of my father if you have knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my father . jesus say these word in the place where the offering be store while he be teach in the temple but no man take him because his time be still to come . then he say to them again i be go away and you will be look for me but death will overtake you in your sin . it be not possible for you to come where i be go . so the jew say will he take his life ? be that why he say where i go it be not possible for you to come ? and he say to them you be of the earth i be from heaven you be of this world i be not of this world . for this reason i say to you that death will overtake you in your sin for if you have not faith that i be he death will come to you while you be in your sin . then they say to him who be you ? jesus say what i say to you from the first . i have much to say about you and against you but he who send me be true and what he have say to me i say to the world . they do not see that his word be about the father . so jesus say when the son of man have be lift up by you then it will be clear to you who i be and that i do nothing of myself but say a the father give me teaching . he who send me be with me he have not go from me because at all time i do the thing which be please to him . when he say this a number come to have faith in him . then jesus say to the jew who have faith in him if you keep my word then you be truly my disciple and you will have knowledge of what be true and that will make you free . they say to him in answer we be abraham 's seed and have never be any man 's servant why do you say you will become free ? and this be the answer jesus give them truly i say to you everyone who do evil be the servant of sin . now the servant do not go on living in the house for ever but the son do . if then the son make you free you will be truly free . i be conscious that you be abraham 's seed but you have a desire to put me to death because my word have no place in you . i say the thing which i have see in my father 's house and you do the thing which come to you from your father 's house . in answer they say to him our father be abraham . jesus say to them if you be abraham 's child you would do what abraham do . but now you have a desire to put me to death a man who have say to you what be true a i have it from god abraham do not do that . you be do the work of your father . they say to him we be true son of abraham we have one father who be god . jesus say to them if god be your father you would have love for me because it be from god i come and be here . i do not come of myself but he send me . why be my word not clear to you ? it be because your ear be shut to my teaching . you be the child of your father the evil one and it be your pleasure to do his desire . from the first he be a taker of life and he do not go in the true way because there be no true thing in him . when he say what be false it be natural to him for he be false and the father of what be false . but because i say what be true you have no belief in me . which of you be able truly to say that i be a sinner ? if i say what be true why have you no belief in me ? he who be a child of god give ear to the word of god your ear be not open to them because you be not from god . the jew say to him in answer be we not right in say that you be of samaria and have an evil spirit ? and this be the answer of jesus i have not an evil spirit but i give honour to my father and you do not give honour to me . i however be not in search of glory for myself there be one who be search for it and he be judge . truly i say to you if a man keep my word he will never see death . the jew say to him now we be certain that you have an evil spirit . abraham be dead and the prophet be dead and you say if a man keep my word he will never see death . be you great than our father abraham who be dead ? and the prophet be dead who do you say that you be ? jesus say in answer if i take glory for myself my glory be nothing it be my father who give me glory of whom you say that he be your god . you have no knowledge of him but i have knowledge of him and if i say i have no knowledge of him i would be talk falsely like you but i have full knowledge of him and i keep his word . your father abraham be full of joy at the hope of see my day he saw it and be glad . then the jew say to him you be not fifty year old have you see abraham ? jesus say to them truly i say to you before abraham come into be i be . so they take up stone to send at him but jesus get secretly out of their way and go out of the temple .and when he go on his way he saw a man blind from birth . and his disciple put a question to him say master be it because of this man 's sin or the sin of his father and mother that he have be blind from birth ? jesus say in answer it be not because of his sin or because of his father 's or mother 's it be so that the work of god might be see openly in him . while it be day we have to do the work of him who send me the night come when no work may be do . as long a i be in the world i be the light of the world . have say these word he put earth mixed with water from his mouth on the man 's eye and say to him go and make yourself clean in the bath of siloam the sense of the name be send . so he go away and after wash come back able to see . then the neighbour and others who have see him before in the street with his hand out for money say be not this the man who get money from people ? some say it be he others say no but he be like him . he say i be he . so they say to him how then be your eye make open ? his answer be the man who be name jesus put earth mixed with water on my eye and say to me go and make yourself clean in siloam so i go away and after wash be now able to see . and they say to him where be he ? his answer be i have no knowledge . they take him before the pharisee this man who have be blind . now the day on which the earth be mixed by jesus and the man 's eye be make open be the sabbath . so the pharisee put more question to him about how his eye have be make open . and he say to them he put earth on my eye and i have a wash and be able to see . then some of the pharisee say that man have not come from god for he do not keep the sabbath . others say how be it possible for a sinner to do such sign ? so there be a division among them . again they say to the blind man what have you to say about him for open your eye ? and he say he be a prophet . now the jew have no belief in the statement that he have be blind and be now able to see till they send for the father and mother of the man whose eye have be make open and put the question to them say be this your son of whom you say that he be blind at birth ? how be it then that he be now able to see ? in answer his father and mother say we be certain that this be our son and that he be blind at birth but how it be he be now able to see or who make his eye open we be not able to say put the question to him he be old enough to give an answer for himself . they say this because of their fear of the jew for the jew have come to an agreement that if any man say that jesus be the christ he would be put out of the synagogue . that be the reason why they say he be old enough put the question to him . so they send a second time for the man who have be blind and they say to him give glory to god it be clear to u that this man be a sinner . he say in answer i have no knowledge if he be a sinner or not but one thing i be certain about i be blind and now i see . then they say to him what do he do to you ? how do he give you the use of your eye ? his answer be i have say it before but your ear be shut why would you have me say it again ? be it your desire to become his disciple ? and they be angry with him and say you be his disciple but we be disciple of moses . we be certain that god give his word to moses but a for this man we have no knowledge where he come from . the man say in answer why here be a strange thing ! you have no knowledge where he come from though he give me the use of my eye . we have knowledge that god do not give ear to sinner but if any man be a worshipper of god and do his pleasure to him god 's ear be open . in all the year nobody have ever before see the eye of a man blind from birth make open . if this man do not come from god he would be unable to do anything . their answer be you come to birth through sin do you make yourself our teacher ? and they put him out of the synagogue . it come to the ear of jesus that they have put him out and meet him he say have you faith in the son of man ? he say in answer and who be he lord ? say so that i may have faith in him . jesus say to him you have see him it be he who be talk to you . and he say lord i have faith . and he give him worship . and jesus say i come into this world to be a judge so that those who do not see may see and those who see may become blind . these word come to the ear of the pharisee who be with him and they say to him be we then blind ? jesus say to them if you be blind you would have no sin but now that you say we see your sin be there still .truly i say to you he who do not go through the door into the place where the sheep be keep but get in by some other way be a thief and an outlaw . he who go in by the door be the keeper of the sheep . the porter let him in and the sheep give ear to his voice he say over the name of the sheep and take them out . when he have get them all out he go before them and the sheep go after him for they have knowledge of his voice . they will not go after another who be not their keeper but will go from him in flight because his voice be strange to them . in this jesus be teach them in the form of a story but what he say be not clear to them . so jesus say again truly i say to you i be the door of the sheep . all who come before me be thief and outlaw but the sheep do not give ear to them . i be the door if any man go in through me he will have salvation and will go in and go out and will get food . the thief come only to take the sheep and to put them to death he come for their destruction i have come so that they may have life and have it in great measure . i be the good keeper of sheep the good keeper give his life for the sheep . he who be a servant and not the keeper or the owner of the sheep see the wolf come and go in flight away from the sheep and the wolf come down on them and send them in all direction because he be a servant he have no interest in the sheep . i be the good keeper i have knowledge of my sheep and they have knowledge of me even a the father have knowledge of me and i of the father and i be give my life for the sheep . and i have other sheep which be not of this field i will be their guide in the same way and they will give ear to my voice so there will be one flock and one keeper . for this reason be i love by the father because i give up my life so that i may take it again . no one take it away from me i give it up of myself . i have power to give it up and i have power to take it again . these order i have from my father . there be a division again among the jew because of these word . and a number of them say he have an evil spirit and be out of his mind why do you give ear to him ? others say these be not the word of one who have an evil spirit . be it possible for an evil spirit to make blind people see ? then come the feast of the opening of the temple in jerusalem it be winter and jesus be walk in the temple in solomon 's covered way . then the jew come round him say how long be you go to keep u in doubt ? if you be the christ say so clearly . jesus say in answer i have say it and you have no belief the work which i do in my father 's name these give witness about me . but you have no belief because you be not of my sheep . my sheep give ear to my voice and i have knowledge of them and they come after me and i give them eternal life they will never come to destruction and no one will ever take them out of my hand . that which my father have give to me have more value than all and no one be able to take anything out of the father 's hand . i and my father be one . then the jew take up stone again to send at him . jesus say to them in answer i have let you see a number of good work from the father for which of those work be you stone me ? this be their answer we be not stone you for a good work but for evil word because be a man you make yourself god . in answer jesus say be there not a say in your law i say you be god ? if he say they be god to whom the word of god come and the writing may not be break do you say of him whom the father make holy and send into the world your word be evil because i say i be god 's son ? if i be not do the work of my father do not have belief in me but if i be do them then have belief in the work even if you have no belief in me so that you may see clearly and be certain that the father be in me and i be in the father . then again they make an attempt to take him but he get away from them . and he go again to the other side of the jordan to the place where john first give baptism and he be there for a time . and a great number of people come to him say john do no sign but everything john say of this man be true . and a number come to have faith in him there .now a certain man name lazarus be ill he be of bethany the town of mary and her sister martha . the mary whose brother lazarus be ill be the mary who put perfume oil on the lord and make his foot dry with her hair . so the sister send to him say lord your dear friend be ill. when this come to his ear jesus say the end of this disease be not death but the glory of god so that the son of god may have glory because of it . now jesus have love in his heart for martha and her sister and lazarus . so when the news come to him that lazarus be ill he do not go from the place where he be for two day . then after that time he say to his disciple let u go into judaea again . the disciple say to him master the jew be attempt only the other day to have you stone and be you go back there again ? then jesus say in answer be there not twelve hour in the day ? a man may go about in the day without fall because he see the light of this world . but if a man go about in the night he may have a fall because the light be not in him . these thing say he and after that he say to them lazarus our friend be at rest but i go so that i may make him come out of his sleep . then his disciple say to him lord if he be rest he will get well . jesus however be talk of his death but they have the idea that he be talk about take rest in sleep . then jesus say to them clearly lazarus be dead . and because of you i be glad i be not there so that you may have faith but let u go to him . then thomas who be name didymus say to the other disciple let u go so that we may be with him in death . now when jesus come he make the discovery that lazarus have be put into the earth four day before . now bethany be near to jerusalem about two mile away and a number of jew have come to martha and mary to give them comfort about their brother . when martha have the news that jesus be on the way she go out to him but mary do not go from the house . then martha say to jesus lord if you have be here my brother would not be dead . but i be certain that even now whatever request you make to god god will give it to you . jesus say to her your brother will come to life again . martha say to him i be certain that he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last day . jesus say to her i be myself that day and that life he who have faith in me will have life even if he be dead and no one who be live and have faith in me will ever see death . be this your faith ? she say to him yes lord my faith be that you be the christ the son of god who be to come into the world . and have say this she go away and say secretly to her sister mary the master be here and have send for you . and mary hearing this get up quickly and go to him . now jesus have not at this time come into the town but be still in the place where martha have see him . then the jew who be with her in the house comfort her when they saw mary get up quickly and go out go after her in the belief that she be go to the place of the dead and would be weep there . when mary come to where jesus be and saw him she go down at his foot say lord if you have be here my brother would not be dead . and when jesus saw her weeping and saw the jew weep who come with her his spirit be move and he be trouble and say where have you put him ? they say come and see lord . and jesus himself be weep . so the jew say see how dear he be to him ! but some of them say this man who make open the eye of the blind man be he not able to keep his friend from death ? so jesus deeply trouble in heart come to the place of the dead . it be a hole in the rock and a stone be over the opening . jesus say take away the stone . martha the sister of him who be dead say lord by this time the body will be smell for he have be dead four day . jesus say to her do i not say to you that if you have faith you would see the glory of god ? so they take away the stone . and jesus look up to heaven say father i give praise to you for hear me . i be certain that your ear be at all time open to me but i say it because of these who be here so that they may see that you send me . then he say in a loud voice lazarus come out ! and he who be dead come out with linen band fold tightly about his hand and foot and a cloth about his face . jesus say to them make him free and let him go . then a number of the jew who have come to mary and have see the thing which jesus do have belief in him . but some of them go to the pharisee with the news of what jesus have do . then the high priest and the pharisee have a meeting and say what be we do ? this man be do a number of sign . if we let him go on in this way everybody will have belief in him and the roman will come and take away our place and our nation . but one of them caiaphas who be high priest that year say to them you have no knowledge of anything you do not see that it be in your interest for one man to be put to death for the people so that all the nation may not come to destruction . he do not say this of himself but be the high priest that year he say a a prophet that jesus would be put to death for the nation and not for that nation only but for the purpose of unite in one body the child of god all over the world . and from that day they take think together how to put him to death . so jesus no longer go about publicly among the jew but go from there into the country near to the waste land to a town name ephraim where he be for some time with the disciple . now the passover of the jew be near and number of people go up from the country to jerusalem to make themselves clean before the passover . they be look for jesus and say to one another while they be in the temple what be your opinion ? will he not come to the feast ? now the chief priest and the pharisee have give order that if anyone have knowledge where he be he be to give them word so that they might take him .then six day before the passover jesus come to bethany where lazarus be whom jesus have make to come back from the dead . so they make him a meal there and he be wait on by martha and lazarus be among those who be seat with him at table . then mary take a pound of perfumed oil of great value put it on the foot of jesus and make them dry with her hair and the house become full of the smell of the perfume . but one of his disciple judas iscariot who be to give him up say why be not this perfume trade for three hundred penny and the money give to the poor ? he say this not because he have any love for the poor but because he be a thief and have the money bag take for himself what be put into it . then jesus say let her be . let her keep what she have for the day of my death . the poor you have ever with you but me you have not for ever . then a great number of the jew have news that he be there and they come not only because of jesus but so that they might see lazarus who have be dead and to whom he have give life . now there be talk among the chief priest of put lazarus to death for because of him a great number of the jew go away and have belief in jesus . the day after a great number of people who be there for the feast when they have the news that jesus be come to jerusalem take branch of palm tree and go out to him cry a blessing on him who come in the name of the lord the king of israel ! and jesus saw a young as and take his seat on it a the writing say have no fear daughter of zion see your king be come seat on a young as . these thing be not clear to his disciple at first but when jesus have be lift up into his glory then it come to their mind that these thing in the writing be about him and that they have be do to him . now the people who be with him when his voice come to lazarus in the place of the dead and give him life again have be talk about it . and that be the reason the people go out to him because it have come to their ear that he have do this sign . then the pharisee say one to another you see you be unable to do anything the world have go after him . now there be some greek among the people who have come up to give worship at the feast they come to philip who be of beth saida in galilee and make a request say sir we have a desire to see jesus . philip go and give word of it to andrew and andrew go with philip to jesus . and jesus say to them in answer the hour of the glory of the son of man have come . truly i say to you if a seed of grain do not go into the earth and come to an end it be still a seed and no more but through it death it give much fruit . he who be in love with life will have it take from him and he who have no care for his life in this world will keep it for ever and ever . if any man be my servant let him come after me and where i be there will my servant be . if any man become my servant my father will give him honour . now be my soul trouble and what be i to say ? father keep me from this hour . no for this purpose have i come to this hour . father give glory to your name . then there come a voice out of heaven say i have give it glory and i will give it glory again . hear the sound a number of people who be there say that it be thunder others say an angel be talk to him . jesus say in answer this voice come not for me but for you . now be this world to be judge now will the ruler of this world be send out . and i if i be lift up from the earth will make all men come to me . this he say point to the sort of death he would have . then the people in answer say to him the law say that the christ will have life without end how say you then that it be necessary for the son of man to be lift up ? who be this son of man ? jesus say to them for a little time longer the light will be among you while you have the light go on walking in it so that the dark may not overtake you one walk in the dark have no knowledge of where he be go . in so far a you have the light put your faith in the light so that you may become son of light . with these word jesus go away and for a time be not see again by them . but though he have do such a number of sign before them they still have no belief in him so that the word of the prophet isaiah might come true when he say lord who have any belief in our preaching ? and the arm of the lord to whom have it be unveil ? for this reason they be unable to have belief because isaiah say again he have make their eye blind and their heart hard for fear that they might see with their eye and get knowledge with their heart and be change and i might make them well . isaiah say these word because he saw his glory . his word be about him . however a number even of the ruler have belief in him but because of the pharisee they do not say so openly for fear that they might be shut out from the synagogue for the praise of men be dearer to them than the approval of god . then jesus say with a loud voice he who have faith in me have faith not in me but in him who send me . and he who see me see him who send me . i have come a a light into the world so that no one who have faith in me will go on living in the dark . and if any man give ear to my word and do not keep them i be not his judge i do not come to be judge of the world but to give salvation to the world . he who put me on one side and do not take my word to heart be not without a judge the word which i have say will be his judge on the last day . for i have not say it on my authority but the father who send me give me order what to say and how to say it . and i have knowledge that his order be eternal life so that the thing which i say i say them even a the father say them to me .now before the feast of the passover it be clear to jesus that the time have come for him to go away from this world to the father . have once have love for those in the world who be his his love for them go on to the end . so while a meal be go on the evil one have now put it into the heart of judas iscariot simon 's son to be false to him jesus be conscious that the father have put everything into his hand and that he come from god and be go to god get up from table put off his robe and take a cloth and put it round him . then he put water into a basin and be wash the foot of the disciple and dry them with the cloth which be round him . so he come to simon peter . peter say lord be my foot to be wash by you ? and jesus answering say to him what i do be not clear to you now but it will be clear to you in time to come . peter say i will never let my foot be wash by you never . jesus say in answer if i do not make you clean you have no part with me . simon peter say to him lord not my foot only but my hand and my head . jesus say to him he who be bath have need only to have his foot wash and then he be clean all over and you my disciple be clean but not all of you . he have knowledge who be false to him that be why he say you be not all clean . then after wash their foot and put on his robe again he take his seat and say to them do you see what i have do to you ? you give me the name of master and lord and you be right that be what i be . if then i the lord and the master have make your foot clean it be right for you to make one another 's foot clean . i have give you an example so that you may do what i have do to you . truly i say to you a servant be not great than his lord and he who be send be not great than the one who send him . if these thing be clear to you happy be you if you do them . i be not talk of you all i have knowledge of my true disciple but thing be a they be so that the writing may come true the foot of him who take bread with me be lift up against me . from this time forward i give you knowledge of thing before they come about so that when they come about you may have belief that i be he . truly i say to you he who take to his heart anyone whom i send take me to his heart and he who so take me take him who send me . when jesus have say this he be trouble in spirit and give witness say truly i say to you that one of you will be false to me . then the eye of the disciple be turn on one another in doubt a to whom he have in mind . there be at table one of his disciple the one dear to jesus rest his head on jesus ' breast . make a sign to him simon peter say who be it he be talk about ? he then rest his head on jesus ' breast say to him lord who be it ? this be the answer jesus give it be the one to whom i will give this bit of bread after i have put it in the vessel . then he take the bit of bread put it into the vessel and give it to judas the son of simon iscariot . and when juda take the bread satan go into him . then jesus say to him do quickly what you have to do . now it be not clear to anyone at table why he say this to him . some be of the opinion that because juda keep the money bag jesus say to him get the thing we have need of for the feast or that he be to give something to the poor . so judas have take the bit of bread straight away go out and it be night . then when he have go out jesus say now be glory give to the son of man and god be give glory in him . if god be give glory in him god will give him glory in himself and will give him glory even now . my dear child i be only to be with you a little long . then you will be look for me and a i say to the jew so now i say to you where i be go you may not come . i give you a new law have love one for another even a i have have love for you so be you to have love one for another . by this it will be clear to all men that you be my disciple if you have love one for another . simon peter say to him lord where be you go ? jesus say in answer where i be go you may not come with me now but you will come later . peter say to him why may i not come with you even now ? i will give up my life for you . jesus say in answer will you give up your life for me ? truly i say to you before the cry of the cock you will have say three time that you be not my disciple .let not your heart be trouble have faith in god and have faith in me . in my father 's house be room enough if it be not so would i have say that i be go to make ready a place for you ? and if i go and make ready a place for you i will come back again and will take you to be with me so that you may be where i be . and you all have knowledge of where i be go and of the way to it . thomas say lord we have no knowledge of where you be go how may we have knowledge of the way ? jesus say to him i be the true and living way no one come to the father but by me . if you have knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my father you have knowledge of him now and have see him . philip say to him lord let u see the father and we have need of nothing more . jesus say to him philip have i be with you all this time and still you have no knowledge of me ? he who have see me have see the father . why do you say let u see the father ? have you not faith that i be in the father and the father be in me ? the word which i say to you i say not from myself but the father who be in me all the time do his work . have faith that i be in the father and that the father be in me at least have faith in me because of what i do . truly i say to you he who put his faith in me will do the very work which i do and he will do great thing than these because i be go to my father . and whatever request you make in my name that i will do so that the father may have glory in the son . if you make any request to me in my name i will do it . if you have love for me you will keep my law . and i will make prayer to the father and he will give you another helper to be with you for ever even the spirit of true knowledge . that spirit the world be not able to take to it heart because it see him not and have no knowledge of him but you have knowledge of him because he be ever with you and will be in you . i will not let you be without a friend i be come to you . a little time longer and the world will see me no more but you will see me and you will be live because i be live . at that time it will be clear to you that i be in my father and you be in me and i in you . he who have my law and keep them he it be who have love for me and he who have love for me will be love by my father and i will have love for him and will let myself be see clearly by him . juda not iscariot say to him how be it that you will let yourself be see clearly by u and not by the world ? jesus say to him in answer if anyone have love for me he will keep my word and he will be dear to my father and we will come to him and make our live place with him . he who have no love for me do not keep my word and the word which you be hear be not my word but the father 's who send me . i have say all this to you while i be still with you . but the helper the holy spirit whom the father will send in my name will be your teacher in all thing and will put you in mind of everything i have say to you . may peace be with you my peace i give to you i give it not a the world give . let not your heart be trouble let it be without fear . keep in mind how i say to you i go away and come to you again . if you have love for me you would be glad because i be go to the father for the father be great than i. and now i have give you word of it before it come so that when it come you may have faith . after this i will not say much to you because the ruler of this world come and he have no power over me but he come so that the world may see that i have love for the father and that i be do a i be order by the father . get up and let u go .i be the true vine and my father be the gardener . he take away every branch in me which have no fruit and every branch which have fruit he make clean so that it may have more fruit . you be clean even now through the teaching which i have give you . be in me at all time a i be in you . a the branch be not able to give fruit of itself if it be not still on the vine so you be not able to do so if you be not in me . i be the vine you be the branch he who be in me at all time a i be in him give much fruit because without me you be able to do nothing . if a man do not keep himself in me he become dead and be cut off like a dry branch such branch be take up and put in the fire and burn . if you be in me at all time and my word be in you then anything for which you make a request will be do for you . here be my father 's glory in that you give much fruit and so be my true disciple . even a the father have give me his love so i have give my love to you be ever in my love . if you keep my law you will be ever in my love even a i have keep my father 's law and be ever in his love . i have say these thing to you so that i may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete . this be the law i give you have love one for another even a i have love for you . great love have no man than this that a man give up his life for his friend . you be my friend if you do what i give you order to do . no longer do i give you the name of servant because a servant be without knowledge of what his master be do i give you the name of friend because i have give you knowledge of all the thing which my father have say to me . you do not take me for yourselves but i take you for myself and i give you the work of go about and produce fruit which will be for ever so that whatever request you make to the father in my name he may give it to you . so this be my law for you have love one for another . if you be hat by the world keep in mind that i be hat by the world before you . if you be of the world you would be love by the world but because you be not of the world but i have take you out of the world you be hat by the world . keep in mind the word i say to you a servant be not great than his lord . if they be cruel to me they will be cruel to you if they keep my word they will keep yours . they will do all this to you because of my name because they have no knowledge of him who send me . if i have not come and be their teacher they would have have no sin but now they have no reason to give for their sin . he who have hate for me have hate for my father . if i have not do among them the work which no other man ever do they would have have no sin but now they have see and they have have hate in their heart for me and my father . this come about so that the writing in their law may be make true their hate for me be without cause . when the helper come whom i will send to you from the father even the spirit of true knowledge who come from the father he will give witness about me and you in addition will give witness because you have be with me from the first .i have say these thing to you so that you may not be in doubt . they will put you out of the synagogue yes the time be come when whoever put you to death will have the belief that he be do god 's pleasure . they will do these thing to you because they have not have knowledge of the father or of me . i have say these thing to you so that when the time come what i have say may come to your mind . i do not say them to you at the first because then i be still with you . but now i be go to him who send me and not one of you say to me where be you go ? but your heart be full of sorrow because i have say these thing . but what i be say be true my go be for your good for if i do not go away the helper will not come to you but if i go i will send him to you . and he when he come will make the world conscious of sin and of righteousness and of be judge of sin because they have not faith in me of righteousness because i go to the father and you will see me no more of be judge because the ruler of this world have be judge . i have still much to say to you but you be not strong enough for it now . however when he the spirit of true knowledge have come he will be your guide into all true knowledge for his word will not come from himself but whatever have come to his hearing that he will say and he will make clear to you the thing to come . he will give me glory because he will take of what be mine and make it clear to you . everything which the father have be mine that be why i say he will take of what be mine and will make it clear to you . after a little time you will see me no longer and then again after a little time you will see me . so some of the disciple say one to another what be this he be say after a little time you will see me no longer and then again after a little time you will see me ? and i be go to the father ? so they say again and again what be this he be say a little time ? his word be not clear to u . jesus saw that they have a desire to put the question to him so he say to them be this what you be question one with another why i say after a little time you will see me no longer and then again after a little time you will see me ? truly i say to you you will be weep and sorrow but the world will be glad you will be sad but your sorrow will be turn into joy . when a woman be about to give birth she have sorrow because her hour be come but when she have give birth to the child the pain be put out of her mind by the joy that a man have come into the world . so you have sorrow now but i will see you again and your heart will be glad and no one will take away your joy . and on that day you will put no question to me . truly i say to you whatever request you make to the father he will give it to you in my name . up to now you have make no request in my name do so and it will be answer so that your heart may be full of joy . all this i have say to you in veiled language but the time be come when i will no longer say thing in veiled language but will give you knowledge of the father clearly . in that day you will make request in my name and i do not say that i will make prayer to the father for you for the father himself give his love to you because you have give your love to me and have have faith that i come from god . i come out from the father and have come into the world again i go away from the world and go to the father . his disciple say now you be talk clearly and not in veiled language . now we be certain that you have knowledge of all thing and have no need for anyone to put question to you through this we have faith that you come from god . jesus make answer have you faith now ? see a time be come yes it be now here when you will go away in all direction every man to his house and i will be by myself but i be not by myself because the father be with me . i have say all these thing to you so that in me you may have peace . in the world you have trouble but take heart ! i have overcome the world .jesus say these thing then lift his eye to heaven he say father the time have now come give glory to your son so that the son may give glory to you even a you give him authority over all flesh to give eternal life to all those whom you have give to him . and this be eternal life to have knowledge of you the only true god and of him whom you have send even jesus christ . i have give you glory on the earth have do all the work which you give me to do . and now father let me have glory with you even that glory which i have with you before the world be . i have give knowledge of your name to the men whom you give me out of the world yours they be and you give them to me and they have keep your word . now it be clear to them that whatever you have give to me come from you because i have give them the word which you give to me and they have take them to heart and have certain knowledge that i come from you and they have faith that you send me . my prayer be for them my prayer be not for the world but for those whom you have give to me because they be yours all mine be yours and yours be mine and i have glory in them . and now i will be no longer in the world but they be in the world and i come to you . holy father keep them in your name which you have give to me so that they may be one even a we be one . while i be with them i keep them safe in your name which you have give to me i take care of them and not one of them have come to destruction but only the son of destruction so that the writing might come true . and now i come to you and these thing i say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them . i have give your word to them and they be hat by the world because they be not of the world even a i be not of the world . my prayer be not that you will take them out of the world but that you will keep them from the evil one . they be not of the world any more than i be of the world . make them holy by the true word your word be the true word . even a you have send me into the world so i have send them into the world . and for them i make myself holy so that they may be make truly holy . my prayer be not for them only but for all who will have faith in me through their word may they all be one ! even a you father be in me and i be in you so let them be in u so that all men may come to have faith that you send me . and the glory which you have give to me i have give to them so that they may be one even a we be one i in them and you in me so that they may be make completely one and so that it may become clear to all men that you have send me and that they be love by you a i be love by you . father it be my desire that these whom you have give to me may be by my side where i be so that they may see my glory which you have give to me because you have love for me before the world come into be . father of righteousness i have knowledge of you though the world have not and to these it be clear that you send me and i have give to them knowledge of your name and will give it so that the love which you have for me may be in them and i in them .when jesus have say these word he go out with his disciple over the stream kedron to a garden into which he go with his disciple . and juda who be false to him have knowledge of the place because jesus go there frequently with his disciple . so judas get a band of arm men and police from the chief priest and pharisee go there with light and with arm . then jesus have knowledge of everything which be come on him go forward and say to them who be you look for ? their answer be jesus the nazarene . jesus say i be he . and juda who be false to him be there at their side . and when he say to them i be he they go back fall to the earth . so again he put the question to them who be you look for ? and they say jesus the nazarene . jesus make answer i have say that i be he if you be look for me let these men go away . he say this so that his word might come true i have keep safe all those whom you give to me . then simon peter who have a sword take it out and give the high priest 's servant a blow cut off his right ear . the servant 's name be malchus . then jesus say to peter put back your sword be i not to take the cup which my father have give to me ? then the band and the chief captain and the police take jesus and put cord round him . they take him first to annas because anna be the father in law of caiaphas who be the high priest that year . it be caiaphas who have say to the jew that it be in their interest for one man to be put to death for the people . and simon peter go after jesus with another disciple . now that disciple be a friend of the high priest and he go in with jesus into the house of the high priest but peter be keep outside at the door . then this other disciple who be a friend of the high priest come out and have a word with the girl who keep the door and take peter in . then the girl who be the door keeper say to peter be you not one of this man 's disciple ? in answer he say i be not . now the servant and the police have make a fire of coal because it be cold they be warm themselves in front of it and peter be there with them warm himself . then the high priest put question to jesus about his disciple and his teaching . jesus make answer i say thing openly to the world at all time i have give my teaching in the synagogue and in the temple to which all the jew come and i have say nothing secretly . why be you question me ? put question to my hearer about what i have say to them they have knowledge of what i say . when he say this one of the police by his side give him a blow with his open hand say do you give such an answer to the high priest ? jesus say in answer if i have say anything evil give witness to the evil but if i say what be true why do you give me blow ? then annas send him chain to caiaphas the high priest . but simon peter be still there warm himself by the fire . they say to him be you not one of his disciple ? he say no i be not . one of the servant of the high priest a relation of him whose ear have be cut off by peter say do i not see you with him in the garden ? then again peter say no . and straight away a cock give it cry . so they take jesus from the house of caiaphas to the praetorium . it be early . they themselves do not go into the praetorium so that they might not become unclean but might take the passover . so pilate come out to them and put the question what have you to say against this man ? they say to him in answer if the man be not a wrongdoer we would not have give him up to you . then pilate say to them take him yourselves and let him be judge by your law . but the jew say to him we have no right to put any man to death . that the word of jesus might come true point to the sort of death he would have . then pilate go back into the praetorium and sent for jesus and say to him be you the king of the jew ? jesus make answer do you say this of yourself or do others say it about me ? pilate say be i a jew ? your nation and the chief priest have give you into my hand what have you do ? jesus say in answer my kingdom be not of this world if my kingdom be of this world my disciple would have make a good fight to keep me out of the hand of the jew but my kingdom be not here . then pilate say to him be you then a king ? jesus make answer you say that i be a king . for this purpose be i give birth and for this purpose i come into the world that i might give witness to what be true . every lover of what be true give ear to my voice . pilate say to him true ? what be true ? have say this he go out again to the jew and say to them i see no wrong in him . but every year you make a request to me to let a prisoner go free at the passover . be it your desire that i let the king of the jew go free ? then again they give a loud cry not this man but barabbas . now barabbas be an outlaw .then pilate take jesus and have him whip with cord . and the men of the army make a crown of thorn and put it on his head and they put a purple robe on him . and they keep come and say long life to the king of the jew ! and they give him blow with their hand . and pilate go out again and say to them see i let him come out to you to make it clear to you that i see no wrong in him . then jesus come out with the crown of thorn and the purple robe . and pilate say to them here be the man ! so when the chief priest and the police saw him they give a loud cry to the cross ! to the cross ! pilate say to them take him yourselves and put him on the cross i see no crime in him . and the jew make answer we have a law and by that law it be right for him to be put to death because he say he be the son of god . when this say come to pilate 's ear his fear become great and he go again into the praetorium and say to jesus where do you come from ? but jesus give him no answer . then pilate say to him you say nothing to me ? be it not clear to you that i have power to let you go free and power to put you to death on the cross ? jesus give this answer you would have no power at all over me if it be not give to you by god so that he who give me up to you have the great sin . hear this pilate have a desire to let him go free but the jew say in a loud voice if you let this man go you be not caesar 's friend everyone who make himself a king go against caesar . so when these word come to pilate 's ear he take jesus out seat himself in the judge 's seat in a place name in hebrew gabbatha or the stone floor . it be the day when they make ready for the passover and it be about the sixth hour . and he say to the jew there be your king ! then they give a loud cry away with him ! away with him ! to the cross ! pilate say to them be i to put your king to death on the cross ? the chief priest say in answer we have no king but caesar . so then he give him up to them to be put to death on the cross . and they take jesus away and he go out with his cross on him to the place which be name dead man 's head in hebrew golgotha where they put him on the cross with two others one on this side and one on that and jesus in the middle . and pilate put on the cross a statement in write . the writing be jesus the nazarene the king of the jew . the writing be see by a number of the jew for the place where jesus be put to death on the cross be near the town and the writing be in hebrew and latin and greek . then the chief priest of the jew say to pilate do not put the king of the jew but he say i be the king of the jew . but pilate make answer what i have put in writing will not be change . and when jesus be nail to the cross the men of the army take his clothing and make a division of it into four part to every man a part and they take his coat now the coat be without a join make out of one bit of cloth . so they say among themselves let this not be cut up but let u put it to the decision of chance and see who get it . they do this so that the writing might come true which say they make a distribution of my clothing among them and my coat they put to the decision of chance . this be what the men of the army do . now by the side of the cross of jesus be his mother and his mother 's sister mary the wife of cleopas and mary magdalene . so when jesus saw his mother and the disciple who be dear to him he say to his mother mother there be your son ! then he say to the disciple there be your mother ! and from that hour the disciple take her to his house . after this be conscious that all thing have now be do so that the writing might come true jesus say give me water . now there be a vessel ready full of bitter wine and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to his mouth . so when jesus have take the wine he say all be do . and with his head bent he give up his spirit . now it be the day of get ready for the passover and so that the body might not be on the cross on the sabbath because the day of that sabbath be a great day the jew make a request to pilate that their leg might be break and that they might be take away . so the men of the army come and the leg of the first be break and then of the other who be put to death on the cross with jesus but when they come to jesus they saw that he be dead by this time and so his leg be not break but one of the men make a wound in his side with a spear and straight away there come out blood and water . and he who saw it have give witness and his witness be true he be certain that what he say be true so that you may have belief . these thing come about so that the writing might be true no bone of his body will be break . and again another verse say they will see him who be wound by their spear . after these thing joseph of arimathaea who be a disciple of jesus but secretly for fear of the jew make a request to pilate to let him take away the body of jesus and pilate say he might do so . so he go and take away his body . and nicodemus come he who have first come to jesus by night with a roll of myrrh and aloe mix about a hundred pound . then they take the body of jesus fold linen about it with the spice a be the way of the jew when they put the dead to rest . now there be a garden near the cross and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man have ever be put . so they put jesus there because it be the jew ' day of get ready for the passover and the place be near .now on the first day of the week very early while it be still dark mary magdalene come to the place and saw that the stone have be take away from it . then she go run to simon peter and to the other disciple who be love by jesus and say to them they have take away the lord out of the place of the dead and we have no knowledge where they have put him . so peter and the other disciple go out to the place of the dead . they go run together and the other disciple get in front of peter and come first to the hole in the rock and look in he saw the linen band on the earth but he do not go in then simon peter come after him and go into the hole in the rock and he saw the linen band on the earth and the cloth which have be round his head not with the linen band but roll up in a place by itself . then the other disciple who come there first go in and he saw and belief come to him . for at that time they have no knowledge that the writing say that he would have to come again from the dead . so then the disciple go away again to their house . but mary be still there outside the hole in the rock weeping and while she be weep and look into the hole she saw two angel in white seat where the body of jesus have be one at the head and the other at the foot . they say to her woman why be you weep ? she say to them because they have take away my lord and i have no knowledge where they have put him . and then look round she saw jesus there but have no idea that it be jesus . jesus say to her woman why be you weep ? who be you look for ? she take him for the gardener say to him sir if you have take him away from here say where you have put him and i will take him away . jesus say to her mary ! turn she say to him in hebrew rabboni ! which be to say master . jesus say to her do not put your hand on me for i have not go up to the father but go to my brother and say to them i go up to my father and your father to my god and your god . mary magdalene go with the news to the disciple and say she have see the lord and that he have say these thing to her . at even on that day the first day of the week when for fear of the jew the door be shut where the disciple be jesus come among them and say to them may peace be with you ! and when he have say this he let them see his hand and his side . then the disciple be glad when they saw the lord . and jesus say to them again may peace be with you ! a the father send me even so i now send you . and when he have say this breathing on them he say to them let the holy spirit come on you any to whom you give forgiveness will be make free from their sin and any from whom you keep back forgiveness will still be in their sin . now thomas one of the twelve name didymus be not with them when jesus come . so the other disciple say to him we have see the lord . but he say to them if i do not see in his hand the print of the nail and put my finger into the print of the nail and if i do not put my hand into his side i will never have belief . and after eight day his disciple be again in the house and thomas be with them . though the door be shut jesus come and take his place in the middle of them he say may peace be with you ! then he say to thomas put out your finger and see my hand and put your hand here into my side and be no longer in doubt but have belief . and thomas say in answer my lord and my god ! jesus say to him because you have see me you have belief a blessing will be on those who have belief though they have not see me ! a number of other sign jesus do before his disciple which be not record in this book but these be record so that you may have faith that jesus be the christ the son of god and so that have this faith you may have life in his name .after these thing jesus let himself be see again by the disciple at the sea of tiberias and it come about in this way . simon peter thomas name didymus nathanael of cana in galilee the son of zebedee and two others of his disciple be all together . simon peter say to them i be go fishing . they say to him and we will come with you . they go out and get into the boat but that night they take no fish . now very early in the morning jesus be there by the edge of the sea though the disciple be not conscious that it be jesus . so jesus say to them child have you take any fish ? they make answer no . and he say to them let down the net on the right side of the boat and you will get some . so they put it in the water and now they be not able to get it up again because of the great number of fish . so the disciple who be dear to jesus say to peter it be the lord ! hearing that it be the lord peter put his coat round him because he be not clothe and go into the sea . and the other disciple come in the little boat they be not far from land only about two hundred cubit off pull the net full of fish . when they get to land they saw a fire of coal there with fish cooking on it and bread . jesus say to them get some of the fish which you have now take . so peter go to the boat and come back pull the net to land full of great fish a hundred and fifty three and though there be such a number the net be not break . jesus say to them come and take some food . and all the disciple be in fear of put the question who be you ? be conscious that it be the lord . then jesus come and take the bread and give it to them and the fish in the same way . now this be the third time that jesus let himself be see by the disciple after he have come back from the dead . then when they have take food jesus say to simon peter simon son of john be your love for me great than the love of these others ? he say to him yes lord you be certain of my love for you . he say to him then give my lambs food . again a second time he say to him simon son of john have you any love for me ? yes lord he say you be certain of my love for you . then take care of my sheep say jesus . he say to him a third time simon son of john be i dear to you ? now peter be trouble in his heart because he put the question a third time be i dear to you ? and he say to him lord you have knowledge of all thing you see that you be dear to me . jesus say to him then give my sheep food . truly i say to you when you be young you make yourself ready and go wherever you have a desire to go but when you be old you will put out your hand and another will make you ready and you will be take where you have no desire to go . now this he say point out the sort of death by which he would give god glory . and after say this he say to him come after me . then peter turn round saw the disciple who be dear to jesus come after them the disciple who be rest on his breast at the last meal and say lord who be it who will be false to you ? see him peter say to jesus what about this man ? jesus say to him if it be my desire for him to be here till i come back what be that to you ? come yourself after me . so this say go about among the brother that this disciple would not undergo death jesus however do not say that he would not undergo death but if it be my desire for him to be here till i come back what be that to you ? this be the disciple who give witness about these thing and who put them in write and we have knowledge that his witness be true . and jesus do such a number of other thing that if every one be record it be my opinion that even the world itself be not great enough for the book there would be .paul a servant of jesus christ an apostle by the selection of god give authority a a preacher of the good news of which god have give word before by his prophet in the holy writing about his son who in the flesh come from the family of david but be mark out a son of god in power by the holy spirit through the come to life again of the dead jesus christ our lord through whom grace have be give to u send u out to make disciple to the faith among all nation for his name among whom you in the same way have be mark out to be disciple of jesus christ to all those who be in rome love by god mark out a saint grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . first of all i give praise to my god through jesus christ for you all because news of your faith have go into all the world . for god be my witness whose servant i be in spirit in the good news of his son that you be at all time in my memory and in my prayer and that i be ever make prayer that god will give me a good journey to you . for i have a strong desire to see you and to give you some grace of the spirit so that you may be make strong that be to say that all of u may be comfort together by the faith which be in you and in me . you may be certain my brother that it have frequently be in my mind to come to you but till now i be keep from it so that i might have some fruit from you in the same way a i have have it from the other nation . i have a debt to greeks and to the nation outside to the wise and to those who have no learning . for which reason i have the desire as far a i be able to give the knowledge of the good news to you who be in rome . for i have no feeling of shame about the good news because it be the power of god give salvation to everyone who have faith to the jew first and then to the greek . for in it there be the revelation of the righteousness of god from faith to faith a it be say in the holy writing the man who do righteousness will be live by his faith . for there be a revelation of the wrath of god from heaven against all the wrongdoing and evil thought of men who keep down what be true by wrongdoing because the knowledge of god may be see in them god have make it clear to them . for from the first making of the world those thing of god which the eye be unable to see that be his eternal power and existence be fully make clear he have give the knowledge of them through the thing which he have make so that men have no reason for wrongdoing because have the knowledge of god they do not give glory to god a god and do not give praise but their mind be full of foolish thing and their heart be without sense be make dark . seem to be wise they be in fact foolish and by them the glory of the eternal god be change and make into the image of man who be not eternal and of bird and beast and thing which go on the earth . for this reason god give them up to the evil desire of their heart work shame in their body with one another because by them the true word of god be change into that which be false and they give worship and honour to the thing which be make and not to him who make it to whom be bless for ever . so be it . for this reason god give them up to evil passion and their woman be change the natural use into one which be unnatural and in the same way the men give up the natural use of the woman and be burn in their desire for one another men do shame with men and get in their body the right reward of their evil do . and because they have not the mind to keep god in their knowledge god give them up to an evil mind to do those thing which be not right be full of all wrongdoing evil desire for the good of others hate envy put to death fight deceit cruel way evil talk and false statement about others hat by god full of pride without respect full of loud talk give to evil invention not honour father or mother without knowledge not true to their undertaking unkind have no mercy who though they have knowledge of the law of god that the fate of those who do these thing be death not only go on do these thing themselves but give approval to those who do them .so you have no reason whoever you be for judge for in judge another you be judge yourself for you do the same thing . and we be conscious that god be a true judge against those who do such thing . but you who be judge another for do what you do yourself be you hop that god 's decision will not take effect against you ? or be it nothing to you that god have pity on you wait and put up with you for so long not see that in his pity god 's desire be to give you a change of heart ? but by your hard and unchanged heart you be store up wrath for yourself in the day of the revelation of god 's judging in righteousness who will give to every man his right reward to those who go on with good work in the hope of glory and honour and salvation from death he will give eternal life but to those who from a love of competition be not guide by what be true will come the heat of his wrath trouble and sorrow on all whose work be evil to the jew first and then to the greek but glory and honour and peace to all whose work be good to the jew first and then to the greek for one man be not different from another before god . all those who have do wrong without the law will get destruction without the law and those who have do wrong under the law will have their punishment by the law for it be not the hearer of the law who will be judge a have righteousness before god but only the doer for when the gentile without the law have a natural desire to do the thing in the law they be a law to themselves because the work of the law be see in their heart their sense of right and wrong give witness to it while their mind be at one time judge them and at another give them approval in the day when god will be a judge of the secret of men a it say in the good news of which i be a preacher through jesus christ . but a for you who have the name of jew and be rest on the law and take pride in god and have knowledge of his desire and be a judge of the thing which be different have the learning of the law in the belief that you be a guide to the blind a light to those in the dark a teacher of the foolish have in the law the form of knowledge and of what be true you who give teach to others do you give it to yourself ? you who say that a man may not take what be not his do you take what be not yours ? you who say that a man may not be untrue to his wife be you true to yours ? you who be a hater of image do you do wrong to the house of god ? you who take pride in the law be you do wrong to the honour of god by behaviour which be against the law ? for the name of god be sham among the gentile because of you a it be say in the holy writing . it be true that circumcision be of use if you keep the law but if you go against the law it be a if you have it not . if those who have not circumcision keep the rule of the law will it not be credit to them a circumcision ? and they by their keep of the law without circumcision will be judge of you by whom the law be break though you have the letter of the law and circumcision . the true jew be not one who be only so publicly and circumcision be not that which may be see in the flesh but he be a jew who be a secret one whose circumcision be of the heart in the spirit and not in the letter whose praise be not from men but from god .how then be the jew good off ? or what profit be there in circumcision ? much in every way first of all because the word of god be give to them . and if some have no faith will that make the faith of god without effect ? in no way but let god be true though every man be see to be untrue a it be say in the writing that your word may be see to be true and you may be see to be right when you be judge . but if the righteousness of god be support by our wrongdoing what be to be say ? be it wrong for god to be angry a men may say ? in no way because if it be so how be god able to be the judge of all the world ? but if because i be untrue god be see to be true get more glory why be i to be judge a a sinner ? let u not do evil so that good may come a statement which we be falsely say by some to have make because such behaviour will have it right punishment . what then ? be we bad off than they ? in no way because we have before make it clear that jews as well a greek be all under the power of sin a it be say in the holy writing there be not one who do righteousness not one who have the knowledge of what be right not one who be a searcher after god they have all go out of the way there be no profit in any of them there be not one who do good not so much a one their throat be like an open place of death with their tongue they have say what be not true the poison of snake be under their lip whose mouth be full of curse and bitter word their foot be quick in run after blood destruction and trouble be in their way and of the way of peace they have no knowledge there be no fear of god before their eye . now we have knowledge that what the law say be for those who be under the law so that every mouth may be stop and all men may be judge by god because by the work of the law no man be able to have righteousness in his eye for through the law come the knowledge of sin . but now without the law there be a revelation of the righteousness of god to which witness be give by the law and the prophet that be the righteousness of god through faith in jesus christ to all those who have faith and one man be not different from another for all have do wrong and be far from the glory of god and they may have righteousness put to their credit freely by his grace through the salvation which be in christ jesus whom god have put forward a the sign of his mercy through faith by his blood to make clear his righteousness when in his pity god let the sin of early time go without punishment and to make clear his righteousness now so that he might himself be upright and give righteousness to him who have faith in jesus . what reason then be there for pride ? it be shut out . by what sort of law ? of work ? no but by a law of faith . for this reason then a man may get righteousness by faith without the work of the law . or be god the god of jew only ? be he not in the same way the god of gentile ? yes of gentile if god be one and he will give righteousness because of faith to those who have circumcision and through faith to those who have not circumcision . do we then through faith make the law of no effect ? in no way but we make it clear that the law be important .what then may we say that abraham our father after the flesh have get ? for if abraham get righteousness by work he have reason for pride but not before god . but what do it say in the holy writing ? and abraham have faith in god and it be put to his account a righteousness . now the reward be credit to him who do work not a of grace but a a debt . but to him who without work have faith in him who give righteousness to the evil doer his faith be put to his account a righteousness . a david say that there be a blessing on the man to whose account god put righteousness without work say happy be those who have forgiveness for their wrongdoing and whose sin be cover . happy be the man against whom no sin be record by the lord . be this blessing then for the circumcision only or in the same way for those who have not circumcision ? for we say that the faith of abraham be put to his account a righteousness . how then be it judge ? when he have circumcision or when he have it not ? not when he have it but when he do not have it and he be give the sign of circumcision a a witness of the faith which he have before he underwent circumcision so that he might be the father of all those who have faith though they have not circumcision and so that righteousness might be put to their account and the father of circumcision to those who not only be of the circumcision but who keep to the way of that faith which our father abraham have before he underwent circumcision . for god 's word that the earth would be his heritage be give to abraham not through the law but through the righteousness of faith . for if they who be of the law be the people who get the heritage then faith be make of no use and the word of god have no power for the outcome of the law be wrath but where there be no law it will not be break . for this reason it be of faith so that it may be through grace and so that the word of god may be certain to all the seed not only to that which be of the law but to that which be of the faith of abraham who be the father of u all a it be say in the holy writing i have make you a father of a number of nation before him in whom he have faith that be god who give life to the dead and to whom the thing which be not be a if they be . who without reason for hope in faith go on hop so that he become the father of a number of nation a it have be say so will your seed be . and not be feeble in faith though his body seem to him little well than dead he be about a hundred year old and sarah be no longer able to have child still he do not give up faith in the undertaking of god but be make strong by faith give glory to god and be certain that god be able to keep his word . for which reason it be put to his account a righteousness . now it be not because of him only that this be say but for u in addition to whose account it will be put if we have faith in him who make jesus our lord come back again from the dead who be put to death for our evil do and come to life again so that we might have righteousness .for which reason because we have righteousness through faith let u be at peace with god through our lord jesus christ through whom in the same way we have be able by faith to come to this grace in which we now be and let u have joy in hope of the glory of god . and not only so but let u have joy in our trouble in the knowledge that trouble give u the power of wait and wait give experience and experience hope and hope do not put to shame because our heart be full of the love of god through the holy spirit which be give to u . for when we be still without strength at the right time christ give his life for evil doer . now it be hard for anyone to give his life even for an upright man though it might be that for a good man someone would give his life . but god have make clear his love to u in that when we be still sinner christ give his life for u . much more if we now have righteousness by his blood will salvation from the wrath of god come to u through him . for if when we be hater of god the death of his son make u at peace with him much more now that we be his friend will we have salvation through his life and not only so but we have joy in god through our lord jesus christ through whom we be now at peace with god . for this reason a through one man sin come into the world and death because of sin and so death come to all men because all have do evil because till the law come sin be in existence but sin be not put to the account of anyone when there be no law to be break . but still death have power from adam till moses even over those who have not do wrong like adam who be a picture of him who be to come . but the free give of god be not like the wrongdoing of man . for if by the wrongdoing of one man death come to number of men much more do the grace of god and the free give by the grace of one man jesus christ come to men . and the free give have not the same effect a the sin of one for the effect of one man 's sin be punishment by the decision of god but the free give have power to give righteousness to wrongdoer in great number . for if by the wrongdoing of one death be rule through the one much more will those to whom have come the wealth of grace and the give of righteousness be rule in life through the one even jesus christ . so then a the effect of one act of wrongdoing be that punishment come on all men even so the effect of one act of righteousness be righteousness of life for all men . because a number of men become sinner through the wrongdoing of one man even so will great number get righteousness through the keep of the word of god by one man . and the law come in addition to make wrongdoing bad but where there be much sin there be much more grace that a sin have power in death so grace might have power through righteousness to eternal life through jesus christ our lord .what may we say then ? be we to go on in sin so that there may be more grace ? in no way . how may we who be dead to sin be live in it any longer ? or be you without the knowledge that all we who have baptism into christ jesus have baptism into his death ? we have be place with him among the dead through baptism into death so that a christ come again from the dead by the glory of the father we in the same way might be live in new life . for if we have be make like him in his death we will in the same way be like him in his come to life again be conscious that our old man be put to death on the cross with him so that the body of sin might be put away and we might no longer be servant to sin . because he who be dead be free from sin . but if we be dead with christ we have faith that we will be live with him have knowledge that because christ have come back from the dead he will never again go down to the dead death have no more power over him . for his death be a death to sin but his life now be a life which he be live to god . even so see yourselves a dead to sin but live to god in christ jesus . for this cause do not let sin be rule in your body which be under the power of death so that you give way to it desire and do not give your body to sin a the instrument of wrongdoing but give yourselves to god a those who be live from the dead and your body a instrument of righteousness to god . for sin may not have rule over you because you be not under law but under grace . what then ? be we to go on in sin because we be not under law but under grace ? let it not be so . be you not conscious that you be the servant of him to whom you give yourselves to do his desire ? if to sin the end be death or if to do the desire of god the end be righteousness . but praise be to god that though you be the servant of sin you have now give yourselves freely to that form of teach under which you be place and be make free from sin you have be make the servant of righteousness . i be use word in the way of men because your flesh be feeble a you give your body a servant to what be unclean and to evil to do evil so now give them a servant to righteousness to do what be holy . when you be servant of sin you be free from righteousness . what fruit have you at that time in the thing which be now a shame to you ? for the end of such thing be death . but now be free from sin and have be make servant to god you have your fruit in that which be holy and the end be eternal life . for the reward of sin be death but what god freely give be eternal life in jesus christ our lord .be it not clear my brother i be use an argument to those who have knowledge of the law that the law have power over a man as long a he be live ? for the woman who have a husband be place by the law under the power of her husband as long a he be live but if her husband be dead she be free from the law of the husband . so if while the husband be live she be join to another man she will get the name of one who be untrue to her husband but if the husband be dead she be free from the law so that she be not untrue even if she take another man . in the same way my brother you be make dead to the law through the body of christ so that you might be join to another even to him who come again from the dead so that we might give fruit to god . for when we be in the flesh the evil passion which come into be through the law be work in our body to give the fruit of death . but now we be free from the law have be make dead to that which have power over u so that we be servant in the new way of the spirit not in the old way of the letter . what then be to be say ? be the law sin ? in no way . but i would not have have knowledge of sin but for the law for i would not have be conscious of desire if the law have not say you may not have a desire for what be another 's . but sin take it chance through that which be order by the law be work in me every form of desire because without the law sin be dead . and there be a time when i be live without the law but when the law give it order sin come to life and put me to death and i make the discovery that the law whose purpose be to give life have become a cause of death for i be trick and put to death by sin which take it chance through the law . but the law be holy and it order be holy upright and good . be then that which be good death to me ? in no way . but the purpose be that sin might be see to be sin by work death to me through that which be good so that through the order of the law sin might seem much more evil . for we be conscious that the law be of the spirit but i be of the flesh give into the power of sin . and i have no clear knowledge of what i be do for that which i have a mind to do i do not but what i have hate for that i do . but if i do that which i have no mind to do i be in agreement with the law that the law be good . so it be no longer i who do it but the sin living in me . for i be conscious that in me that be in my flesh there be nothing good i have the mind but not the power to do what be right . for the good which i have a mind to do i do not but the evil which i have no mind to do that i do . but if i do what i have no mind to do it be no longer i who do it but the sin living in me . so i see a law that though i have a mind to do good evil be present in me . in my heart i take pleasure in the law of god but i see another law in my body work against the law of my mind and make me the servant of the law of sin which be in my flesh . how unhappy be i ! who will make me free from the body of this death ? i give praise to god through jesus christ our lord . so with my mind i be a servant to the law of god but with my flesh to the law of sin .for this cause those who be in christ jesus will not be judge a sinner . for the law of the spirit of life in christ jesus have make me free from the law of sin and death . for what the law be not able to do because it be feeble through the flesh god send his son in the image of the evil flesh and a an offering for sin give his decision against sin in the flesh so that what be order by the law might be do in u who be live not in the way of the flesh but in the way of the spirit . for those who be live in the way of the flesh give their mind to the thing of the flesh but those who go in the way of the spirit to the thing of the spirit . for the mind of the flesh be death but the mind of the spirit be life and peace because the mind of the flesh be opposite to god it be not under the law of god and be not able to be so that those who be in the flesh be not able to give pleasure to god . you be not in the flesh but in the spirit if the spirit of god be in you . but if any man have not the spirit of christ he be not one of his . and if christ be in you the body be dead because of sin but the spirit be life because of righteousness . but if the spirit of him who make jesus come again from the dead be in you he who make christ jesus come again from the dead will in the same way through his spirit which be in you give life to your body which now be under the power of death . so then my brother we be in debt not to the flesh to be live in the way of the flesh for if you go in the way of the flesh death will come on you but if by the spirit you put to death the work of the body you will have life . and all those who be guide by the spirit of god be son of god . for you do not get the spirit of servant again to put you in fear but the spirit of son be give to you by which we say abba father . the spirit be witness with our spirit that we be child of god and if we be child we have a right to a part in the heritage a part in the thing of god together with christ so that if we have a part in his pain we will in the same way have a part in his glory . i be of the opinion that there be no comparison between the pain of this present time and the glory which we will see in the future . for the strong desire of every living thing be wait for the revelation of the son of god . for every living thing be put under the power of change not by it desire but by him who make it so in hope that all living thing will be make free from the power of death and will have a part with the free child of god in glory . for we be conscious that all living thing be weep and sorrow in pain together till now . and not only so but we who have the first fruit of the spirit even we have sorrow in our mind wait for the time when we will take our place a son that be the salvation of our body . for our salvation be by hope but hope which be see be not hope for who be hop for what he see ? but if we have hope for that which we see not then we will be able to go on wait for it . and in the same way the spirit be a help to our feeble heart for we be not able to make prayer to god in the right way but the spirit put our desire into word which be not in our power to say and he who be the searcher of heart have knowledge of the mind of the spirit because he be make prayer for the saint in agreement with the mind of god . and we be conscious that all thing be work together for good to those who have love for god and have be mark out by his purpose . because those of whom he have knowledge before they come into existence be mark out by him to be make like his son so that he might be the first among a band of brother and those who be mark out by him be name and those who be name be give righteousness and to those to whom he give righteousness in the same way he give glory . what may we say about these thing ? if god be for u who be against u ? he who do not keep back his only son but give him up for u all will he not with him freely give u all thing ? who will say anything against the saint of god ? it be god who make u clear from evil who will give a decision against u ? it be christ jesus who not only be put to death but come again from the dead who be now at the right hand of god take our part . who will come between u and the love of christ ? will trouble or pain or cruel act or the need of food or of clothing or danger or the sword ? a it be say in the holy writing because of you we be put to death every day we be like sheep ready for destruction . but we be able to overcome all these thing and more through his love . for i be certain that not death or life or angel or ruler or thing present or thing to come or power or thing on high or thing under the earth or anything which be make will be able to come between u and the love of god which be in christ jesus our lord .i say what be true in christ and not what be false my mind give witness with me in the holy spirit that i be full of sorrow and pain without end . for i have a desire to take on myself the curse for my brother my family in the flesh who be israelite who have the place of son and the glory and the agreement with god and the give of the law and the worship and the hope offer by god whose be the father and of whom come christ in the flesh who be over all god to whom be bless for ever . so be it . but it be not a if the word of god be without effect . for they be not all israel who be of israel and they be not all child because they be the seed of abraham but in isaac will your seed be name . that be it be not the child of the flesh but the child of god 's undertaking who be name a the seed . for this be the word of god 's undertaking at this time will i come and sarah will have a son . and not only so but rebecca be about to have a child by our father isaac before the child have come into existence or have do anything good or bad in order that god 's purpose and his selection might be effect not by work but by him whose purpose it be it be say to her the older will be the servant of the younger . even a it be say i have love for jacob but for esau i have hate . what may we say then ? be god not upright ? let it not be say . for he say to moses i will have mercy on whom i will have mercy and pity on whom i will have pity . so then it be not by the desire or by the attempt of man but by the mercy of god . for the holy writing say to pharaoh for this same purpose do i put you on high so that i might make my power see in you and that there might be knowledge of my name through all the earth . so then at his pleasure he have mercy on a man and at his pleasure he make the heart hard . but you will say to me why do he still make u responsible ? who be able to go against his purpose ? but o man who be you to make answer against god ? may the thing which be make say to him who make it why do you make me so ? or have not the potter the right to make out of one part of his earth a vessel for honour and out of another a vessel for shame ? what if god desire to let his wrath and his power be see for a long time put up with the vessel of wrath which be ready for destruction and to make clear the wealth of his glory to vessel of mercy which he have before make ready for glory even u who be mark out by him not only from the jew but from the gentile ? a he say in hosea they will be name my people who be not my people and she will be love who be not love . and in the place where it be say to them you be not my people there they will be name the son of the living god . and isaiah say about israel even if the number of the child of israel be a the sand of the sea only a small part will get salvation for the lord will give effect to his word on the earth put an end to it and cut it short . and a isaiah have say before if the lord of army have not give u a seed we would have be like sodom and gomorrah . what then may we say ? that the nation who do not go after righteousness have get righteousness even the righteousness which be of faith but israel go after a law of righteousness do not get it . why ? because they be not search for it by faith but by work . they come up against the stone which be in the way a it be say see i be put in zion a stone cause a fall and a rock in the way but he who have faith in him will not be put to shame .brother my heart 's desire and my prayer to god for them be that they may get salvation . for i give witness of them that they have a strong desire for god but not with knowledge . because not have knowledge of god 's righteousness and desire to give effect to their righteousness they have not put themselves under the righteousness of god . for christ be the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who have faith . for moses say that the man who do the righteousness which be of the law will get life by it . but the righteousness which be of faith say these word say not in your heart who will go up to heaven ? that be to make christ come down or who will go down into the deep ? that be to make christ come again from the dead but what do it say ? the word be near you in your mouth and in your heart that be the word of faith of which we be the preacher because if you say with your mouth that jesus be lord and have faith in your heart that god have make him come back from the dead you will have salvation for with the heart man have faith to get righteousness and with the mouth he say that jesus be lord to get salvation . because it be say in the holy writing whoever have faith in him will not be sham . and the jew be not different from the greek for there be the same lord of all who be good to all who have hope in his name because whoever will give worship to the name of the lord will get salvation . but how will they give worship to him in whom they have no faith ? and how will they have faith in him of whom they have not have news ? and how will they have news without a preacher ? and how will there be preacher if they be not send ? a it be say how beautiful be the foot of those who give the glad news of good thing . but they have not all give ear to the good news . for isaiah say lord who have have faith in our word ? so faith come by hear and hearing by the word of christ . but i say do not the word come to their ear ? yes certainly their sound have go out into all the earth and their word to the end of the world . but i say have israel no knowledge ? first moses say you will be move to envy by that which be not a nation and by a foolish people i will make you angry . and isaiah say without fear those who be not search for me make discovery of me and i be see by those whose heart be turn away from me . but about israel he say all the day my hand have be stretch out to a people whose heart be turn away and who put themselves against my word .so i say have god put his people on one side ? let there be no such thought . for i be of israel of the seed of abraham of the tribe of benjamin . god have not put away the people of his selection . or have you no knowledge of what be say about elijah in the holy writing ? how he say word to god against israel lord they have put your prophet to death and make waste your altar and now i be the last and they be search for me to take away my life . but what answer do god make to him ? i have still seven thousand men whose knee have not be bent to baal . in the same way there be at this present time some who be mark out by the selection of grace . but if it be of grace then it be no long of work or grace would not be grace . what then ? that which israel be search for he do not get but those of the selection get it and the rest be make hard . a it be say in the holy writing god give them a spirit of sleep eye which might not see and ears which have no hearing to this day . and david say let their table be make a net for take them and a stone in their way and a punishment let their eye be make dark so that they may not see and let their back be bend down at all time . so i say be their step make hard in order that they might have a fall ? in no way but by their fall salvation have come to the gentile so that they might be move to envy . now if their fall be the wealth of the world and their loss the wealth of the gentile how much great will be the glory when they be make full ? but i say to you gentile in so far a i be the apostle of the gentile i make much of my position if in any way those who be of my flesh may be move to envy so that some of them may get salvation by me . for if by their put away the rest of men have be make friend with god what will their come back again be but life from the dead ? and if the first fruit be holy so be the mass and if the root be holy so be the branch . but if some of the branch be break off and you an olive tree of the field be put in among them and be give a part with them in the root by which the olive tree be make fertile do not be uplift in pride over the branch because it be not you who be the support of the root but it be by the root that you be support . you will say branch be break off so that i might be put in . truly because they have no faith they be break off and you have your place by reason of your faith . do not be lift up in pride but have fear for if god do not have mercy on the natural branch he will not have mercy on you . see then that god be good but his rule be fix to those who be put away he be hard but to you he have be good on the condition that you keep in his mercy if not you will be cut off a they be . and they if they do not go on without faith will be unite to the tree again because god be able to put them in again . for if you be cut out of a field olive tree and against the natural use be unite to a good olive tree how much more will these the natural branch be unite again with the olive tree which be theirs ? for it be my desire brother that this secret may be clear to you so that you may not have pride in your knowledge that israel have be make hard in part till all the gentile have come in and so all israel will get salvation a it be say in the holy writing there will come out of zion the one who make free by him wrongdoing will be take away from jacob and this be my agreement with them when i will take away their sin . as far a the good news be in question they be cut off from god on account of you but as far a the selection be in question they be love on account of the father . because god 's selection and his mercy may not be change . for a you in time past be not under the rule of god but now have get mercy through their turning away so in the same way these have go against the order of god so that by the mercy give to you they may now get mercy . for god have let them all go against his order so that he might have mercy on them all . o how deep be the wealth of the wisdom and knowledge of god ! no one be able to make discovery of his decision and his way may not be search out . who have knowledge of the mind of the lord ? or who have take part in his purpose ? or who have first give to him and it will be give back to him again ? for of him and through him and to him be all thing . to him be the glory for ever . so be it .for this reason i make request to you brother by the mercy of god that you will give your body a a living offering holy please to god which be the worship it be right for you to give him . and let not your behaviour be like that of this world but be change and make new in mind so that by experience you may have knowledge of the good and pleasing and complete purpose of god . but i say to every one of you through the grace give to me not to have an over high opinion of himself but to have wise thought a god have give to every one a measure of faith . for a we have a number of part in one body but all the part have not the same use so we though we be a number of person be one body in christ and be dependent on one another and have different quality by reason of the grace give to u such a the quality of a prophet let it be make use of in relation to the measure of our faith or the position of a deacon of the church let a man give himself to it or he who have the power of teach let him make use of it he who have the power of comfort let him do so he who give let him give freely he who have the power of rule let him do it with a serious mind he who have mercy on others let it be with joy . let love be without deceit . be hater of what be evil keep your mind fix on what be good . be kind to one another with a brother 's love put others before yourselves in honour be not slow in your work but be quick in spirit a the lord 's servant be glad in hope quiet in trouble at all time give to prayer give to the need of the saint ready to take people into your house . give blessing and not curse to those who be cruel to you . take part in the joy of those who be glad and in the grief of those who be sorrow . be in harmony with one another . do not have a high opinion of yourselves but be in agreement with common people . do not give yourselves an air of wisdom . do not give evil for evil to any man . let all your business be well order in the eye of all men . as far a it be possible for you be at peace with all men . do not give punishment for wrong do to you dear brother but give way to the wrath of god for it be say in the holy writing punishment be mine i will give reward say the lord . but if one who have hate for you be in need of food or of drink give it to him for in so do you will put coal of fire on his head . do not let evil overcome you but overcome evil by good .let everyone put himself under the authority of the high power because there be no power which be not of god and all power be order by god . for which reason everyone who put himself against the authority put himself against the order of god and those who be against it will get punishment for themselves . for ruler be not a cause of fear to the good work but to the evil . if you would have no fear of the authority do good and you will have praise for he be the servant of god to you for good . but if you do evil have fear for the sword be not in his hand for nothing he be god 's servant making god 's punishment come on the evil doer . so put yourselves under the authority not for fear of wrath but because you have the knowledge of what be right . for the same reason make payment of tax because the authority be god 's servant to take care of such thing at all time . give to all what be their right tax to him whose they be payment to him whose right it be fear to whom fear honour to whom honour be to be give . be in debt for nothing but to have love for one another for he who have love for his neighbour have keep all the law . and this do not be untrue in married life do not put to death do not take what be another 's do not have desire for what be another 's and if there be any other order it be cover by this word have love for your neighbour a for yourself . love do no wrong to his neighbour so love make the law complete . see then that the time have come for you to be awake from sleep for now be your salvation nearer than when you first have faith . the night be far go and the day be near so let u put off the work of the dark arm ourselves with light with right behaviour a in the day not in pleasure making and drinking not in bad company and unclean behaviour not in fight and envy . but put on the lord jesus christ and do not give thought to the flesh to do it desire .do not put on one side him who be feeble in faith and do not put him in doubt by your reasoning . one man have faith to take all thing a food another who be feeble in faith take only green food . let not him who take food have a low opinion of him who do not and let not him who do not take food be a judge of him who do for he have god 's approval . who be you to make yourself a judge of another man 's servant ? it be to his master that he be responsible for good or bad . yes his place will be safe because the lord be able to keep him from fall . this man put one day before another to that man they be the same . let every man be certain in his mind . he who keep the day keep it to the lord and he who take food take it a to the lord for he give praise to god and he who do not take food to the lord he take it not and give praise to god . for every man 's life and every man 's death have a relation to others as well a to himself . as long a we have life we be live to the lord or if we give up our life it be to the lord so if we be live or if our life come to an end we be the lord 's . and for this purpose christ go into death and come back again that he might be the lord of the dead and of the living . but you why do you make yourself your brother 's judge ? or again why have you no respect for your brother ? because we will all have to take our place before god a our judge . for it be say in the holy writing by my life say the lord to me every knee will be bent and every tongue will give worship to god . so every one of u will have to give an account of himself to god . then let u not be judge of one another any long but keep this in mind that no man be to make it hard for his brother or give him cause for doubt . i be conscious of this and be certain in the lord jesus that nothing be unclean in itself but for the man in whose opinion it be unclean for him it be unclean . and if because of food your brother be troubled then you be no longer go on in the way of love . do not let your food be destruction to him for whom christ go into death . let it not be possible for men to say evil about your good for the kingdom of god be not food and drink but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy spirit . and he who in these thing be christ 's servant be please to god and have the approval of men . so then let u go after the thing which make peace and the thing by which we may be a help to one another . do not let the work of god come to nothing on account of food . all thing be certainly clean but it be evil for that man who by take food make it hard for another . it be well not to take meat or wine or to do anything which might be a cause of trouble to your brother . the faith which you have have it to yourself before god . happy be the man who be not judge by that to which he give approval . but he who be in doubt be judge if he take food because he do it not in faith and whatever be not of faith be sin .we who be strong have to be a support to the feeble and not give pleasure to ourselves . let every one of u give pleasure to his neighbour for his good to make him strong . for christ do not give pleasure to himself but a it be say the bitter word of those who be angry with you come on me . now those thing which be put down in write before our time be for our learning so that through quiet waiting and through the comfort of the holy writing we might have hope . now may the god who give comfort and strength in wait make you of the same mind with one another in harmony with christ jesus so that with one mouth you may give glory to the god and father of our lord jesus christ . so then take one another to your heart a christ take u to the glory of god . now i say that christ have be make a servant of the circumcision to give effect to the undertaking give by god to the father and so that the gentile might give glory to god for his mercy a it be say for this reason i will give praise to you among the gentile and i will make a song to your name . and again he say take part you gentiles in the joy of his people . and again give praise to the lord all you gentile and let all the nation give praise to him . and again isaiah say there will be the root of jesse and he who come to be the ruler over the gentile in him will the gentile put their hope . now may the god of hope make you full of joy and peace through faith so that all hope may be yours in the power of the holy spirit . and i myself be certain of you brother that you be full of what be good complete in all knowledge able to give direction to one another . but i have in some measure less fear in write to you to put these thing before you again because of the grace which be give to me by god to be a servant of christ jesus to the gentile do the work of a priest in the good news of god so that the offering of the gentile might be please to god be make holy by the holy spirit . so i have pride in christ jesus in the thing which be god 's . and i will keep myself from talk of anything but those thing which christ have do by me to put the gentile under his rule in word and in act by sign and wonder in the power of the holy spirit so that from jerusalem and round about as far a illyricum i have give all the good news of christ make it my purpose not to take the good news where christ be name so that my work might not be rest on that of others but a it be say in the holy writing they will see to whom the news of him have not be give and those to whose ear it have not come will have knowledge . for which reason i be frequently keep from come to you but now have no longer any place in these part and have have for a number of year a great desire to come to you whenever i go to spain for it be my hope to see you on my way and to be send on there by you if first i may in some measure have be comfort by your company but now i go to jerusalem take help for the saint . for it have be the good pleasure of those of macedonia and achaia to send a certain amount of money for the poor among the saint at jerusalem . yes it have be their good pleasure and they be in their debt . for if the gentile have have a part in the thing of the spirit which be theirs it be right for them in the same way to give them help in the thing of the flesh . so when i have do this and have give them this fruit of love i will go on by you into spain . and i be certain that when i come i will be full of the blessing of christ . now i make request to you brother by our lord jesus christ and by the love of the spirit that you will be work together with me in your prayer to god for me so that i may be keep safe from those in judaea who have not put themselves under the rule of god and that the help which i be take for jerusalem may be please to the saint so that i may come to you in joy by the good pleasure of god and have rest with you . now may the god of peace be with you all . so be it .it be my desire to say a good word for phoebe who be a servant of the church in cenchreae that you will take her in kindly after the way of the saint a one who be the lord 's and give her help in anything in which she may have need of you because she have be a help to a great number and to myself . give my love to prisca and aquila worker with me in christ jesus who for my life put their neck in danger to whom not only i but all the church of the gentile be in debt and say a kind word to the church which be in their house . give my love to my dear epaenetus who be the first fruit of asia to christ . give my love to mary who give much care to you . give my love to andronicus and junia my relation who be in prison with me who be note among the apostle and who be in christ before me . give my love to ampliatus who be dear to me in the lord give my love to urbanus a worker in christ with u and to my dear stachys . give my love to apelles who have the approval of christ . say a kind word to those who be of the house of aristobulus . give my love to herodion my relation . say a kind word to those of the house of narcissus who be in the lord . give my love to tryphaena and tryphosa worker in the lord . give my love to my dear persis who do much work in the lord . give my love to rufus one of the lord 's selection and to his mother and mine . give my love to asyncritus phlegon hermes patrobas hermas and the brother who be with them . give my love to philologus and julia nereus and his sister and olympas and all the saint who be with them . give one another a holy kiss . all the church of christ send their love to you . now it be my desire brother that you will take note of those who be cause division and trouble among you quite against the teaching which be give to you and keep away from them . for such people be not servant of the lord christ but of their stomach and by their smooth and well say word the heart of those who have no knowledge of evil be trick . for all have knowledge of how you do what you be order . for this reason i have joy in you but it be my desire that you may be wise in what be good and without knowledge of evil . and the god of peace will be crush satan under your foot before long . the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you . timothy who be work with me send his love to you so do lucius and jason and sosipater my relation . i tertius who have do the writing of this letter send love in the lord . gaius with whom i be live whose house be open to all the church send his love so do erastus the manager of the account of the town and quartus the brother . now to him who be able to make you strong in agreement with the good news which i give you and the preaching of jesus christ in the light of the revelation of that secret which have be keep through time eternal but be now make clear and by the writing of the prophet by the order of the eternal god the knowledge of it have be give to all the nation so that they may come under the rule of the faith to the only wise god through jesus christ be the glory for ever . so be it .paul an apostle of jesus christ by the purpose of god and sosthenes the brother to the church of god which be in corinth to those who have be make holy in christ jesus saint by the selection of god with all those who in every place give honour to the name of our lord jesus christ their lord and ours grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . i give praise to my god for you at all time because of the grace of god which have be give to you in christ jesus so that in him you have wealth in all thing in word and in knowledge of every sort even a the witness of the christ have be make certain among you so that have every grace you be live in the hope of the revelation of our lord jesus christ who will give you strength to the end to be free from all sin in the day of our lord jesus christ . god be true through whom you have be give a part with his son jesus christ our lord . now i make request to you my brother in the name of our lord jesus christ that you will all say the same thing and that there may be no division among you so that you may be in complete agreement in the same mind and in the same opinion . because it have come to my knowledge through those of the house of chloe that there be division among you my brother . that be that some of you say i be of paul some say i be of apollo some say i be of cephas and some say i be christ 's . be there a division in christ ? be paul nail to the cross for you ? or be you give baptism in the name of paul ? i give praise to god that not one of you have baptism from me but crispus and gaius so that no one may be able to say that you have baptism in my name . and i give baptism to the house of stephanas but i be not certain that any others have baptism from me . for christ send me not to give baptism but to be a preacher of the good news not with wise word for fear that the cross of christ might be make of no value . for the word of the cross seem foolish to those who be on the way to destruction but to u who be on the way to salvation it be the power of god . a it say in the holy writing i will put an end to the wisdom of the wise and will put on one side the design of those who have knowledge . where be the wise ? where be he who have knowledge of the law ? where be the man of this world who have a love of discussion ? have not god make foolish the wisdom of this world ? for because by the purpose of god the world with all it wisdom have not the knowledge of god it be god 's pleasure by so foolish a thing a preach to give salvation to those who have faith in him . see that the jew make request for sign and the greek be look for knowledge but we give the good news of christ on the cross a hard thing to the jew and a foolish thing to the gentile but to those of god 's selection jew and greek christ be the power and the wisdom of god . because what seem foolish in god be wise than men and what seem feeble in god be strong than men . for you see god 's design for you my brother that he have not take a great number of the wise after the flesh not the strong not the noble but god make selection of the foolish thing of this world so that he might put the wise to shame and the feeble thing that he might put to shame the strong and the low thing of the world and the thing without honour do god make selection of yes even the thing which be not so that he might make a nothing the thing which be so that no flesh might have glory before god . but god have give you a place in christ jesus through whom god have give u wisdom and righteousness and salvation and make u holy so that a it be say in the holy writing whoever have a desire for glory let his glory be in the lord .and when i come to you my brother i do not come with wise word of knowledge put before you the secret of god . for i have make the decision to have knowledge of nothing among you but only of jesus christ on the cross . and i be with you without strength in fear and in doubt . and in my preaching there be no honeyed word of wisdom but i be dependent on the power of the spirit to make it clear to you so that your faith might be base not on man 's wisdom but on the power of god . but still we have wisdom for those who be complete in knowledge though not the wisdom of this world and not of the ruler of this world who be come to nothing but we give the news of the secret wisdom of god which he have keep in store before the world come into existence for our glory of which not one of the ruler of this world have knowledge for if they have they would not have put the lord of glory on the cross but a it say in the holy writing thing which the eye saw not and which have not come to the ear or into the heart of man such thing a god have make ready for those who have love for him . but god have give u the revelation of these thing through his spirit for the spirit make search into all thing even the deep thing of god . for who have knowledge of the thing of a man but the spirit of the man which be in him ? in the same way no one have knowledge of the thing of god but the spirit of god . but we have not the spirit of the world but the spirit which come from god so that we may have knowledge of the thing which be freely give to u by god . and these be the thing which we say not in the language of man 's wisdom but in word give to u by the spirit judge the thing of the spirit by the help of the spirit . for the natural man be not able to take in the thing of the spirit of god for they seem foolish to him and he be not able to have knowledge of them because such knowledge come only through the spirit . but he who have the spirit though judge all thing be himself judge by no one . for who have knowledge of the mind of the lord so a to be his teacher ? but we have the mind of christ .and the teaching i give you my brother be such a i be able to give not to those who have the spirit but to those who be still in the flesh even to child in christ . i give you milk and not meat because you be then unable to take it and even now you be not able because you be still in the flesh for when there be envy and division among you be you not still walk after the way of the flesh even a natural men ? for when one say i be of paul and another say i be of apollo be you not talk like natural men ? what then be apollos ? and what be paul ? they be but servant who give you the good news a god give it to them . i do the planting apollo do the watering but god give the increase . so then the planter be nothing and the waterer be nothing but god who give the increase . now the planter and the waterer be work for the same end but they will have their separate reward in the measure of their work . for we be worker with god you be god 's plant god 's building . in the measure of the grace give to me i a a wise master builder have put the base in position and another go on building on it . but let every man take care what he put on it . for there be no other base for the building but that which have be put down which be jesus christ . but on the base a man may put gold silver stone of great price wood dry grass cut stem every man 's work will be make clear in that day because it will be test by fire and the fire itself will make clear the quality of every man 's work . if any man 's work come through the test he will have a reward . if the fire put an end to any man 's work it will be his loss but he will get salvation himself though a by fire . do you not see that you be god 's holy house and that the spirit of god have his place in you ? if anyone make the house of god unclean god will put an end to him for the house of god be holy and you be his house . let no man have a false idea . if any man seem to himself to be wise among you let him become foolish so that he may be wise . for the wisdom of this world be foolish before god . a it be say in the holy writing he who take the wise in their secret design and again the lord have knowledge of the reasoning of the wise that they be nothing . so let no one take pride in men . for all thing be yours paul or apollo or cephas or the world or life or death or thing present or thing to come all be yours and you be christ 's and christ be god 's .let u be judge a servant of christ and a those who be responsible for the secret thing of god . and it be right for such servant to be safe person . but it be a small thing to me that i be judge by you or by man 's judging i be not even a judge of myself . for i be not conscious of any wrong in myself but this do not make me clear for it be the lord who be my judge . for this reason let there be no judging before the time till the lord come who will make clear the secret thing of the dark and the design of the heart and then will every man have his praise from god . my brother it be because of you that i have take apollo and myself a example of these thing so that in u you might see that it be not wise to go far than what be in the holy writing so that no one of you may be lift up against his brother . for who make you good than your brother ? or what have you that have not be give to you ? but if it have be give to you what cause have you for pride a if it have not be give to you ? for even now you be full even now you have wealth you have be make king without u truly i would be glad if you be king so that we might be king with you . for it seem to me that god have put u the apostle last of all a men whose fate be death for we be put on view to the world and to angel and to men . we be make to seem foolish for christ but you be wise in christ we be feeble but you be strong you have glory but we have shame . even to this hour we be without food drink and clothing we be give blow and have no certain rest place and with our hand we do the hard work when they give u curse we give blessing when we undergo punishment we take it quietly when evil thing be say about u we give gentle answer we be make a the unclean thing of the world a that for which no one have any use even till now . i be not say these thing to put you to shame but so that a my dear child you may see what be right . for even if you have ten thousand teacher in christ you have not more than one father for in christ jesus i have give birth to you through the good news . so my desire be that you take me a your example . for this cause i have send timothy to you who be my dear and true child in the lord he will make clear to you my way in christ even a i be teach everywhere in every church . now some be full of pride a if i be not come to you . but i will come to you in a short time if it be please to the lord and i will take note not of the word of those who be full of pride but of the power . for the kingdom of god be not in word but in power . what be your desire ? be my come to be with punishment or be it to be in love and a gentle spirit ?it be say in fact that there be among you a sin of the flesh such a be not see even among the gentile that one of you have his father 's wife . and in place of feel sorrow you be pleased with yourselves so that he who have do this thing have not be send away from among you . for i myself be present in spirit though not in body have come to a decision about him who have do this thing in the name of our lord jesus when you have come together with my spirit with the power of our lord jesus that this man be to be hand over to satan for the destruction of the flesh so that his spirit may have forgiveness in the day of the lord jesus . this pride of yours be not good . do you not see that a little leaven make a change in all the mass ? take away then the old leaven so that you may be a new mass even a you be without leaven . for christ have be put to death a our passover . let u then keep the feast not with old leaven and not with the leaven of evil thought and act but with the unleavened bread of true thought and right feeling . in my letter i say to you that you be not to keep company with those who go after the desire of the flesh but i have not in mind the sinner who be outside the church or those who have a desire for and take the property of others or those who give worship to image for it be not possible to keep away from such people without go out of the world completely but the sense of my letter be that if a brother have the name of be one who go after the desire of the flesh or have the desire for other people 's property or be in the way of use violent language or be the worse for drink or take by force what be not his you might not keep company with such a one or take food with him . for it be no business of mine to be judge those who be outside but it be yours to be judge those who be among you a for those who be outside god be their judge . so put away the evil man from among you .how be it that if any one of you have a cause at law against another he take it before a gentile judge and not before the saint ? be it not certain that the saint will be the judge of the world ? if then the world will be judge by you be you unable to give a decision about the small thing ? be it not certain that we be to be the judge of angel ? how much more then of the thing of this life ? if then there be question to be judge in connection with the thing of this life why do you put them in the hand of those who have no position in the church ? i say this to put you to shame . be there not among you one wise man who may be able to give a decision between his brother ? but a brother who have a cause at law against another take it before gentile judge . more than this it be not to your credit to have cause at law with one another at all . why not put up with wrong ? why not undergo loss ? so far from do this you yourselves do wrong and take your brother ' property . have you not knowledge that evil doer will have no part in the kingdom of god ? have no false idea about this no one who go after the desire of the flesh or give worship to image or be untrue when marry or be less than a man or make a wrong use of men or be a thief or the bad for drink or make use of strong language or take by force what be not his will have any part in the kingdom of god . and such be some of you but you have be wash you have be make holy you have be give righteousness in the name of the lord jesus christ and in the spirit of our god . i be free to do all thing but not all thing be wise . i be free to do all thing but i will not let myself come under the power of any . food be for the stomach and the stomach for food and god will put an end to them together . but the body be not for the desire of the flesh but for the lord and the lord for the body and god who make the lord jesus come back from the dead will do the same for u by his power . do you not see that your body be part of the body of christ ? how then may i take what be a part of the body of christ and make it a part of the body of a loose woman ? such a thing may not be . or do you not see that he who be join to a loose woman be one body with her ? for god have say the two of them will become one flesh . but he who be unite to the lord be one spirit . keep away from the desire of the flesh . every sin which a man do be outside of the body but he who go after the desire of the flesh do evil to his body . or be you not conscious that your body be a house for the holy spirit which be in you and which have be give to you by god ? and you be not the owner of yourselves for a payment have be make for you let god be honour in your body .now a to the thing in your letter to me it be good for a man to have nothing to do with a woman . but because of the desire of the flesh let every man have his wife and every woman her husband . let the husband give to the wife what be right and let the wife do the same to the husband . the wife have not power over her body but the husband and in the same way the husband have not power over his body but the wife . do not keep back from one another what be right but only for a short time and by agreement so that you may give yourselves to prayer and come together again so that satan may not get the good of you through your loss of self control . but this i say a my opinion and not a an order of the lord . it be my desire that all men might be even a i be . but every man have the power of his special way of life give him by god one in this way and one in that . but i say to the unmarried and to the widow it be good for them to be even a i be . but if they have not self control let them get marry for married life be well than the burning of desire . but to the marry i give order though not i but the lord that the wife may not go away from her husband or if she go away from him let her keep unmarried or be unite to her husband again and that the husband may not go away from his wife . but to the rest i say and not the lord if a brother have a wife who be not a christian and it be her desire to go on living with him let him not go away from her . and if a woman have a husband who be not a christian and it be his desire to go on living with her let her not go away from her husband . for the husband who have not faith be make holy through his christian wife and the wife who be not a christian be make holy through the brother if not your child would be unholy but now be they holy . but if the one who be not a christian have a desire to go away let it be so the brother or the sister in such a position be not force to do one thing or the other but it be god 's pleasure that we may be at peace with one another . for how may you be certain o wife that you will not be the cause of salvation to your husband ? or you o husband that you may not do the same for your wife ? only a the lord have give to a man and a be the purpose of god for him so let him go on living . and these be my order for all the church . if any man who be a christian have have circumcision let him keep so and if any man who be a christian have not have circumcision let him make no change . circumcision be nothing and it opposite be nothing but only do the order of god be of value . let every man keep the position in which he have be place by god . if you be a servant when you become a christian let it not be a grief to you but if you have a chance to become free make use of it . for he who be a servant when he become a christian be the lord 's free man and he who be free when he become a christian be the lord 's servant . it be the lord who have make payment for you be not servant of men . my brother let every man keep in that condition which be the purpose of god for him . now about virgin i have no order from the lord but i give my opinion a one to whom the lord have give mercy to be true to him . in my opinion then because of the present trouble it be good for a man to keep a he be . if you be marry to a wife make no attempt to get free from her if you be free from a wife do not take a wife . if you get marry it be not a sin and if an unmarried woman get married it be not a sin . but those who do so will have trouble in the flesh . but i will not be hard on you . but i say this my brother the time be short and from now it will be wise for those who have wife to be a if they have them not and for those who be in sorrow to give no sign of it and for those who be glad to give no sign of joy and for those who be get property to be a if they have nothing and for those who make use of the world not to be use it fully for this world 's way of life will quickly come to an end . but it be my desire for you to be free from care . the unmarried man give his mind to the thing of the lord how he may give pleasure to the lord but the married man give his attention to the thing of this world how he may give pleasure to his wife . and the wife be not the same a the virgin . the virgin give her mind to the thing of the lord so that she may be holy in body and in spirit but the married woman take think for the thing of the world how she may give pleasure to her husband . now i say this for your profit not to make thing hard for you but because of what be right and so that you may be able to give all your attention to the thing of the lord . but if in any man 's opinion he be not do what be right for his virgin if she be past her best year and there be need for it let him do what seem right to him it be no sin let them be marry . but the man who be strong in mind and purpose who be not force but have control over his desire do well if he come to the decision to keep her a virgin . so then he who get marry to his virgin do well and he who keep her unmarried do well . it be right for a wife to be with her husband as long a he be live but when her husband be dead she be free to be marry to another but only to a christian . but it will be good for her to keep a she be in my opinion and it seem to me that i have the spirit of god .now about thing offer to image we all seem to ourselves to have knowledge . knowledge give pride but love give true strength . if anyone seem to himself to have knowledge so far he have not the right sort of knowledge about anything but if anyone have love for god god have knowledge of him . so then a to the question of take food offer to image we be certain that an image be nothing in the world and that there be no god but one . for though there be those who have the name of god in heaven or on earth a there be a number of god and a number of lord there be for u only one god the father of whom be all thing and we be for him and one lord jesus christ through whom be all thing and we have our be through him . still all men have not that knowledge but some be use till now to the image be conscious that they be take food which have be offer to the image and because they be not strong in the faith their mind be troubled . but god 's approval of u be not base on the food we take if we do not take it we be no bad for it and if we take it we be no good . but take care that this power of yours do not give cause for trouble to the feeble . for if a man see you who have knowledge take food a a guest in the house of an image will it not give him if he be feeble the idea that he may take food offer to image ? and so through your knowledge you be the cause of destruction to your brother for whom christ underwent death . and in this way do evil to the brother and cause trouble to those whose faith be feeble you be sin against christ . for this reason if food be a cause of trouble to my brother i will give up take meat for ever so that i may not be a cause of trouble to my brother .be i not free ? be i not an apostle ? have i not see jesus our lord ? be you not my work in the lord ? if to others i be not an apostle at least i be one to you for the fact that you be christian be the sign that i be an apostle . my answer to those who be judge me be this . have we no right to take food and drink ? have we no right to take about with u a christian wife like the rest of the apostle and the brother of the lord and cephas ? or i only and barnabas have we no right to take a rest from work ? who ever go to war without look to someone to be responsible for his payment ? who put in vine and do not take the fruit of them ? or who take care of sheep without drinking of their milk ? be i talk a a man ? do not the law say the same ? for it say in the law of moses it be not right to keep the ox from take the grain when he be crush it . be it for the ox that god be give order ? or have he u in mind ? yes it be say for u because it be right for the ploughman to do his ploughing in hope and for him who be crush the grain to do his work hop for a part in the fruit of it . if we have be plant the thing of the spirit for you do it seem a great thing for you to give u a part in your thing of this world ? if others have a part in this right over you have we not even more ? but we do not make use of our right so that we might put nothing in the way of the good news of christ . do you not see that the servant of the holy thing get their living from the temple and the servant of the altar have their part in the food which be offer on the altar ? even so do the lord give order that the preacher of the good news might get their living from the good news . but i have not make use of any of these thing and i be not write this in the hope that it may be so for me for it would be good for me to undergo death than for any man to make this pride of mine of no effect . for if i be a preacher of the good news i have no cause for pride in this because i be force to do so for a curse be on me if i do not . but if i do it gladly i have a reward and if not i be under order to do it . what then be my reward ? this that when i be give the good news i may give it without payment not make use of my right a a preacher of the good news . for though i be free from all men i make myself a servant to all so that more might have salvation . and to the jew i be a a jew so that i might give the good news to them to those under the law i be the same not a be myself under the law but so that i might give the good news to those under the law . to those without the law i be a one without the law not a be without law to god but a under law to christ so that i might give the good news to those without the law . to the feeble i be a one who be feeble so that they might have salvation i have be all thing to all men so that some at least might have salvation . and i do all thing for the cause of the good news so that i may have a part in it . do you not see that in a running competition all take part but only one get the reward ? so let your mind be fix on the reward . and every man who take part in the sport have self control in all thing . now they do it to get a crown which be of this world but we for an eternal crown . so then i be run not uncertainly so i be fight not a one who give blow in the air but i give blow to my body and keep it under control for fear that after have give the good news to others i myself might not have god 's approval .for it be my desire my brother that you may keep in mind how all our father be under the cloud and they all go through the sea and they all have baptism from moses in the cloud and in the sea and they all take the same holy food and the same holy drink for they all take of the water from the holy rock which come after them and the rock be christ . but with most of them god be not please for they come to their end in the waste land . now these thing be for an example to u so that our heart might not go after evil thing a they do . then do not go after false god a some of them do a it be say in the holy writing after rest and feast the people get up to take their pleasure . again let u not give way to the desire of the flesh a some of them do of whom twenty three thousand come to their end in one day . and let u not put the lord to the test a some of them do and come to their death by snake . and do not say evil thing against the lord a some of them do and destruction overtake them . now these thing be do a an example and be put down in write for our teaching on whom the last day have come . so let him who seem to himself to be safe go in fear of a fall . you have be put to no test but such a be common to man and god be true who will not let any test come on you which you be not able to undergo but he will make with the test a way out of it so that you may be able to go through it . for this cause my dear brother give no worship to false god . what i be say be for wise men do you be the judge of it . the cup of bless which we take do it not give u a part in the blood of christ ? and be not the break bread a take part in the body of christ ? because we be a number of person be one bread we be one body for we all take part in the one bread . see israel after the flesh do not those who take a food the offering of the altar take a part in the altar ? do i say then that what be offer to image be anything or that the image be anything ? what i say be that the thing offer by the gentile be offer to evil spirit and not to god and it be not my desire for you to have any part with evil spirit . it be not possible for you at the same time to take the cup of the lord and the cup of evil spirit you may not take part in the table of the lord and the table of evil spirit . or may we be the cause of envy to the lord ? be we strong than he ? we be free to do all thing but there be thing which it be not wise to do . we be free to do all thing but not all thing be for the common good . let a man give attention not only to what be good for himself but equally to his neighbour 's good . whatever meat may be have at the public market take a food without question of right or wrong for the earth be the lord 's and all thing in it . if a gentile make a feast for you and you be pleased to go a a guest take whatever be put before you without question of right or wrong . but if anyone say to you this food have be use a an offering do not take it on account of him who say it and on account of his sense of right and wrong right and wrong i say not for you but for the other man for the fact that i be free be not dependent on another man 's sense of right or wrong . but if i give praise to god for the food which i take let no man say evil of me for that reason . so then if it be a question of food or drink or any other thing whatever you do do all to the glory of god . give no cause of trouble to jew or to greeks or to the church of god . even a i give way to all men in all thing not look for profit for myself but for the good of others that they may get salvation .so take me for your example even a i take christ for mine . now i be pleased to see that you keep me in memory in all thing and that you give attention to the teaching which be hand down from me to you . but it be important for you to keep this fact in mind that the head of every man be christ and the head of the woman be the man and the head of christ be god . every man who take part in prayer or give teach a a prophet with his head cover put shame on his head . but every woman who do so with her head unveil put shame on her head for it be the same a if her hair be cut off . for if a woman be not veiled let her hair be cut off but if it be a shame to a woman to have her hair cut off let her be veil . for it be not right for a man to have his head cover because he be the image and glory of god but the woman be the glory of the man . for the man do not come from the woman but the woman from the man . and the man be not make for the woman but the woman for the man . for this reason it be right for the woman to have a sign of authority on her head because of the angel . but the woman be not separate from the man and the man be not separate from the woman in the lord . for a the woman be from the man so the man be through the woman but all thing be from god . be judge yourselves of the question do it seem right for a woman to take part in prayer unveil ? do it not seem natural to you that if a man have long hair it be a cause of shame to him ? but if a woman have long hair it be a glory to her for her hair be give to her for a covering . but if any man will not be rule in this question this be not our way of do thing and it be not do in the church of god . but in give you this order there be one thing about which i be not pleased it be that when you come together it be not for the good but for the bad . for first of all it have come to my ear that when you come together in the church there be division among you and i take the statement to be true in part . for division be necessary among you in order that those who have god 's approval may be clearly see among you . but now when you come together it be not possible to take the holy meal of the lord for when you take your food everyone take his meal before the other and one have not enough food and another be the bad for drink . what ? have you not house to take your meal in ? or have you no respect for the church of god put the poor to shame ? what be i to say to you ? be i to give you praise ? certainly not . for it be hand down to me from the lord a i give it to you that the lord jesus on the night when juda be false to him take bread and when it have be break with an act of praise he say this be my body which be for you do this in memory of me . in the same way with the cup after the meal he say this cup be the new testament in my blood do this whenever you take it in memory of me . for whenever you take the bread and the cup you give witness to the lord 's death till he come . if then anyone take the bread or the cup of the lord in the wrong spirit he will be responsible for the body and blood of the lord . but let no man take of the bread and the cup without test himself . for a man put himself in danger if he take part in the holy meal without be conscious that it be the lord 's body . for this cause a number of you be feeble and ill and a number be dead . but if we be true judge of ourselves punishment would not come on u . but if punishment do come it be send by the lord so that we may be safe when the world be judge . so then my brother when you come together to the holy meal of the lord let there be wait for one another . if any man be in need of food let him take his meal in his house so that you may not come together to your damage . and the rest i will put in order when i come .but about the thing of the spirit my brother it be not right for you to be without teach . you be conscious that when you be gentile in whatever way you be guide you go after image without voice or power . so it be my desire for you to be clear about this that no one be able to say by the spirit of god that jesus be curse and no one be able to say that jesus be lord but by the holy spirit . now there be different quality give to men but the same spirit . and there be different sort of servant but the same lord . and there be different operation but the same god who be work all thing in all . but to every man some form of the spirit 's working be give for the common good . for to one be give word of wisdom through the spirit and to another word of knowledge through the same spirit to another faith in the same spirit and to another the power of take away disease by the one spirit and to another the power of work wonder and to another the prophet 's word and to another the power of test spirit to another different sort of tongue and to another the power of make clear the sense of the tongue but all these be the operation of the one and the same spirit give to every man separately a his pleasure be . for a the body be one and have a number of part and all the part make one body so be christ . for through the baptism of the one spirit we be all form into one body jews or greeks servant or free men and be all make full of the same spirit . for the body be not one part but a number of part . if the foot say because i be not the hand i be not a part of the body it be no less a part of the body . and if the ear say because i be not the eye i be not a part of the body it be a part of the body all the same . if all the body be an eye where would be the hearing ? if all be hear where would be the smelling ? but now god have put every one of the part in the body a it be please to him . and if they be all one part where would the body be ? but now they be all different part but one body . and the eye may not say to the hand i have no need of you or again the head to the foot i have no need of you . no those part which seem to be feeble be the more necessary and to those part of the body which seem to have less honour we give all the more honour and to those part of the body which be a cause of shame to u we give the great respect but those part of the body which be beautiful have no need of such care and so the body have be join together by god in such a way a to give more honour to those part which have need of it so that there might be no division in the body but all the part might have the same care for one another . and if there be pain in one part of the body all the part will be feel it or if one part be honour all the part will be glad . now you be the body of christ and every one of you the separate part of it . and god have put some in the church first apostles second prophet third teacher then those with wonder work power then those with the power of take away disease helper wise guide user of strange tongue . be all apostle ? be all prophet ? be all teacher ? have all the power of work wonder ? be all able to take away disease ? have all the power of tongue ? be all able to give their sense ? but let your desire be turn to the more important thing give by the spirit . and now i be point out to you an even good way .if i make use of the tongue of men and of angel and have not love i be like sound brass or a loud tongue bell . and if i have a prophet 's power and have knowledge of all secret thing and if i have all faith by which mountain may be move from their place but have not love i be nothing . and if i give all my good to the poor and if i give my body to be burn but have not love it be of no profit to me . love be never tire of wait love be kind love have no envy love have no high opinion of itself love have no pride love 's way be ever fair it take no thought for itself it be not quickly make angry it take no account of evil it take no pleasure in wrongdoing but have joy in what be true love have the power of undergo all thing have faith in all thing hop all thing . though the prophet 's word may come to an end tongue come to nothing and knowledge have no more value love have no end . for our knowledge be only in part and the prophet 's word give only a part of what be true but when that which be complete be come then that which be in part will be no longer necessary . when i be a child i make use of a child 's language i have a child 's feeling and a child 's thought now that i be a man i have put away the thing of a child . for now we see thing in a glass darkly but then face to face now my knowledge be in part then it will be complete even a god 's knowledge of me . but now we still have faith hope love these three and the great of these be love .go after love still desire to have the thing which the spirit give but most of all that you may have the prophet 's power . for he who make use of tongue be not talk to men but to god because no one have the sense of what he be say but in the spirit he be talk of secret thing . but the word of the prophet give men knowledge and comfort and strength . he who make use of tongue may do good to himself but he who give the prophet 's word do good to the church . now though it be my desire for you all to have the power of tongue it would give me more pleasure to be hear the prophet 's word from you for this be a great thing than use tongue if the sense be not give at the same time for the good of the church . but now my brother if i come to you use tongue what profit will it be to you if i do not give you a revelation or knowledge or the word of the prophet or teaching ? even thing without life have a voice such a a music pipe or other instrument if they do not give out different sound who may be certain what be be play ? for if the war horn give out an uncertain note who will get ready for the fight ? so if you in use a strange tongue say word which have no sense how will anyone take in what you be say ? for you will be talk to the air . there be it may be a number of different voice in the world and no voice be without sense . but if the sense of the voice be not clear to me i be like a man from a strange country to him who be talk and he will be the same to me . so if you be desire the thing which the spirit give let your mind be turn first to the thing which be for the good of the church . for this reason let the man who have the power of use tongue make request that he may at the same time be able to give the sense . for if i make use of tongue in my prayer my spirit make the prayer but not my mind . what then ? let my prayer be from the spirit and equally from the mind let my song be from the spirit and equally from mind . for if you give a blessing with the spirit how will the man who have no knowledge say so be it after your prayer see that he have not take in what you be say ? for your give of the blessing be certainly well do but of no profit to the man without knowledge . i give praise to god that i be able to make use of tongue more than you all but in the church it would be good for me to make use of five word of which the sense be clear so that others might have profit than ten thousand word in a strange tongue . my brother do not be child in mind in evil be a little child but in mind be of full growth . in the law it be say by men of other tongue and by strange lip will my word come to this people and not even so will they give ear to me say the lord . for this reason tongue be for a sign not to those who have faith but to those who have not but the prophet 's word be for those who have faith and not for the rest who have not . if then the church have come together and all be use tongue and there come in men without knowledge or faith will they not say that you be unbalanced ? but if all be teach a prophet and a man without faith or knowledge come in he be test by all he be judge by all the secret of his heart be make clear and he will go down on his face and give worship to god say that god be truly among you . what be it then my brother ? when you come together everyone have a holy song or a revelation or a tongue or be give the sense of it . let everything be do for the common good . if any man make use of a tongue let it not be more than two or at the most three and in turn and let someone give the sense but if there be no one to give the sense let him keep quiet in the church and let his word be to himself and to god . and let the prophet give their word but not more than two or three and let the others be judge of what they say . but if a revelation be give to another who be seat near let the first be quiet . for you may all be prophet in turn so that all may get knowledge and comfort and the spirit of the prophet be control by the prophet for god be not a god whose way be without order but a god of peace a in all the church of the saint . let woman keep quiet in the church for it be not right for them to be talk but let them be under control a it say in the law . and if they have a desire for knowledge about anything let them put question to their husband privately for talk in the church put shame on a woman . what ? be it from you that the word of god go out ? or do it only come in to you ? if any man seem to himself to be a prophet or to have the spirit let him take note of the thing which i be write to you a be the word of the lord . but if any man be without knowledge let him be so . so then my brother let it be your chief desire to be prophet but let no one be stop from use tongue . let all thing be do in the right and ordered way .now i be go to make clear to you my brother what the good news be which i give to you and which you take and on which your faith be base by which you have salvation that be to say the form in which it be give to you if it be fix in your mind and if your faith in it be not without effect . for i give to you first of all what be hand down to me how christ underwent death for our sin a it say in the writing and he be put in the place of the dead and on the third day he come back from the dead a it say in the writing and he be see by cephas then by the twelve then by more than five hundred brother at the same time most of whom be still live but some be sleep then he be see by james then by all the apostle . and last of all a by one whose birth be out of the right time he be see by me . for i be the least of the apostle have no right to be name an apostle because of my cruel attack on the church of god . but by the grace of god i be what i be and his grace which be give to me have not be for nothing for i do more work than all of them though not i but the grace of god which be with me . if then it be i who be the preacher or they this be our word and to this you have give your faith . now if the good news say that christ come back from the dead how do some of you say that there be no come back from the dead ? but if there be no come back from the dead then christ have not come back from the dead and if christ do not come again from the dead then our good news and your faith in it be of no effect . yes and we be see to be false witness of god because we give witness of god that by his power christ come again from the dead which be not true if there be no come back from the dead . for if it be not possible for the dead to come to life again then christ have not come to life again and if that be so your faith be of no effect you be still in your sin . and in addition the dead in christ have go to destruction . if in this life only we have hope in christ we be of all men most unhappy . but now christ have truly come back from the dead the first fruit of those who be sleep . for a by man come death so by man there be a come back from the dead . for a in adam death come to all so in christ will all come back to life . but every man in his right order christ the first fruit then those who be christ 's at his come . then come the end when he will give up the kingdom to god even the father when he will have put an end to all rule and to all authority and power . for his rule will go on till he have put all those who be against him under his foot . the last power to come to an end be death . for a it say he have put all thing under his foot . but when he say all thing be put under him it be clear that it be not say about him who put all thing under him . and when all thing have be put under him then will the son himself be under him who put all thing under him so that god may be all in all . again what will they do who be give baptism for the dead ? if the dead do not come back at all why be people give baptism for them ? and why be we in danger every hour ? yes truly by your pride in me my brother in christ jesus our lord my life be one long death . if after the way of men i be fight with beast at ephesus what profit be it to me ? if the dead do not come to life again let u take our pleasure in feast for tomorrow we come to an end . do not be trick by false word evil company do damage to good behaviour . be awake to righteousness and keep yourselves from sin for some have no knowledge of god i say this to put you to shame . but someone will say how do the dead come back ? and with what sort of body do they come ? foolish man it be necessary for the seed which you put into the earth to undergo death in order that it may come to life again and when you put it into the earth you do not put in the body which it will be but only the seed of grain or some other sort of plant but god give it a body a it be please to him and to every seed it special body . all flesh be not the same flesh but there be one flesh of men another of beast another of bird and another of fish . and there be body of heaven and body of earth but the glory of the one be different from that of the other . there be one glory of the sun and another glory of the moon and another glory of the star for the glory of one star be different from that of another . so be it with the come back from the dead . it be plant in death it come again in life it be plant in shame it come again in glory feeble when it be plant it come again in power it be plant a natural body it come again a a body of the spirit . if there be a natural body there be equally a body of the spirit . and so it be say the first man adam be a living soul . the last adam be a life give spirit . but that which be natural come before that which be of the spirit . the first man be from the earth and of the earth the second man be from heaven . those who be of the earth be like the man who be from the earth and those who be of heaven be like the one from heaven . and in the same way a we have take on u the image of the man from the earth so we will take on u the image of the one from heaven . now i say this my brother that it be not possible for flesh and blood to have a part in the kingdom of god and death may not have a part in life . see i be give you the revelation of a secret we will not all come to the sleep of death but we will all be change . in a second in the shutting of an eye at the sound of the last horn for at that sound the dead will come again free for ever from the power of death and we will be change . for this body which come to destruction will be make free from the power of death and the man who be under the power of death will put on eternal life . but when this have take place then that which be say in the writing will come true death be overcome by life . o death where be your power ? o death where be your pain ? the pain of death be sin and the power of sin be the law but praise be to god who give u strength to overcome through our lord jesus christ . for this cause my dear brother be strong in purpose and unmoved ever give yourselves to the work of the lord because you be certain that your work be not without effect in the lord .now about the give of money for the saint a i give order to the church of galatia so do you . on the first day of the week let every one of you put by him in store in measure a he have do well in business so that it may not be necessary to get money together when i come . and when i come i will send the men of your selection with letter to take the money you have get together to jerusalem . and if it be possible for me to go there they will go with me . but i will come to you after i have go through macedonia for that be my purpose but i may be with you for a time or even for the winter so that you may see me on my way wherever i go . for it be not my desire to see you now on my way because it be my hope to be with you for some time if that be the lord 's pleasure . but i will be at ephesus till pentecost for a great and important door there be open to me and there be a number of people against me . now if timothy come see that he be with you without fear because he be do the lord 's work even a i be see then that he have the honour which be right . but send him on his way in peace so that he may come to me for i be look for him with the brother . but a for apollo the brother i have a great desire for him to come to you with the brother but it be not his pleasure to come now but he will come when he have a chance . be on the watch unmoved in the faith and be strong like men . let all you do be do in love . now i make my request to you my brother for you have knowledge that the house of stephanas be the first fruit of achaia and that they have make themselves the servant of the saint that you put yourselves under such and under everyone who be help the lord 's work . and i be glad of the come of stephanas and fortunatus and achaicus for they have do what be need to make your work complete . for they give comfort to my spirit and to yours for which cause give respect to such people . the church of asia send their love to you . so do aquila and prisca with the church which be in their house . all the brother send their love to you . give one another a holy kiss . i paul send you these word of love in my writing . if any man have not love for the lord let him be curse . maran atha our lord come . the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you . my love be with you all in christ jesus . so be it .paul an apostle of jesus christ by the purpose of god and timothy the brother to the church of god which be in corinth with all the saint who be in all achaia grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ the father of mercy and the god of all comfort who give u comfort in all our trouble so that we may be able to give comfort to others who be in trouble through the comfort with which we ourselves be comfort by god . for a we undergo more of the pain which christ underwent so through christ do our comfort become great . but if we be troubled it be for your comfort and salvation or if we be comfort it be for your comfort which take effect through your quiet undergoing of the same trouble which we undergo and our hope for you be certain in the knowledge that a you take part in the trouble so you will take part in the comfort . for it be our desire that you may not be without knowledge of our trouble which come on u in asia that the weight of it be very great more than our power so that it seem that we have no hope even of life yes we ourselves have have the answer of death in ourselves so that our hope might not be in ourselves but in god who be able to give life to the dead who give u salvation from so great a death on whom we have put our hope that he will still go on to give u salvation you at the same time help together by your prayer for u so that for what have be give to u through a number of person praise may go up to god for u from all of them . for our glory be in this in the knowledge which we have that our way of life in the world and most of all in relation to you have be holy and true in the eye of god not in the wisdom of the flesh but in the grace of god . for in our letter we say no other thing to you but those which you be read and to which you give agreement and it be my hope will go on do so to the end even a you have be ready in part to say that we be your glory in the same way that you be ours in the day of the lord jesus . and be certain of this it be my purpose to come to you before so that you might have a second grace and by way of corinth to go into macedonia and from there to come back again to you so that you might send me on my way to judaea . if then i have such a purpose do i seem to be change suddenly ? or be i guide in my purpose by the flesh say yes today and no tomorrow ? a god be true our word to you be not yes and no . for the son of god jesus christ whom we be preach among you even i and silvanus and timothy be not yes and no but in him be yes . for he be the yes to all the undertaking of god and by him all the word of god be make certain and put into effect to the glory of god through u . now he who make our faith strong together with you in christ and have give u of his grace be god and it be he who have put his stamp on u even the spirit a the sign in our heart of the come glory . but god be my witness that it be in pity for you that i do not come to corinth at that time . not that we have authority over your faith but we be helper of your joy for it be faith which be your support .but it be my decision for myself not to come again to you with sorrow . for if i give you sorrow who then will make me glad but he who be make sad by me ? and i say this very thing in my letter for fear that when i come i might have sorrow from those from whom it be right for me to have joy be certain of this that my joy be the joy of you all . for out of much trouble and pain of heart and much weeping i send my letter to you not to give you sorrow but so that you might see how great be the love which i have to you . but if anyone have be a cause of sorrow he have be so not to me only but in some measure to all of you i say this that i may not be over hard on you . let it be enough for such a man to have undergone the punishment which the church put on him so that now on the other hand it be right for him to have forgiveness and comfort from you for fear that his sorrow may be over great . for which cause my desire be that you will make your love to him clear by your act . and for the same reason i send you a letter so that i might be certain of your desire to do my order in all thing . but if you give forgiveness to anyone i do the same for if i have give forgiveness for anything i have do it because of you in the person of christ so that satan may not get the good of u for we be not without knowledge of his design . now when i come to troas for the good news of christ and there be an open door for me in the lord i have no rest in my spirit because titus my brother be not there so i go away from them and come into macedonia . but praise be to god who make u strong to overcome in christ and make clear through u in every place the value of the knowledge of him . for we be a sweet perfume of christ to god in those who be get salvation and in those who be go to destruction to the one it be a perfume of death to death to the other a perfume of life to life . and who be enough for such thing ? for we be not like the great number who make use of the word of god for profit but our word be true a from god be say a before god in christ .do we seem to be again attempt to put ourselves in the right ? or have we need a some have of letter of approval to you or from you ? you yourselves be our letter whose writing be in our heart open for every man 's reading and knowledge for you be clearly a letter of christ the fruit of our work record not with ink but with the spirit of the living god not in stone but in heart of flesh . and this be the certain faith which we have in god through christ not a if we be able by ourselves to do anything for which we might take the credit but our power come from god who have make u able to be servant of a new agreement not of the letter but of the spirit for the letter give death but the spirit give life . for if the operation of the law give death record in letter on stone come with glory so that the eye of the child of israel have to be turn away from the face of moses because of it glory a glory which be only for a time will not the operation of the spirit have a much great glory ? for if the operation of the law produce punishment have it glory how much great will be the operation of the spirit cause righteousness ? for the glory of the first no longer seem to be glory because of the great glory of that which come after . for if the order which be for a time have it glory much more will the eternal order have it glory . have then such a hope we keep nothing back and be not like moses who put a veil on his face so that the child of israel might not see clearly to the end of the present order of thing but their mind be make hard for to this very day at the reading of the old agreement the same veil be still unlifted though it be take away in christ . but to this day at the reading of the law of moses a veil be over their heart . but when it be turn to the lord the veil will be take away . now the lord be the spirit and where the spirit of the lord be there the heart be free . but we all with unveiled face give back a in a glass the glory of the lord be change into the same image from glory to glory even a from the lord who be the spirit .for this reason because we have be make servant of this new order through the mercy give to u we be strong and we have give up the secret thing of shame not walk in false way and not make use of the word of god with deceit but by the revelation of what be true a before god we have the approval of every man 's sense of right and wrong . but if our good news be veil it be veil from those who be on the way to destruction because the god of this world have make blind the mind of those who have not faith so that the light of the good news of the glory of christ who be the image of god might not be shin on them . for our preaching be not about ourselves but about christ jesus a lord and ourselves a your servant through jesus . see that it be god who say let light be shin out of the dark who have put in our heart the light of the knowledge of the glory of god in the face of jesus christ . but we have this wealth in vessel of earth so that it may be see that the power come not from u but from god trouble be round u on every side but we be not shut in thing be hard for u but we see a way out of them we be cruelly attack but not without hope we be make low but we be not without help in our body there be ever the mark of the death of jesus so that the life of jesus may be see in our body . for while living we be still be give up to death because of jesus so that the life of jesus may be see in our flesh though it be under the power of death . so then death be work in u but life in you . but have the same spirit of faith a it be say in the writing the word of my mouth come from the faith in my heart in the same way our word be the outcome of our faith because we be certain that he who make the lord jesus come back from the dead will do the same for u and will give u a place in his glory with you . for we go through all thing on account of you because the great the number to whom the grace be give the great be the praise to the glory of god . for which cause we do not give way to weariness but though our outer man be get feebler our inner man be make new day by day . for our present trouble which be only for a short time be work out for u a much great weight of glory while our mind be not on the thing which be see but on the thing which be not see for the thing which be see be for a time but the thing which be not see be eternal .for we be conscious that if this our tent of flesh be take down we have a building from god a house not make with hand eternal in heaven . for in this we be cry in weariness greatly desire to be clothe with our house from heaven so that our spirit may not be unclothe . for truly we who be in this tent do give out cry of weariness for the weight of care which be on u not because we be desire to be free from the body but so that we may have our new body and death may be overcome by life . now he who have make u for this very thing be god who have give u the spirit a a witness of what be to come . so then we be ever without fear and though conscious that while we be in the body we be away from the lord for we be walk by faith not by see we be without fear desiring to be free from the body and to be with the lord . for this reason we make it our purpose in the body or away from it to be well please to him . for we all have to come before christ to be judge so that every one of u may get his reward for the thing do in the body good or bad . have in mind then the fear of the lord we put these thing before men but god see our heart and it be my hope that we may seem right in your eye . we be not again request your approval but we be give you the chance of take pride in u so that you may be able to give an answer to those whose glory be in seem and not in the heart . for if we be foolish it be to god or if we be serious it be for you . for it be the love of christ which be move u because we be of the opinion that if one be put to death for all then all have undergo death and that he undergo death for all so that the living might no longer be live to themselves but to him who undergo death for them and come back from the dead . for this reason from this time forward we have knowledge of no man after the flesh even if we have have knowledge of christ after the flesh we have no long any such knowledge . so if any man be in christ he be in a new world the old thing have come to an end they have truly become new . but all thing be of god who have make u at peace with himself through christ and have give to u the work of make peace that be that god be in christ make peace between the world and himself not put their sin to their account and have give to u the preaching of this news of peace . so we be the representative of christ a if god be make a request to you through u we make our request to you in the name of christ be at peace with god . for him who have no knowledge of sin god make to be sin for u so that we might become the righteousness of god in him .we then work together with god make our request to you not to take the grace of god to no purpose . for he say i have give ear to you at a good time and i have be your helper in a day of salvation see now be the good time now be the day of salvation give no cause for trouble in anything so that no one may be able to say anything against our work but in everything make it clear that we be the servant of god in quiet strength in trouble in need in sorrow in blow in prison in attack in hard work in watching in go without food in a clean heart in knowledge in long waiting in be kind in the holy spirit in true love in the true word in the power of god with the arm of righteousness on the right hand and on the leave by glory and by shame by an evil name and a good name a untrue and still true unnoted but still keep fully in mind a near to death but still live a undergoing punishment but not put to death a full of sorrow but ever glad a poor but give wealth to others a have nothing but still have all thing . our mouth be open to you o corinthian our heart be wide . it be not our feeling to you which be narrow but yours to u . now to give me back payment of the same sort i be talk a to my child let your heart be wide open to me . do not keep company with those who have not faith for what be there in common between righteousness and evil or between light and dark ? and what agreement be there between christ and the evil one ? or what part have one who have faith with one who have not ? and what agreement have the house of god with image ? for we be a house of the living god even a god have say i will be live among them and walk with them and i will be their god and they will be my people . for which cause come out from among them and be separate say the lord and let no unclean thing come near you and i will take you for myself and will be a father to you and you will be my son and daughter say the lord the ruler of all .because god then will give u such reward dear brother let u make ourselves clean from all evil of flesh and spirit and become completely holy in the fear of god . let your heart be open to u we have do no man wrong no man have be damage by u we have make no profit out of any man it be not with the purpose of judge you that i say this for i have say before that you be in our heart for life and death together . my word to you be without fear i be full of pride on account of you i have great comfort and joy in all our trouble . for even when we have come into macedonia our flesh have no rest but we be trouble on every side there be fighting outside and fear inside . but god who give comfort to the poor in spirit give u comfort by the come of titus and not by his come only but by the comfort which he have in you while he give u word of your desire your sorrow your care for me so that i be still more glad . for though my letter give you pain i have no regret for it now though i have before for i see that the letter give you pain but only for a time . now i be glad not that you have sorrow but that your sorrow be the cause of a change of heart for yours be a holy sorrow so that you might undergo no loss by u in anything . for the sorrow which god give be the cause of salvation through a change of heart in which there be no reason for grief but the sorrow of the world be a cause of death . for you see what care be produce in you by this very sorrow of yours before god what clearing of yourselves what wrath against sin what fear what desire what serious purpose what punishment . in everything you have make it clear that you be free from sin in this business . so though i send you a letter it be not only because of the man who do the wrong or because of him to whom the wrong be do but so that your true care for u might be make clear in the eye of god . so we have be comfort and we have the great joy in our comfort because of the joy of titus for his spirit have be make glad by you all . for i be not put to shame in anything in which i may have make clear to him my pride in you but a we say nothing to you but what be true so the good thing which i say to titus about you be see by him to be true . and his love to you be the more increased by his memory of you all how you give way to his authority and how you take him to your heart with fear and honour . it give me great joy to see you answer to my good opinion of you in every way .and now we give you news brother about the grace of god which have be give to the church of macedonia how while they be undergo every sort of trouble and be in the great need they take all the great joy in be able to give freely to the need of others . for i give them witness that a they be able and even more than they be able they give from the impulse of their heart seriously request u that they might have a part in this grace of be servant to the need of the saint and go even farther than our hope they first give themselves to the lord and to u after the purpose of god . so that we make a request to titus that a he have make a start before so he might make this grace complete in you . and that a you be full of every good thing of faith of the word of knowledge of a ready mind and of love to u so you may be full of this grace in the same way . i be not give you an order but use the ready mind of others a a test of the quality of your love . for you see the grace of our lord jesus christ how though he have wealth he become poor on your account so that through his need you might have wealth . and in this i give my opinion for it be to your profit who be the first to make a start a year before not only to do this but to make clear that your mind be more than ready to do it . then make the do of it complete so that a you have a ready mind you may give effect to it a you be able . for if there be a ready mind a man will have god 's approval in the measure of what he have and not of what he have not . and i be not say this so that others may get off free while the weight come on you but so that thing may be equal that from those thing of which you have more than enough at the present time their need may be help and that if you be in any need they may be a help to you in the same way make thing equal . a it say in the writing he who have take up much have nothing over and he who have little have enough . but praise be to god who put the same care for you into the heart of titus . for while he gladly give ear to our request he be interested enough to go to you from the impulse of his heart . and with him we have send a brother whose praise in the good news have go through all the church and not only so but he be mark out by the church to go with u in the grace of this give which we have undertake to the glory of the lord and to make clear that our mind be ready and so that no man might be able to say anything against u in the business of this give which have be put into our hand for the business have be so order by u a to have the approval not only of the lord but of men . and we have send with them our brother whose ready spirit have be make clear to u at time and in way without number but it be now all the more so because of the certain faith which he have in you . if any question come up about titus he be my brother worker work with me for you or about the others they be the representative of the church to the glory of christ . make clear then to them a representative of the church the quality of your love and that the thing which we have say about you be true .but there be no need for me to say anything in my letter about the give to the saint for i have before make clear to those of macedonia my pride in your ready mind say to them that achaia have be ready for a year back and a great number have be move to do the same by your example . but i have send the brother so that the good thing we say about you may be see to be true and that a i say you may be ready for fear that if any from macedonia come with me and you be not ready we not to say you might be put to shame in this thing . so it seem to me wise for the brother to go before and see that the amount which you have undertake to give be ready so that it might be a cause for praise and not a if we be make profit out of you . but in the writing it say he who put in only a small number of seed will get in the same and he who put them in from a full hand will have produce in full measure from them . let every man do after the purpose of his heart not give with grief or by force for god take pleasure in a ready giver . and god be able to give you all grace in full measure so that ever have enough of all thing you may be full of every good work a it be say in the writing he have send out far and wide he have give to the poor his righteousness be for ever . and he who give seed for put into the field and bread for food will take care of the growth of your seed at the same time increase the fruit of your righteousness your wealth be increase in everything with a simple mind cause praise to god through u . for this work of give not only take care of the need of the saint but be the cause of much praise to god for when through this work of give they see what you be they give glory to god for the way in which you have give yourselves to the good news of christ and for the wealth of your give to them and to all while their heart go out to you in love and in prayer for you because of the great grace of god which be in you . praise be to god for what he have give which word have no power to say .now i paul myself make request to you by the quiet and gentle behaviour of christ i who be poor in spirit when with you but who say what be in my mind to you without fear when i be away from you yes i make my request to you so that when i be with you i may not have to make use of the authority which may be need against some to whom we seem to be walk after the flesh . for though we may be live in the flesh we be not fight after the way of the flesh for the arm with which we be fight be not those of the flesh but be strong before god for the destruction of high place put an end to reasoning and every high thing which be lift up against the knowledge of god and cause every thought to come under the authority of christ be ready to give punishment to whatever be against his authority after you have make it clear that you be completely under his control . give attention to the thing which be before you . if any man seem to himself to be christ 's let him keep in mind that we be as much christ 's a he be . for though i might take pride in our authority which the lord give for building you up and not for your destruction it will not be a cause of shame to me that i may not seem to have the desire of cause you fear by my letter . for his letter they say have weight and be strong but in body he be feeble and his way of talk have little force . let those who say this keep in mind that what we be in word by letter when we be away so will we be in act when we be present . for we will not make comparison of ourselves with some of those who say good thing about themselves but these measure themselves by themselves and make comparison of themselves with themselves be not wise . we will not give glory to ourselves in over great measure but after the measure of the rule which god have give u a measure which come even to you . for we have no need to make ourselves seem more than we be a if our authority do not come as far a to you for we come even as far a you with the good news of christ not take credit to ourselves for what be not our business that be for the work of others but have hope that with the growth of your faith we may get the credit for an increase which be the effect of our work so that we may be able to go on and take the good news to country still far away than you be and not take credit for another man 's work in make thing ready to our hand . but whoever have a desire for glory let his glory be in the lord . for the lord 's approval of a man be not dependent on his opinion of himself but on the lord 's opinion of him .put up with me if i be a little foolish but truly you do put up with me . for i have a very great care for you because you have be marry by me to one husband and it be my desire to give you completely holy to christ . but i have a fear that in some way a eve be trick by the deceit of the snake your mind may be turn away from their simple and holy love for christ . for if anyone come preach another jesus from the one whose preacher we be or if you have get a different spirit or a different sort of good news from those which come to you how well you put up with these thing . for in my opinion i be in no way less than the most important of the apostle . but though i be rough in my way of talk i be not so in knowledge a we have make clear to all by our act among you . or do i do wrong in make myself low so that you might be lift up because i give you the good news of god without reward ? i take money from other church a payment for my work so that i might be your servant and when i be present with you and be in need i let no man be responsible for me for the brother when they come from macedonia give me whatever be need and in everything i keep myself from be a trouble to you and i will go on do so . a the true word of christ be in me i will let no man take from me this my cause of pride in the country of achaia . why ? because i have no love for you ? let god be judge . but what i do that i will go on do so that i may give no chance to those who be look for one so that in the cause of their pride they may be see to be the same a we be . for such men be false apostle worker of deceit make themselves seem like apostle of christ . and it be no wonder for even satan himself be able to take the form of an angel of light . so it be no great thing if his servant make themselves seem to be servant of righteousness whose end will be the reward of their work . i say again let me not seem foolish to anyone but if i do put up with me a such so that i may take a little glory to myself . what i be now say be not by the order of the lord but a a foolish person take credit to myself a it seem . see that there be those who take credit to themselves after the flesh i will do the same . for you put up with the foolish gladly be wise yourselves . you put up with a man if he make servant of you if he make profit out of you if he make you prisoner if he put himself in a high place if he give you blow on the face . i say this by way of sham ourselves a if we have be feeble . but if anyone put himself forward i be talk like a foolish person i will do the same . be they hebrew ? so be i. be they of israel ? so be i. be they the seed of abraham ? so be i. be they servant of christ ? i be talk foolishly i be more so i have have more experience of hard work of prison of blow more than measure of death . five time the jew give me forty blow but one . three time i be whip with rod once i be stone three time the ship i be in come to destruction at sea a night and a day i have be in the water in frequent travel in danger on river in danger from outlaw in danger from my countryman in danger from the gentile in danger in the town in danger in the waste land in danger at sea in danger among false brother in hard work and weariness in frequent watching go without food and drink cold and in need of clothing . in addition to all the other thing there be that which come on me every day the care of all the church . who be feeble and i be not feeble ? who be in danger of fall and i be not angry ? if i have to take credit to myself i will do so in the thing in which i be feeble . the god and father of our lord jesus christ to whom be praise for ever be witness that the thing which i say be true . in damascus the ruler under aretas the king keep watch over the town of the people of damascus in order to take me and be let down in a basket from the wall through a window i get free from his hand .a it be necessary for me to take glory to myself though it be not a good thing i will come to vision and revelation of the lord . i have knowledge of a man in christ fourteen year back if he be in the body or out of the body i be not able to say but god only who be take up to the third heaven . and i have knowledge of such a man if he be in the body or out of the body i be not able to say but god only how he be take up into paradise and word come to his ear which may not be say and which man be not able to say . on account of such a one i will have glory for myself i will take no glory but only in my feeble body . for if i have a desire to take credit to myself it would not be foolish for i would be say what be true but i will not for fear that i might seem to any man more than he see me to be or have word from me that i be . and because the revelation be so very great in order that i might not be overmuch lift up there be give to me a thorn in the flesh one sent from satan to give me pain . and about this thing i make request to the lord three time that it might be take away from me . and he say to me my grace be enough for you for my power be make complete in what be feeble . most gladly then will i take pride in my feeble body so that the power of christ may be on me . so i take pleasure in be feeble in unkind word in need in cruel attack in trouble on account of christ for when i be feeble then be i strong . i have be force by you to become foolish though it be right for my praise to have come from you for in no way be i less than the chief of the apostle though i be nothing . truly the sign of an apostle be do among you in quiet strength with wonder and act of power . for what be there in which you be make less than the other church but in the one thing that i be not a trouble to you ? let me have forgiveness for this wrong . this be now the third time that i be ready to come to you and i will not be a trouble to you my desire be for you not for your property for it be not the child 's business to make store for their father but the father for the child . and i will gladly give all i have for your soul . if i have the more love for you be i to be love the less ? but let it be so that i be not a trouble to you myself but someone may say be false i take you with deceit . do i make a profit out of you by any of those whom i send to you ? i give order to titus and i send the brother with him . do titus make any profit out of you ? be we not guide by the same spirit in the same way ? it may seem to you that all this time we have be attempt to put ourselves in the right but we be say these thing before god in christ . for all thing dear brother be for your profit . for i have a fear that when i come you may not be answer to my desire and that i may not be answer to yours that there may be fight hate angry feeling division evil talk about others secret thought of pride outburst against authority and that when i come again my god may put me to shame among you and i may have grief for those who have do wrong before and have have no regret for their unclean way and for the evil desire of the flesh to which they have give way .this be the third time that i be come to you . from the mouth of two or three witness will every word be make certain . i say before and still say it before i come a be present for the second time though i be still away from you to those who have do wrong before and to all the others that if i come again i will not have pity see that you be look for a sign of christ give out his word in me who be not feeble in relation to you but be strong in you for he be feeble in that he be put to death on the cross but he be live by the power of god . and we be feeble in him but we will be live with him through the power of god in relation to you . make a test of yourselves if you be in the faith make certain of yourselves . or be you not conscious in yourselves that jesus christ be in you if you be truly christ 's ? but it be my hope that you will have no doubt that we be truly christ 's . now our prayer to god be that you may do no evil not in order that it may be put to our credit but so that you may do what be right whatever we may seem . because we be able to do nothing against what be true but only for it . for we be glad when we be feeble and you be strong and this be our prayer even that you may be make complete . for this cause i be write these thing while i be away so that there may be need for me when i be present to make use of sharp measure by the authority which the lord have give me for build up and not for destruction . let this be my last word brother be glad be complete be comfort be of the same mind be at peace with one another and the god of love and peace will be with you . give one another a holy kiss . all the saint send their love to you . the grace of our lord jesus christ and the love of god and the harmony of the holy spirit be with you all .paul an apostle not from men and not through man but through jesus christ and god the father who make him come back from the dead and all the brother who be with me to the church of galatia grace to you and peace from god the father and our lord jesus christ who give himself for our sin so that he might make u free from this present evil world after the purpose of our god and father to whom be the glory for ever and ever . so be it . i be surprise that you be be so quickly turn away from him whose word come to you in the grace of christ to good news of a different sort which be not another sort only there be some who give you trouble desire to make change in the good news of christ . but even if we or an angel from heaven be to be a preacher to you of good news other than that which we have give you let there be a curse on him . a we have say before so say i now again if any man be a preacher to you of any good news other than that which have be give to you let there be a curse on him . be i now use argument to men or god ? or be it my desire to give men pleasure ? if i be still please men i would not be a servant of christ . because i say to you my brother that the good news of which i be the preacher be not man 's . for i do not get it from man and i be not give teach in it but it come to me through revelation of jesus christ . for news have come to you of my way of life in the past in the jew ' religion how i be cruel without measure to the church of god and do great damage to it and i go far in the jew ' religion than a number of my generation among my countryman have a more burning interest in the belief hand down from my father . but when it be the good pleasure of god by whom i be mark out even from my mother 's body through his grace to give the revelation of his son in me so that i might give the news of him to the gentile then i do not take the opinion of flesh and blood and i go not up to jerusalem to those who be apostle before me but i go away into arabia and again i come back to damascus . then after three year i go up to jerusalem to see cephas and be there with him fifteen day . but of the other apostle i saw only jam the lord 's brother . now god be witness that the thing which i be write to you be true . then i come to the part of syria and cilicia . and the church of judaea which be in christ still have no knowledge of my face or person only it come to their ear that he who at one time be cruel to u be now preach the faith which before have be attack by him and they give glory to god in me .then after the space of fourteen year i go up again to jerusalem with barnabas take titus with me . and i go up by revelation and i put before them the good news which i be preach among the gentile but privately before those who be of good name so that the work which i be or have be do might not be without effect . but not even titus who be with me be a greek be make to undergo circumcision and that because of the false brother let in secretly who come search out our free condition which we have in christ jesus so that they might make servant of u to whom we give way not even for an hour so that the true word of the good news might still be with you . but from those who seem to be important whatever they be have no weight with me god do not take man 's person into account those who seem to be important give nothing new to me but quite the opposite when they saw that i have be make responsible for preach the good news to those without circumcision even a peter have be for those of the circumcision because he who be work in peter a the apostle of the circumcision be work no less in me among the gentile when they saw the grace which be give to me james and cephas and john who have the name of be pillar give to me and barnabas their right hand a friend so that we might go to the gentile and they to the circumcision only it be their desire that we would give thought to the poor which very thing i have much in mind to do . but when cephas come to antioch i make a protest against him to his face because he be clearly in the wrong . for before certain men come from james he do take food with the gentile but when they come he go back and make himself separate fear those who be of the circumcision . and the rest of the jew go after him so that even barnabas be overcome by their false way . but when i saw that they be not live uprightly in agreement with the true word of the good news i say to cephas before them all if you be a jew be live like the gentile and not like the jew how will you make the gentile do the same a the jew ? we be jew by birth and not sinner of the gentile be conscious that a man do not get righteousness by the work of the law but through faith in jesus christ we have faith in christ jesus so that we might get righteousness by faith in christ and not by the work of the law because by the work of the law will no flesh get righteousness . but if while we be desire to get righteousness through christ we ourselves be see to be sinner be christ a servant of sin ? in no way ! for if i put up again those thing which i give to destruction i be see to be a wrongdoer . for i through the law have become dead to the law so that i might be live to god . i have be put to death on the cross with christ still i be live no longer i but christ be live in me and that life which i now be live in the flesh i be live by faith the faith of the son of god who in love for me give himself up for me . i do not make the grace of god of no effect because if righteousness be through the law then christ be put to death for nothing .o foolish galatian by what strange power have you be trick to whom it be make clear that jesus christ be put to death on the cross ? give me an answer to this one question do the spirit come to you through the work of the law or by the hearing of faith ? be you so foolish ? have make a start in the spirit will you now be make complete in the flesh ? do you undergo such a number of thing to no purpose ? if it be in fact to no purpose . he who give you the spirit and do work of power among you be it by the work of law or by the hearing of faith ? even a abraham have faith in god and it be put to his account a righteousness . be certain then that those who be of faith the same be son of abraham . and the holy writing see before the event that god would give the gentile righteousness by faith give the good news before to abraham say in you will all the nation have a blessing . so then those who be of faith have a part in the blessing of abraham who be full of faith . for all who be of the work of the law be under a curse because it be say in the writing a curse be on everyone who do not keep on do all the thing which be order in the book of the law . now that no man get righteousness by the law in the eye of god be clear because the upright will be living by faith . and the law be not of faith but he who do them will have life by them . christ have make u free from the curse of the law have become a curse for u because it be say in the writing a curse on everyone who be put to death by hang on a tree so that on the gentile might come the blessing of abraham in christ jesus in order that we through faith might have the spirit which god have undertake to give . brother a men would say even a man 's agreement when it have be make certain may not be put on one side or have addition make to it . now to abraham be the undertaking give and to his seed . he say not and to seed a of a great number but a of one he say and to your seed which be christ . now this i say the law which come four hundred and thirty year after do not put an end to the agreement make before by god so a to make the undertaking without effect . because if the heritage be by the law it be no longer dependent on the word of god but god give it to abraham by his word . what then be the law ? it be an addition make because of sin till the come of the seed to whom the undertaking have be give and it be order through angel by the hand of a go between . now a go between be not a go between of one but god be one . be the law then against the word of god ? in no way because if there have be a law which be able to give life truly righteousness would have be by the law . however the holy writing have put all thing under sin so that that for which god give the undertaking base on faith in jesus christ might be give to those who have such faith . but before faith come we be keep in prison under the law wait for the revelation of the faith which be to come . so the law have be a servant to take u to christ so that we might have righteousness by faith . but now that faith be come we be no longer under a servant . because you be all son of god through faith in christ jesus . for all those of you who be give baptism into christ do put on christ . there be no jew or greek servant or free male or female because you be all one in jesus christ . and if you be christ 's then you be abraham 's seed and yours be the heritage by the right of god 's undertake give to abraham .but i say that as long a the son be a child he be in no way different from a servant though he be lord of all but be under keeper and manager till the time fix by the father . so we when we be young be keep under the first rule of the world but when the time have come god send out his son make of a woman make under the law that he might make them free who be under the law and that we might be give the place of son . and because you be son god have send out the spirit of his son into our heart say abba father . so that you be no longer a servant but a son and if a son then the heritage of god be yours . but at that time have no knowledge of god you be servant to those who by right be no god but now that you have come to have knowledge of god or more truly god have knowledge of you how be it that you go back again to the poor and feeble first thing desire to be servant to them again ? you keep day and month and fix time and year . i be in fear of you that i may have be work for you to no purpose . my desire for you brother be that you may be a i be because i be a you be . you have do me no wrong but you have knowledge that with a feeble body i be preach the good news to you the first time and you do not have a poor opinion of me because of the trouble in my flesh or put shame on it but you take me to your heart a an angel of god even a christ jesus . where then be that happy condition of yours ? because i give you witness that if possible you would have take out your eye and give them to me . so then be i no longer your friend because i give you true word ? their interest in you be not good but their desire be that you may be shut out so that you may go after them . but it be good to have an interest in a good cause at all time and not only when i be present with you . my child of whom i be again in birth pain till christ be form in you truly my desire be to be present with you now use a changed voice for i be trouble about you . say you whose desire it be to be under the law do you not give ear to the law ? because it be in the writing that abraham have two son one by the servant woman and one by the free woman . now the son by the servant woman have his birth after the flesh but the son by the free woman have his birth through the undertaking of god . which thing have a secret sense because these woman be the two agreement one from the mountain of sinai give birth to servant which be hagar . now this hagar be the mountain sinai in arabia and be the image of the jerusalem which now be which be a servant with her child . but the jerusalem on high be free which be our mother . for it be in the writing you who have never give birth be glad give cry of joy you who have have no birth pain for the child of her who have be give up by her husband be more than those of the woman who have a husband . now we brother a isaac be be the child of the undertaking of god . but a in those day he who have birth after the flesh be cruel to him who have birth after the spirit even so it be now . what then do the writing say ? send away the servant woman and her son for the son of the servant woman will not have a part in the heritage with the son of the free woman . so brother we be not child of the servant woman but of the free woman .christ have truly make u free then keep your free condition and let no man put a yoke on you again . see i paul say to you that if you undergo circumcision christ will be of no use to you . yes i give witness again to every man who undergo circumcision that he will have to keep all the law . you be cut off from christ you who would have righteousness by the law you be turn away from grace . for we through the spirit by faith be wait for the hope of righteousness . because in christ jesus have circumcision or not have circumcision be equally of no profit but only faith work through love . you be go on well who be the cause of your not give ear to what be true ? this ready belief do not come from him who have make you his . a little leaven make a change in all the mass . i be certain about you in the lord that you will be of no other mind but he who be trouble you will have his punishment whoever he be . but i brother if i be still preach circumcision why be i still attack ? then have the shame of the cross be take away . my desire be that they who give you trouble might even be cut off themselves . because you brother be mark out to be free only do not make use of your free condition to give the flesh it chance but through love be servant one to another . for all the law be make complete in one word even in this have love for your neighbour a for yourself . but if you be give to fight with one another take care that you be not the cause of destruction one to another . but i say go on in the spirit and you will not come under the rule of the evil desire of the flesh . for the flesh have desire against the spirit and the spirit against the flesh because these be opposite the one to the other so that you may not do the thing which you have a mind to do . but if you be guide by the spirit you be not under the law . now the work of the flesh be clear which be these evil desire unclean thing wrong use of the sens worship of image use of strange power hat fight desire for what another have angry feeling attempt to get the good of others division false teaching envy uncontrolled drinking and feasting and such thing of which i give you word clearly even a i do in the past that they who do such thing will have no part in the kingdom of god . but the fruit of the spirit be love joy peace a quiet mind kind act well do faith gentle behaviour control over desire against such there be no law . and those who be christ 's have put to death on the cross the flesh with it passion and it evil desire . if we be live by the spirit by the spirit let u be guide . let u not be full of self glory make one another angry have envy of one another .brother if a man be take in any wrongdoing you who be of the spirit will put such a one right in a spirit of love keep watch on yourself for fear that you yourself may be test . take on yourselves one another 's trouble and so keep the law of christ . for if a man have an idea that he be something when he be nothing he be trick by himself . but let every man make test of his work and then will his cause for glory be in himself only and not in his neighbour . because every man be responsible for his part of the work . but let him who get teach in the word give a part in all good thing to his teacher . be not trick god be not make sport of for whatever seed a man put in that will he get back a grain . because he who put in the seed of the flesh will of the flesh get the reward of death but he who put in the seed of the spirit will of the spirit get the reward of eternal life . and let u not get tire of well do for at the right time we will get in the grain if we do not give way to weariness . so then a we have the chance let u do good to all men and specially to those who be of the family of the faith . see the size of the handwriting which i myself have make use of in write to you . those who have the desire to seem important in the flesh put force on you to undergo circumcision only that they may not be attack because of the cross of christ . because even those who undergo circumcision do not themselves keep the law but they would have you undergo circumcision so that they may have glory in your flesh . but far be it from me to have glory in anything but only in the cross of our lord jesus christ through which this world have come to an end on the cross for me and i for it . for have circumcision be nothing and not have circumcision be nothing but only a new order of existence . and on all who be guide by this rule be peace and mercy and on the israel of god . from this time on let no man be a trouble to me because my body be mark with the mark of jesus . the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit brother . so be it .paul an apostle of christ jesus by the purpose of god to the saint who be at ephesus and those who have faith in christ jesus grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ who have give u every blessing of the spirit in the heaven in christ even a he make selection of u in him from the first so that we might be holy and free from all evil before him in love a we be design before by him for the position of son to himself through jesus christ in the good pleasure of his purpose to the praise of the glory of his grace which he freely give to u in the loved one in whom we have salvation through his blood the forgiveness of our sin through the wealth of his grace which he give u in full measure in all wisdom and care have make clear to u the secret of his purpose in agreement with the design which he have in mind to put into his hand the ordering of the time when they be complete so that all thing might come to a head in christ the thing in heaven and the thing on the earth in him i say in whom we have a heritage be mark out from the first in his purpose who do all thing in agreement with his design so that his glory might have praise through u who first have hope in christ in whom you have be give the true word the good news of your salvation and through your faith in him be give the sign of the holy spirit of hope which be the first fruit of our heritage till god get back that which be his to the praise of his glory . for this cause i have have news of the faith in the lord jesus which be among you and which you make clear to all the saint give praise without end for you keep you in mind in my prayer that the god of our lord jesus christ the father of glory may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him and that have the eye of your heart full of light you may have knowledge of what be the hope of his purpose what be the wealth of the glory of his heritage in the saint and how unlimited be his power to u who have faith a be see in the working of the strength of his power by which he make christ come back from the dead and give him a place at his right hand in heaven far over all rule and authority and power and every name which be name not only in the present order but in that which be to come and he have put all thing under his foot and have make him to be head over all thing to the church which be his body the full measure of him in whom all thing be make complete .and to you do he give life when you be dead through your wrongdoing and sin in which you be live in the past after the way of this present world do the pleasure of the lord of the power of the air the spirit who be now work in those who go against the purpose of god among whom we all at one time be live in the pleasure of our flesh give way to the desire of the flesh and of the mind and the punishment of god be wait for u even a for the rest . but god be full of mercy through the great love which he have for u even when we be dead through our sin give u life together with christ by grace you have salvation so that we come back from death with him and be seat with him in the heaven in christ jesus that in the time to come he might make clear the full wealth of his grace in his mercy to u in christ jesus because by grace you have salvation through faith and that not of yourselves it be give by god not by work so that no man may take glory to himself . for by his act we be give existence in christ jesus to do those good work which god before make ready for u so that we might do them . for this reason keep it in mind that in the past you the gentile in the flesh who be look on a be outside the circumcision by those who have circumcision in the flesh make by hand that you be at that time without christ be cut off from any part in israel 's right a a nation have no part in god 's agreement have no hope and without god in the world . but now in christ jesus you who at one time be far off be make near in the blood of christ . for he be our peace who have make the two into one and by whom the middle wall of division have be break down have in his flesh put an end to that which make the division between u even the law with it rule and order so that he might make in himself of the two one new man so make peace and that the two might come into agreement with god in one body through the cross so put an end to that division . and he come preach peace to you who be far off and to those who be near because through him the two of u be able to come near in one spirit to the father . so then you be no longer a those who have no part or place in the kingdom of god but you be number among the saint and of the family of god rest on the base of the apostle and prophet christ jesus himself be the chief keystone in whom all the building rightly join together come to be a holy house of god in the lord in whom you with the rest be unite together a a living place of god in the spirit .for this cause i paul the prisoner of christ jesus for you gentiles if that ordering of the grace of god have come to your knowledge which be give to me for you how by revelation the secret be make clear to me a i say before in a short letter by the reading of which you will be clear about my knowledge of the secret of christ which in other generation be not give to the son of men but the revelation of it have now be make to his holy apostle and prophet in the spirit which be that the gentile have a part in the heritage and in the same body and in the same hope in christ through the good news of which i be make a preacher through that grace of god which be give to me in the measure of the working of his power . to me who be less than the least of all the saint be this grace give so that i might make clear to the gentile the good news of the unending wealth of christ and make all men see what be the ordering of the secret which from the first have be keep in god who make all thing so that now to the ruler and the authority in the heaven might be make clear through the church the wide shin wisdom of god which be see in his eternal purpose in christ jesus our lord by whom we come near to god without fear through faith in him . for this reason it be my prayer that you may not become feeble because of my trouble for you which be your glory . for this cause i go down on my knee before the father from whom every family in heaven and on earth be name that in the wealth of his glory he would make you strong with power through his spirit in your heart so that christ may have his place in your heart through faith and that you be root and base in love may have strength to see with all the saint how wide and long and high and deep it be and to have knowledge of the love of christ which be outside all knowledge so that you may be make complete a god himself be complete . now to him who be able to do in full measure more than all our desire or thought through the power which be work in u to him be the glory in the church and in christ jesus to all generation for ever and ever . so be it .i then the prisoner in the lord make this request from my heart that you will see that your behaviour be a credit to the position which god 's purpose have give you with all gentle and quiet behaviour take whatever come put up with one another in love take care to keep the harmony of the spirit in the yoke of peace . there be one body and one spirit even a you have be mark out by god in the one hope of his purpose for you one lord one faith one baptism one god and father of all who be over all and through all and in all . but to every one of u have grace be give in the measure of the give of christ . for this reason he say he go up on high take his prisoner with him and give freely to men . now this he go up what be it but that he first go down into the low part of the earth ? he who go down be the same who go up far over all the heaven so that he might make all thing complete . and he give some a apostle and some prophet and some preacher of the good news and some to give care and teaching for the training of the saint a servant in the church for the building up of the body of christ till we all come to the harmony of the faith and of the knowledge of the son of god to full growth to the full measure of christ so that we may be no longer child send this way and that turn about by every wind of teaching by the twisting and trick of men by the deceit of error but say true word in love may come to full growth in him who be the head even christ through whom all the body be rightly form and unite together by the full working of every part be increase to the building up of itself in love . this i say then and give witness in the lord that you be to go no longer in the way of the gentile whose mind be turn to that which have no profit whose thought be dark to whom the life of god be strange because they be without knowledge and their heart have be make hard who have no more power of feeling have give themselves up to evil passion to do all unclean thing with overmuch desire . for this be not the teaching of christ which be give to you if in fact you give ear to him and be give teach in him even a what be true be make clear in jesus that you be to put away in relation to your early way of life the old man which have become evil by love of deceit and be make new in the spirit of your mind and put on the new man to which god have give life in righteousness and a true and holy way of living . and so put away false word let everyone say what be true to his neighbour for we be part one of another . be angry without do wrong let not the sun go down on your wrath and do not give way to the evil one . let him who be a thief be so no longer but let him do good work with his hand so that he may have something to give to him who be in need . let no evil talk come out of your mouth but only what be good for give necessary teaching and for grace to those who give ear . and do not give grief to the holy spirit of god by whom you be mark for the day of salvation . let all bitter sharp and angry feeling and noise and evil word be put away from you with all unkind act and be kind to one another full of pity have forgiveness for one another even a god in christ have forgiveness for you .let it then be your desire to be like god as well loved child and be live in love even a christ have love for you and give himself up for u an offering to god for a perfume of a sweet smell . but evil act of the flesh and all unclean thing or desire for others ' property let it not even be name among you a be right for saint and let there be no low behaviour or foolish talk or word say in sport which be not right but in place of them the give of praise . be certain of this that no man who give way to the passion of the flesh no unclean person or one who have desire for the property of others or who give worship to image have any heritage in the kingdom of christ and god . do not be turn from the right way by foolish word for because of these thing the punishment of god come on those who do not put themselves under him . have no part with such men for you at one time be dark but now be light in the lord let your behaviour be that of child of light because the fruit of the light be in all righteousness and in everything which be good and true testing by experience what be well please to the lord and have no company with the work of the dark which give no fruit but make their true quality clear for the thing which be do by them in secret it be shame even to put into word . but all thing when their true quality be see be make clear by the light because everything which be make clear be light . for this reason he say be awake you who be sleep and come up from among the dead and christ will be your light . take care then how you be live not a unwise but a wise making good use of the time because the day be evil . for this reason then do not be foolish but be conscious of the lord 's pleasure . and do not take overmuch wine by which one may be overcome but be full of the spirit join with one another in holy song of praise and of the spirit use your voice in song and make melody in your heart to the lord give praise at all time for all thing in the name of our lord jesus christ to god even the father let yourselves be rule by one another in the fear of christ . wife be under the authority of your husband a of the lord . for the husband be the head of the wife a christ be the head of the church be himself the saviour of the body . and a the church be under christ 's authority so let wife be under the rule of their husband in all thing . husband have love for your wife even a christ have love for the church and give himself for it so that he might make it holy have make it clean with the washing of water by the word and might take it for himself a church full of glory not have one mark or fold or any such thing but that it might be holy and complete . even so it be right for husband to have love for their wife a for their body . he who have love for his wife have love for himself for no man ever have hate for his flesh but he give it food and take care of it even a christ do for the church because we be part of his body . for this cause will a man go away from his father and mother and be join to his wife and the two will become one flesh . this be a great secret but my word be about christ and the church . but do you everyone have love for his wife even a for himself and let the wife see that she have respect for her husband .child do what be order by your father and mother in the lord for this be right . give honour to your father and mother which be the first rule have a reward so that all may be well for you and your life may be long on the earth . and you father do not make your child angry but give them train in the teaching and fear of the lord . servant do what be order by those who be your natural master have respect and fear for them with all your heart a to christ not only under your master 's eye a pleaser of men but a servant of christ do the pleasure of god from the heart do your work readily a to the lord and not to men in the knowledge that for every good thing anyone do he will have his reward from the lord if he be a servant or if he be free . and you master do the same thing to them not make use of violent word in the knowledge that their master and yours be in heaven and he have no respect for a man 's position . lastly be strong in the lord and in the strength of his power . take up god 's instrument of war so that you may be able to keep your position against all the deceit of the evil one . for our fight be not against flesh and blood but against authority and power against the world ruler of this dark night against the spirit of evil in the heaven . for this reason take up all the arm of god so that you may be able to be strong in the evil day and have do all to keep your place . take your place then have your body clothe with the true word and have put on the breastplate of righteousness be ready with the good news of peace a shoe on your foot and most of all use faith a a cover to keep off all the flaming arrow of the evil one . and take salvation for your head dress and the sword of the spirit which be the word of god with prayer and deep desire make request at all time in the spirit and keep watch with strong purpose in prayer for all the saint and for me that word may be give to me in the opening of my mouth to make clear without fear the secret of the good news for which i be a representative in chain and that i may say without fear the thing which it be right for me to say . but so that you may have knowledge of my business and how i be tychicus the well love brother and test servant in the lord will give you news of all thing whom i have send to you for this very purpose so that you may have knowledge of our position and that he may give comfort to your heart . peace be to the brother and love with faith from god the father and the lord jesus christ . grace be with all those who have true love for our lord jesus christ .paul and timothy servant of jesus christ to all the saint in christ jesus at philippi with the bishop and deacon of the church grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . i give praise to my god at every memory of you and in all my prayer for you all make my request with joy because of your help in give the good news from the first day till now for i be certain of this very thing that he by whom the good work be start in you will make it complete till the day of jesus christ so it be right for me to take thought for you all in this way because i have you in my heart for in my chain and in my argument before the judge in support of the good news make clear that it be true you all have your part with me in grace . for god be my witness how my love go out to you all in the loving mercy of christ jesus . and my prayer be that you may be increase more and more in knowledge and experience so that you may give your approval to the best thing that you may be true and without wrongdoing till the day of christ be full of the fruit of righteousness which be through jesus christ to the glory and praise of god . now it be my purpose to make clear to you brother that the cause of the good news have be help by my experience so that it become clear through all the praetorium and to all the rest that i be a prisoner on account of christ and most of the brother in the lord take heart because of my chain be all the strong to give the word of god without fear . though some be preach christ out of envy and competition others do it out of a good heart these do it from love conscious that i be responsible for the cause of the good news but those be preach christ in a spirit of competition not from their heart but with the purpose of give me pain in my prison . what then ? only that in every way falsely or truly the preaching of christ go on and in this i be glad and will be glad . for i be conscious that this will be for my salvation through your prayer and the give out of the stored wealth of the spirit of jesus christ in the measure of my strong hope and belief that in nothing will i be put to shame but that without fear a at all time so now will christ have glory in my body by life or by death . for to me life be christ and death be profit . but if i go on living in the flesh if this be the fruit of my work then i do not see what decision to make . i be in a hard position between the two have a desire to go away and be with christ which be very much good still to go on in the flesh be more necessary because of you . and be certain of this i be conscious that i will go on yes and go on with you all for your growth and joy in the faith so that your pride in me may be increase in christ jesus through my be present with you again . only let your behaviour do credit to the good news of christ so that if i come and see you or if i be away from you i may have news of you that you be strong in one spirit work together with one soul for the faith of the good news have no fear of those who be against you which be a clear sign of their destruction but of your salvation and that from god because to you it have be give in the cause of christ not only to have faith in him but to undergo pain on his account fight the same fight which you saw in me and now have word of in me .if then there be any comfort in christ any help give by love any uniting of heart in the spirit any loving mercy and pity make my joy complete by be of the same mind have the same love be in harmony and of one mind do nothing through envy or through pride but with low thought of self let everyone take others to be good than himself not look everyone to his private good but keep in mind the thing of others . let this mind be in you which be in christ jesus to whom though himself in the form of god it do not seem that to take for oneself be to be like god but he make himself a nothing take the form of a servant be make like men and be see in form a a man he take the low place and let himself be put to death even the death of the cross . for this reason god have put him in the high place and have give to him the name which be great than every name so that at the name of jesus every knee may be bent of those in heaven and those on earth and those in the underworld and that every tongue may give witness that jesus christ be lord to the glory of god the father . so then my loved one a you have at all time do what i say not only when i be present but now much more when i be not with you give yourselves to work out your salvation with fear in your heart for it be god who be the cause of your desire and of your act for his good pleasure . do all thing without protest and argument so that you may be holy and gentle child of god without sin in a twisted and foolish generation among whom you be see a light in the world offer the word of life so that i may have glory in you in the day of christ because my running be not for nothing and my work be not without effect . and even if i be offer like a drink offering give myself for the cause and work of your faith i be glad and have joy with you all and in the same way do you be glad and have a part in my joy . but i be hop in the lord jesus to send timothy to you before long so that i may be comfort when i have news of you . for i have no man of like mind who will truly have care for you . for they all go after what be theirs not after the thing of christ . but his quality be clear to you how a a child be to it father so he be a help to me in the work of the good news . him then i be hop to send as quickly a possible when i be able to see how thing will go for me but i have faith in the lord that i myself will come before long . but it seem to me necessary to send to you epaphroditus my brother who have take part with me in the work and in the fight and your servant send by you for help in my need because his heart be with you all and he be greatly troubled because you have news that he be ill for in fact he be ill almost to death but god have mercy on him and not only on him but on me so that i might not have grief on grief . i have send him then the more gladly so that when you see him again you may be happy and i may have the less sorrow . so take him to your heart in the lord with all joy and give honour to such a he be because for the work of christ he be near to death put his life in danger to make your care for me complete .for the rest my brother be glad in the lord . write the same thing to you be no trouble to me and for you it be safe . be on the watch against dog against the worker of evil against those of the circumcision for we be the circumcision who give worship to god and have glory in jesus christ and have no faith in the flesh even though i myself might have faith in the flesh if any other man have reason to have faith in the flesh i have more be give circumcision on the eighth day of the nation of israel of the tribe of benjamin a hebrew of hebrew in relation to the law a pharisee in bitter hate i be cruel to the church i keep all the righteousness of the law to the last detail . but those thing which be profit to me i give up for christ . yes truly and i be ready to give up all thing for the knowledge of christ jesus my lord which be more than all for whom i have undergo the loss of all thing and to me they be less than nothing so that i may have christ a my reward and be see in him not have my righteousness which be of the law but that which be through faith in christ the righteousness which be of god by faith that i may have knowledge of him and of the power of his come back from the dead and a part with him in his pain become like him in his death if in any way i may have the reward of life from the dead . not a if i have even now get the reward or be make complete but i go on in the hope that i may come to the knowledge of that for which i be make the servant of christ jesus . brother it be clear to me that i have not come to that knowledge but one thing i do let go those thing which be past and stretch out to the thing which be before i go forward to the mark even the reward of the high purpose of god in christ jesus . then let u all who have come to full growth be of this mind and if in anything you be of a different mind even this will god make clear to you only as far a we have get let u be guide by the same rule . brother take me a your example and take note of those who be walk after the example we have give . for there be those of whom i have give you word before and do so now with sorrow who be hater of the cross of christ whose end be destruction whose god be the stomach and whose glory be in their shame whose mind be fix on the thing of the earth . for our country be in heaven from where the saviour for whom we be wait will come even the lord jesus christ by whom this poor body of ours will be change into the image of the body of his glory in the measure of the working by which he be able to put all thing under himself .so my brother well love and very dear to me my joy and crown be strong in the lord my loved one . i make request to euodias and syntyche to be of the same mind in the lord . and i make request to you true helper in my work to see to the need of those woman who take part with me in the good news with clement and the rest of my brother worker whose name be in the book of life . be glad in the lord at all time again i say be glad . let your gentle behaviour be clear to all men . the lord be near . have no care but in everything with prayer and praise put your request before god . and the peace of god which be deep than all knowledge will keep your heart and mind in christ jesus . for the rest my brother whatever thing be true whatever thing have honour whatever thing be upright whatever thing be holy whatever thing be beautiful whatever thing be of value if there be any virtue and if there be any praise give thought to these thing . the thing which come to you by my teaching and preaching and which you saw in me these thing do and the god of peace will be with you . but i be very glad in the lord that your care for me have come to life again though you do in fact take thought for me but you be not able to give effect to it . but i will not say anything about my need for i be able wherever i be to be dependent on myself . it be the same to me if i be look down on or honour everywhere and in all thing i have the secret of how to be full and how to go without food how to have wealth and how to be in need . i be able to do all thing through him who give me strength . but you do well to have care for me in my need . and you have knowledge philippian that when the good news first come to you when i go away from macedonia no church take part with me in the business of give to the saint but you only because even in thessalonica you send once and again to me in my need . not that i be look for an offering but for fruit which may be put to your credit . i have all thing and more than enough i be make full have have from epaphroditus the thing which come from you a perfume of a sweet smell an offering well please to god . and my god will give you all you have need of from the wealth of his glory in christ jesus . now to god our father be glory for ever and ever . so be it . give word of love to every saint in christ jesus . the brother who be with me send you their love . all the saint send their love to you specially those who be of caesar 's house . the grace of the lord jesus christ be with your spirit .paul an apostle of jesus christ by the purpose of god and timothy our brother to the saint and true brother in christ at colossae grace to you and peace from god our father . we give praise to god the father of our lord jesus christ make prayer for you at all time after hear of your faith in christ jesus and of the love which you have for all the saint through the hope which be in store for you in heaven knowledge of which be give to you before in the true word of the good news which have come to you and which in all the world be give fruit and increase a it have do in you from the day when it come to your ear and you have true knowledge of the grace of god a it be give to you by epaphras our well love helper who be a true servant of christ for u and who himself make clear to u your love in the spirit . for this reason we from the day when we have word of it keep on in prayer for you that you may be full of the knowledge of his purpose with all wisdom and experience of the spirit live uprightly in the approval of the lord give fruit in every good work and increase in the knowledge of god full of strength in the measure of the great power of his glory so that you may undergo all trouble with joy give praise to the father who have give u a part in the heritage of the saint in light who have make u free from the power of evil and give u a place in the kingdom of the son of his love in whom we have our salvation the forgiveness of sin who be the image of the unseen god come into existence before all living thing for by him all thing be make in heaven and on earth thing see and thing unseen authority lord ruler and power all thing be make by him and for him he be before all thing and in him all thing have be . and he be the head of the body the church the start point of all thing the first to come again from the dead so that in all thing he might have the chief place . for god in full measure be pleased to be in him through him unite all thing with himself have make peace through the blood of his cross through him i say unite all thing which be on earth or in heaven . and you who in the past be cut off and at war with god in your mind through evil work he have now make one in the body of his flesh through death so that you might be holy and without sin and free from all evil before him if you keep yourselves safely base in the faith not move from the hope of the good news which come to you and which be give to every living be under heaven of which i paul be make a servant . now i have joy in my pain because of you and in my flesh i undergo whatever be still need to make the sorrow of christ complete for the salvation of his body the church of which i become a servant by the purpose of god which be give to me for you to give effect to the word of god the secret which have be keep from all time and generation but have now be make clear to his saint to whom god be pleased to give knowledge of the wealth of the glory of this secret among the gentile which be christ in you the hope of glory whom we be preach guiding and teaching every man in all wisdom so that every man may be complete in christ and for this purpose i be work use all my strength by the help of his power which be work in me strongly .for it be my desire to give you news of the great fight i be make for you and for those at laodicea and for all who have not see my face in the flesh so that their heart may be comfort and that be join together in love they may come to the full wealth of the certain knowledge of the secret of god even christ in whom be all the secret store of wisdom and knowledge . i say this so that you may not be turn away by any deceit of word . for though i be not present in the flesh still i be with you in the spirit see with joy your order and your unchanging faith in christ . a then you take christ jesus the lord so go on in him root and base together in him strong in the faith which the teaching give you give praise to god at all time . take care that no one take you away by force through man 's wisdom and deceit go after the belief of men and the theory of the world and not after christ for in him all the wealth of god 's be have a living form and you be complete in him who be the head of all rule and authority in whom you have a circumcision not make with hand in the put off of the body of the flesh in the circumcision of christ have be put to death with him in baptism by which you come to life again with him through faith in the working of god who make him come back from the dead . and you be dead through your sin and the evil condition of your flesh to you i say he give life together with him and forgiveness of all our sin have put an end to the handwriting of the law which be against u take it out of the way by nail it to his cross have make himself free from the rule of authority and power he put them openly to shame glory over them in it . for this reason let no man be your judge in any question of food or drink or feast day or new moon or sabbath for these be an image of the thing which be to come but the body be christ 's . let no man take your reward from you by consciously make little of himself and give worship to angels have his thought fix on the thing which he have see be foolishly lift up in his natural mind and not join to the head from whom all the body be give strength and keep together through it join and band have it growth with the increase of god . if you be make free by your death with christ from the rule of the world why do you put yourselves under the authority of order which say there may be no touch tasting or take in your hand rule which be all to come to an end with their use after the order and teaching of men ? these thing seem to have a sort of wisdom in self order worship and make little of oneself and be cruel to the body not honour it by give it it natural use .if then you have a new life with christ give your attention to the thing of heaven where christ be seat at the right hand of god . keep your mind on the high thing not on the thing of earth . for your life on earth be do and you have a secret life with christ in god . at the come of christ who be our life you will be see with him in glory . then put to death your body which be of the earth wrong use of the flesh unclean thing passion evil desire and envy which be the worship of strange god because of which the wrath of god come on those who go against his order among whom you be live in the past when you do such thing . but now it be right for you to put away all these thing wrath passion bad feeling curse unclean talk do not make false statement to one another because you have put away the old man with all his doings and have put on the new man which have become new in knowledge after the image of his maker where there be no greek or jew no one with circumcision or without circumcision no division between nation no servant or free man but christ be all and in all . a saint of god then holy and dearly love let your behaviour be mark by pity and mercy kind feel a low opinion of yourselves gentle way and a power of undergo all thing be gentle to one another and have forgiveness for one another if anyone have do wrong to his brother even a the lord have forgiveness for you and more than all have love the only way in which you may be completely join together . and let the peace of christ be rule in your heart a it be the purpose of god for you to be one body and give praise to god at all time . let the word of christ be in you in all wealth of wisdom teaching and help one another with song of praise and holy word make melody to god with grace in your heart . and whatever you do in word or in act do all in the name of the lord jesus give praise to god the father through him . wife be under the authority of your husband a be right in the lord . husband have love for your wife and be not bitter against them . child do the order of your father and mother in all thing for this be please to the lord . father do not be hard on your child so that their spirit may not be break . servant in all thing do the order of your natural master not only when their eye be on you a pleaser of men but with all your heart fear the lord whatever you do do it readily a to the lord and not to men be certain that the lord will give you the reward of the heritage for you be the servant of the lord christ . for the wrongdoer will have punishment for the wrong he have do without respect for any man 's position .master give your servant what be right and equal conscious that you have a master in heaven . give yourselves to prayer at all time keep watch with praise and make prayer for u that god may give u an open door for the preaching of the word the secret of christ for which i be now in chain so that i may make it clear a it be right for me to do . be wise in your behaviour to those who be outside make good use of the time . let your talk be with grace mixed with salt so that you may be able to give an answer to everyone . tychicus will give you news of all my business he be a dear brother and true servant and helper in the word and i have send him to you for this very purpose so that you may have news of how we be and so that he may give your heart comfort and with him i have send onesimus the true and well love brother who be one of you . they will give you word of everything which be take place here . aristarchus my brother prisoner send his love to you and mark a relation of barnabas about whom you have be give order if he come to you be kind to him and jesus whose other name be justus these be of the circumcision they be my only brother worker for the kingdom of god who have be a comfort to me . epaphras who be one of you a servant of christ jesus send you his love ever take think for you in his prayer that you may be complete and fully certain of all the purpose of god . for i give witness of him that he have undergone much trouble for you and for those in laodicea and in hierapolis . luke our well love medical friend and demas send you their love . give my love to the brother in laodicea and to nymphas and the church in their house . and when this letter have be make public among you let the same be do in the church of laodicea and see that you have the letter from laodicea . say to archippus see that you do the work which the lord have give you to do . i paul give you this word of love in my handwriting . keep in memory that i be a prisoner . grace be with you .paul and silvanus and timothy to the church of the thessalonian in god the father and the lord jesus christ grace to you and peace . we give praise to god at all time for you keep you in memory in our prayer have ever in mind your work of faith and act of love and the strength of your hope in our lord jesus christ before our god and father be conscious my brother dear to god that you have be mark out by god 's purpose because our good news come to you not in word only but in power and in the holy spirit so that you be completely certain of it even a you saw what our behaviour to you be like from our love to you . and you take u and the lord a your example after the word have come to you in much trouble with joy in the holy spirit so that you become an example to all those who have faith in christ in macedonia and achaia . for not only be the word of the lord sound out from you in macedonia and achaia but in every place your faith in god be make clear so that we have no need to say anything . for they themselves give the news of how we come among you and how you be turn from image to god to the worship of a true and living god wait for his son from heaven who come back from the dead even jesus our saviour from the wrath to come .for you yourselves brother be conscious that our come among you be not without effect but after we have first undergone much pain and be cruelly attack a you saw at philippi by the help of god we give you the good news without fear though everything be against u . for our witness do not come from error or from an unclean heart or from deceit but even a the good news be give to u by the approval of god so we give it out not a please men but god by whom our heart be test . for it be common knowledge among you that we never make use of smooth sound false word and god be witness that at no time be we secretly desire profit for ourselves or look for glory from men from you or from others when we might have make ourselves a care to you a apostle of christ . but we be gentle among you like a woman care for her little one even so be full of love desire for you we take delight in give you not only god 's good news but even our life because you be dear to u . for you have the memory my brother of our trouble and care how working night and day so that we might not be a trouble to any of you we give you the good news of god . you be witness with god how holy and upright and free from all evil be our way of life among you who have faith even a you saw how like a father with his child we be teach and comfort you all and give witness so that your life might be please to god who have give you a part in his kingdom and his glory . and for this cause we still give praise to god that when the word come to your ear through u you take it not a the word of man but a it truly be the word of god which have live power in you who have faith . for you my brother take a your example the church of god which be in judaea in christ jesus because you undergo the same thing from your countryman a they do from the jew who put to death the lord jesus and the prophet violently drive u out who be unpleasing to god and against all men who to make the measure of their sin complete keep u from give the word of salvation to the gentile but the wrath of god be about to come on them in the full degree . but we my brother be away from you for a short time in body but not in heart have all the more desire to see your face for which reason we make attempt to come to you even i paul once and again but satan keep u from come . for what be our hope or joy or crown of glory ? be not even you before our lord jesus at his come ? for you be our glory and our joy .at last our desire to have news of you be so strong that while we ourselves be wait at athens we send timothy our brother and god 's servant in the good news of christ to give you strength and comfort in your faith so that no man might be move by these trouble because you see that these thing be part of god 's purpose for u . and when we be with you we say to you that trouble be before u and so it come about a you see . for this reason when i be no longer able to keep quiet i send to get news of your faith fearing that you might be test by the evil one and that our work might come to nothing . but now that timothy have come to u from you and have give u good news of your faith and love and that you have happy memory of u desire greatly to see u even a we do to see you for this cause brother in all our trouble and grief we be comfort about you because of your faith for it be life to u if you keep your faith in the lord unchanged . for how great be the praise which we give to god for you and how great the joy with which we be glad because of you before our god night and day request god again and again that we may see your face and make your faith complete . now may our god and father himself and our lord jesus make a way for u to come to you and the lord give you increase of love in full measure to one another and to all men even a our love to you so that your heart may be strong and free from all sin before our god and father at the come of our lord jesus with all his saint .and last of all the prayer which we make to you from our heart and in the name of the lord jesus be this that a we make clear to you what sort of behaviour be please to god a in fact you be do now so you will go on in these way but more and more . because you have in mind the order we give you through the lord jesus . for the purpose of god for you be this that you may be holy and may keep yourselves from the desire of the flesh so that every one of you may keep his body holy and in honour not in the passion of evil desire like the gentile who have no knowledge of god and that no man may make attempt to get the good of his brother in business for the lord be the judge in all these thing a we say to you before and give witness . because it be god 's purpose that our way of life may be not unclean but holy . whoever then go against this word go against not man but god who give his holy spirit to you . but about love the brother there be no need for me to say anything to you in this letter for you have the teaching of god that love for one another be right and necessary and truly you be lover of all the brother in macedonia but it be our desire that your love may be increase still more and that you may take pride in be quiet and do your business work with your hand a we give you order that you may be respect by those who be outside and may have need of nothing . but it be our desire brother that you may be certain about those who be sleep so that you may have no need for sorrow a others have who be without hope . for if we have faith that jesus underwent death and come back again even so those who be sleep will come again with him by god 's power . for this we say to you by the word of the lord that we who be still live at the come of the lord will not go before those who be sleep . because the lord himself will come down from heaven with a word of authority with the voice of the chief angel with the sound of a horn and the dead in christ will come to life first then we who be still live will be take up together with them into the cloud to see the lord in the air and so will we be for ever with the lord . so then give comfort to one another with these word .but about the time and their order my brother there be no need for me to say anything to you . for you yourselves have the knowledge that the day of the lord will come like a thief in the night . when they say there be peace and no danger then sudden destruction will come on them a birth pain on a woman with child and they will not be able to get away from it . but you my brother be not in the dark for that day to overtake you like a thief for you be all son of light and of the day we be not of the night or of the dark . so then let u not take our rest a the others do but let u be self control and awake . for those who be sleep do so in the night and those who be the bad for drink be so in the night but let u who be of the day be serious put on the breastplate of faith and love and on our head the hope of salvation . for god 's purpose for u be not wrath but salvation through our lord jesus christ who be put to death for u so that awake or sleep we may have a part in his life . so then go on comforting and building up one another a you have be do . but we make this request to you my brother give attention to those who be work among you who be over you in the lord to keep order among you and have a high opinion of them in love because of their work . be at peace among yourselves . and our desire be that you will keep control over those whose life be not well ordered give comfort to the feeble hearted support those with little strength and put up with much from all . let no one give evil for evil but ever go after what be good for one another and for all . have joy at all time . keep on with your prayer . in everything give praise for this be the purpose of god in christ jesus for you . do not put out the light of the spirit do not make little of the word of the prophet let all thing be test keep to what be good keep from every form of evil . and may the god of peace himself make you holy in every way and may your spirit and soul and body be free from all sin at the come of our lord jesus christ . god by whom you have be mark out in his purpose be unchanging and will make it complete . brother keep u in mind in your prayer . give all the brother a holy kiss . i give order in the name of the lord that all the brother be to be present at the reading of this letter . the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you .paul and silvanus and timothy to the church of the thessalonian in god our father and the lord jesus christ grace to you and peace from god the father and the lord jesus christ . it be right for u to give praise to god at all time for you brother because of the great increase of your faith and the wealth of your love for one another so that we ourselves take pride in you in the church of god for your untroubled mind and your faith in all the trouble and sorrow which you be go through which be a clear sign of the decision which god in his righteousness have make to give you a part in his kingdom for which you have undergo this pain for it be an act of righteousness on god 's part to give trouble a their reward to those who be trouble you and to you who be troubled rest with u when the lord jesus come from heaven with the angel of his power in flame of fire to give punishment to those who have no knowledge of god and to those who do not give ear to the good news of our lord jesus whose reward will be eternal destruction from the face of the lord and from the glory of his strength at his come when he will have glory in his saint and will be a cause of wonder in all those who have faith because our witness among you have effect in that day . for this reason you be ever in our prayer that you may seem to our god such a may have a part in his purpose and that by his power he will make all his good purpose and the work of faith complete so that glory may be give to the name of our lord jesus through you and you may have glory in him by the grace of our god and the lord jesus christ .now a to the come of the lord jesus christ and our meeting with him it be our desire my brother that you may not be move in mind or trouble by a spirit or by a word or by a letter a from u with the suggestion that the day of the lord be even now come give no belief to false word because there will first be a fall away from the faith and the revelation of the man of sin the son of destruction who put himself against all authority lift himself up over all which be name god or be give worship so that he take his seat in the temple of god put himself forward a god . have you no memory of what i say when i be with you give you word of these thing ? and now it be clear to you what be keep back his revelation till the time come for him to be see . for the secret of evil be even now at work but there be one who be keep back the evil till he be take out of the way . and then will come the revelation of that evil one whom the lord jesus will put to death with the breath of his mouth and give to destruction by the revelation of his come even the one whose come be mark by the working of satan with all power and sign and false wonder and with every deceit of wrongdoing among those whose fate be destruction because they be quite without that love of the true faith by which they might have salvation . and for this cause god will give them up to the power of deceit and they will put their faith in what be false so that they all may be judge who have no faith in what be true but take pleasure in evil . but it be right for u to give praise to god at all time for you brother love by the lord because it be the purpose of god from the first that you might have salvation be make holy by the spirit and by faith in what be true and in this purpose he give you a part through the good news of which we be the preacher even that you might have part in the glory of our lord jesus christ . so then brother be strong in purpose and keep the teaching which have be give to you by word or by letter from u . now our lord jesus christ himself and god our father who have love for u and have give u eternal comfort and good hope through grace give you comfort and strength in every good work and word .for the rest my brother let there be prayer for u that the word of the lord may go forward with increase glory even a it do with you and that we may be make free from foolish and evil men for not all have faith . but the lord be true who will give you strength and keep you safe from evil . and we have faith in the lord about you that you be do and will do the thing about which we give you order . and may your heart be guide by the lord into the love of god and quiet wait for christ . now we give you order brother in the name of our lord jesus christ to keep away from all those whose behaviour be not well order and in harmony with the teach which they have from u . for you yourselves be use to take u a your example because our life among you be rule by order and we do not take food from any man for nothing but be work hard night and day not to be a trouble to any of you not because we have not the right but to make ourselves an example to you so that you might do the same . for even when we be with you we give you order say if any man do no work let him not have food . for it have come to our ear that there be some among you whose behaviour be uncontrolled who do no work at all but be over interested in the business of others . now to such we give order and make request in the lord jesus that work quietly they get their living . and you my brother do not get tire of well do . and if any man do not give attention to what we have say in this letter take note of that man and keep away from him so that he may be sham . have no feeling of hate for him but take him in hand seriously a a brother . now the lord of peace himself give you peace at all time and in every way . may the lord be with you all . these word of love to you at the end be in my writing paul 's writing and this be the mark of every letter from me . may the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all .paul an apostle of jesus christ by the order of god our saviour and christ jesus our hope to timothy my true child in the faith grace mercy peace from god the father and christ jesus our lord . it be my desire when i go on into macedonia that you might make a stop at ephesus to give order to certain men not to put forward a different teaching or to give attention to story and long list of generation from which come questioning and doubt in place of god 's ordered way of life which be in faith but the effect of the order be love come from a clean heart and a knowledge of what be right and true faith from which some have be turn away give themselves to foolish talk desire to be teacher of the law though they have no knowledge of what they say or of the statement which they make so certainly . we be conscious that the law be good if a man make a right use of it with the knowledge that the law be make not for the upright man but for those who have no respect for law and order for evil men and sinner for the unholy and those who have no religion for those who put their father or mother to death for taker of life for those who go after loose woman for those with unnatural desire for those who take men prisoner who make false statement and false oath and those who do any other thing against the right teach which may be see in the good news of the glory of the great god which be give into my care . i give praise to him who give me power christ jesus our lord because he take me to be true make me his servant though i have say violent word against god and do cruel act cause great trouble but i be give mercy because i do it without knowledge not have faith and the grace of our lord be very great with faith and love which be in christ jesus . it be a true saying in which all may put their faith that christ jesus come into the world to give salvation to sinner of whom i be the chief but for this reason i be give mercy so that in me the chief of sinner jesus christ might make clear all his mercy a an example to those who in the future would have faith in him to eternal life . now to the king eternal ever live unseen the only god be honour and glory for ever and ever . so be it . this order i give to you timothy my son in harmony with the word of the prophet about you so that by them you may be strong fight the good fight keep faith and be conscious of well do for some by not do these thing have go wrong in relation to the faith such be hymenaeus and alexander whom i have give up to satan so that they may say no more evil word against god .my desire be first of all that you will make request and prayer and give praise for all men for king and all those in authority so that we may have a calm and quiet life in all fear of god and serious behaviour . this be good and please in the eye of god our saviour whose desire be that all men may have salvation and come to the knowledge of what be true . for there be one god and one peacemaker between god and men the man christ jesus who give himself a an offering for all witness of which be to be give at the right time and of this i become a preacher and an apostle what i say be true not false and a teacher of the gentile in the true faith . it be my desire then that in every place men may give themselves to prayer lift up holy hand without wrath or argument . and that woman may be dress in simple clothing with a quiet and serious air not with twisted hair and gold or jewel or robe of great price but clothe with good work a be right for woman who be live in the fear of god . let a woman quietly take the place of a learner and be under authority . in my opinion it be right for a woman not to be a teacher or to have rule over a man but to be quiet . for adam be first form then eve and adam be not take by deceit but the woman be trick become a wrongdoer . but if they go on in faith and love and holy self control she will be keep safe at the time of childbirth .this be a true say a man desire the position of a bishop have a desire for a good work . the bishop then be to be a man of good name the husband of one wife self control serious mind have respect for order open his house freely to guests a ready teacher not quickly move to wrath or blow but gentle no fighter no lover of money rule his house well have his child under control with all serious behaviour for if a man have not the art of rule his house how will he take care of the church of god ? not one newly take into the church for fear that through his high opinion of himself he may come into the same sin a the evil one . and he be to have a good name among those outside the church so that nothing may be say against him and he may not be take by the design of the evil one . deacon in the same way be to be serious in their behaviour not false in word not give to take much wine or greatly desire the wealth of this world keep the secret of the faith in a heart free from sin . and let these first be put to the test then let them become deacon if there be nothing against them . woman be to be serious in behaviour say no evil of others control themselves true in all thing . let deacon be husband of one wife rule their child and their house well . for those who have do good work a deacon get for themselves a good position and become free from fear in the faith which be in christ jesus . i be write these thing to you though i be hop to come to you before long but if i be long in come this will make clear to you what behaviour be right for men in the house of god which be the church of the living god the pillar and base of what be true . and without argument great be the secret of religion he who be see in the flesh who be give god 's approval in the spirit be see by the angel of whom the good news be give among the nation in whom the world have faith who be take up in glory .but the spirit say clearly that in late time some will be turn away from the faith give their mind to spirit of deceit and the teaching of evil spirit through the false way of men whose word be untrue whose heart be burn a with a heat iron who keep men from be marry and from take food which god make to be take with praise by those who have faith and true knowledge . because everything which god have make be good and nothing be evil if it be take with praise for it be make holy by the word of god and by prayer . if you keep these thing before the mind of the brother you will be a good servant of christ jesus train in the word of the faith and of the right teaching which have be your guide but have nothing to do with unclean and foolish story . give yourself train in religion for the training of the body be of profit for a little but religion be of profit in every way give hope for the life which now be and for that which be to come . this be a true saying in which all may put their faith . and this be the purpose of all our work and our fighting because our hope be in the living god who be the saviour of all men and specially of those who have faith . let these be your order and your teaching . let no one make little of you because you be young but be an example to the church in word in behaviour in love in faith in holy living . till i come give attention to the reading of the holy writing to comfort the saint and to teach . make use of that grace in you which be give to you by the word of the prophet when the ruler of the church put their hand on you . have a care for these thing give yourself to them with all your heart so that all may see how you go forward . give attention to yourself and your teaching . go on in these thing for in do so you will get salvation for yourself and for those who give hearing to you .do not say sharp word to one who have authority in the church but let your talk be a to a father and to the young men a to brother to the old woman a to mother to the young a to sister with a clean heart . give honour to widow who be truly widows . but if any widow have child or child 's child let these see that it be right to take care of their family and their father and mother for this be please in the eye of god . now she who be truly a widow and without family put her hope in god give herself to prayer day and night . but she who give herself to pleasure be dead while she be live . give order to this effect so that no evil may be say of anyone . if anyone have no care for his family and those in his house he be false to the faith and be bad than one who have no faith . let no woman be number among the widow who be under sixty year old and only if she have be the wife of one man and if witness be give of her good work if she have have the care of child if she have be kind to traveller wash the foot of the saint help those who be in trouble give herself to good work . but to the young widow say no for when their love be turn away from christ they have a desire to be marry and they be judge because they have be false to their first faith and they get into the way of do no work go about from house to house and not only do no work but talk foolishly be over interested in the business of others say thing which they have no right to say . so it be my desire that the young widow may be marry and have child control their family and give the evil one no chance to say anything against them for even now some be turn away to satan . if any woman of the faith have relation who be widows let her give them help so that the care of them do not come on the church and so it may give help to those who be truly widow . let ruler whose rule be good be honour twice over specially those whose work be preach and teach . for the writing say it be not right to keep the ox from take the grain when he be crush it . and the worker have a right to his reward . do not take a true any statement make against one in authority but only if two or three give witness to it . say sharp word to sinner when all be present so that the rest may be in fear . i give you order before god and christ jesus and the angel of god 's selection to keep these order without give thought to one side more than another . do not put hand on any man without thought and have no part in other men 's sin keep yourself clean . do not take only water a your drink but take a little wine for the good of your stomach and because you be frequently ill. the sin of some men be clearly see go before them to be judge but with others their sin go after them . in the same way there be good work which be clearly see and those which be not so may not be keep secret .let all who be servant under the yoke give all honour to their master so that no evil may be say against the name of god and his teaching . and let those whose master be of the faith have respect for them because they be brother work for them the more readily because those who take part in the good work be of the faith and be dear . give order and teach about these thing . if any man give different teach not in agreement with the true word of our lord jesus christ and with the teaching which be in agreement with true religion he have an over high opinion of himself be without knowledge have only an unhealthy love of questioning and war of word from which come envy fight cruel word evil thought bitter talk of men who be evil in mind and dead to what be true take the faith to be a way of make profit . but true faith with peace of mind be of great profit for we come into the world with nothing and we be not able to take anything out but if we have food and a roof over u let that be enough . but those who have a desire for wealth be fall into danger and be take a in a net by a number of foolish and damaging desire through which men be overtake by death and destruction . for the love of money be a root of all evil and some whose heart be fix on it have be turn away from the faith and be wound with unnumbered sorrow . but you o man of god keep yourself from these thing and go after righteousness religion faith love a quiet mind gentle behaviour . be fight the good fight of the faith take for yourself the life eternal for which you be mark out and of which you give witness in the eye of all . i give you order before god the giver of life and christ jesus who before pontius pilate give witness to the faith to keep the word untouched by evil clear from all shame till the revelation of our lord jesus christ which at the right time he will make clear who be the eternal and only ruler king of king and lord of lord who only have life for ever live in light to which no man may come near whom no man have see or be able to see to whom be honour and power for ever . so be it . give order to those who have money and good in this life not to be lift up in their mind or to put their hope in the uncertain chance of wealth but in god who give u in full measure all thing for our use and to do good have wealth in good work be quick to give take part with one another making ready for themselves a safe place for the time to come so that the true life may be theirs . o timothy take good care of that which be give to you turn away from the wrong and foolish talk and argument of that knowledge which be falsely so name through which some who give their mind to it have be turn away from the faith . grace be with you .paul an apostle of jesus christ by the purpose of god in the hope of the life which be in christ jesus to timothy my well love child grace mercy peace from god the father and christ jesus our lord . i give praise to god whose servant i have be with a heart free from sin from the time of my father because in my prayer at all time the thought of you be with me night and day desire to see you keep in my memory your weep so that i may be full of joy have in mind your true faith which first be in your mother 's mother lois and in your mother eunice and i be certain be now in you . for this reason i say to you let that grace of god which be in you give to you by my hand have live power . for god do not give u a spirit of fear but of power and of love and of self control . have no feeling of shame then for the witness of our lord or for me his prisoner but undergo all thing for the good news in the measure of the power of god who give u salvation mark u out for his purpose not on account of our work but in the measure of his purpose and his grace which be give to u in christ jesus before time eternal but have now be make clear by the revelation of our saviour christ jesus who put an end to death and make life unending come to light through the good news of which i be make a preacher and an apostle and a teacher and for which i undergo these thing but i have no feeling of shame . for i have knowledge of him in whom i have faith and i be certain that he be able to keep that which i have give into his care till that day . keep the form of those true word which you have from me in faith and love which be in christ jesus . that good thing which be give to you keep safe through the holy spirit which be in u . you have have news that all those in asia go away from me among whom be phygelus and hermogenes may the lord give mercy to the house of onesiphorus because he frequently give me help and have no feeling of shame because i be in chain but when he be in rome he go in search of me everywhere and come to me may he have the lord 's mercy in that day and of all he do for me at ephesus you have full knowledge .so then my child be strong in the grace which be in christ jesus . and the thing which i have say to you before a number of witness give to those of the faith so that they may be teacher of others . be ready to do without the comfort of life a one of the army of christ jesus . a fight man when he be with the army keep himself free from the business of this life so that he may be please to him who have take him into his army . and if a man take part in a competition he do not get the crown if he have not keep the rule . it be right for the worker in the field to be the first to take of the fruit . give thought to what i say for the lord will give you wisdom in all thing . keep in mind jesus christ of the seed of david who come back from the dead a my good news give witness in which i put up with the hard condition even prison chain like one who have do a crime but the word of god be not in chain . but i undergo all thing for the saint so that they may have salvation in christ jesus with eternal glory . this be a true say if we undergo death with him then will we be live with him if we go on to the end then we will be rule with him if we say we have no knowledge of him then he will say he have no knowledge of u if we be without faith still he keep faith for he will never be untrue to himself . put these thing before them give them order in the name of the lord to keep themselves from fight about word which be of no profit only cause error in their hearer . let it be your care to get the approval of god a a workman who have no cause for shame give the true word in the right way . but take no part in wrong and foolish talk for those who do so will go far into evil and their word will be like poisoned wound in the flesh such be hymenaeus and philetus men whose idea be all false who say that the come back from the dead have even now take place overturn the faith of some . but god 's strong base be unchanging have this sign the lord have knowledge of those who be his and let everyone by whom the name of the lord be name be turn away from evil . now in a great house there be not only vessel of gold and silver but others of wood and earth and some which be honour and some without honour . if a man make himself clean from these he will be a vessel for honour make holy ready for the master 's use ready for every good work . but keep yourself from those desire of the flesh which be strong when the body be young and go after righteousness faith love peace with those whose prayer go up to the lord from a clean heart . and put away foolish and uncontrolled questioning see that they be a cause of trouble . for it be not right for the lord 's servant to make trouble but he be to be gentle to all ready in teach put up with wrong gently guide those who go against the teaching if by chance god may give them a change of heart and true knowledge and so they may get themselves free from the net of the evil one be make the prisoner of the lord 's servant for the purpose of god .but be certain of this that in the last day time of trouble will come . for men will be lover of self lover of money uplift in pride give to bitter word go against the authority of their father never give praise have no religion without natural love bitter hater say evil of others violent and uncontrolled hat all good false to their friend act without thought lift up in mind loving pleasure more than god have a form of religion but turn their back on the power of it go not with these . for these be they who go secretly into house make prisoner of foolish woman weight down with sin turn from the way by their evil desire ever learning and never come to the knowledge of what be true . and a james and jambres go against moses so do these go against what be true men of evil mind who test by faith be see to be false . but they will go no farther for their foolish behaviour will be clear to all men a theirs be in the end . but you take a your example my teach behaviour purpose and faith my long wait my love my quiet undergoing of trouble my punishment and pain the thing which come to me at antioch at iconium at lystra the cruel attack make on me and the lord make me free from them all . yes and all whose purpose be to be live in the knowledge of god in christ jesus will be cruelly attack . evil and false men will become bad and bad use deceit and themselves overcome by deceit . but see that you keep to the teaching you have be give and the thing of which you be certain conscious of who have be your teacher and that from the time when you be a child you have have knowledge of the holy writing which be able to make you wise to salvation through faith in christ jesus . every holy write which come from god be of profit for teach for train for guide for education in righteousness so that the man of god may be complete train and make ready for every good work .i give you order before god and christ jesus who will be the judge of the living and the dead and by his revelation and his kingdom be preach the word at all time in every place make protest say sharp word give comfort with long waiting and teaching for the time will come when they will not take the true teaching but move by their desire they will get for themselves a great number of teacher for the pleasure of hear them and shut their ear to what be true will be turn away to belief in foolish story . but be self control in all thing do without comfort go on preach the good news complete the work which have be give you to do . for i be even now be offer and my end be near . i have make a good fight i have come to the end of my journey i have keep the faith from now on the crown of righteousness be make ready for me which the lord the upright judge will give to me at that day and not only to me but to all those who have have love for his revelation . do your best to come to me before long for demas have go away from me for love of this present life and have go to thessalonica crescens have go to galatia titus to dalmatia . only luke be with me . get mark and take him with you for he be of use to me in the work . tychicus i sent to ephesus . the coat which i do not take from troas and which be with carpus get when you come and the book specially the paper . alexander the copper worker do me much wrong the lord will give him the reward of his work but be on the watch for him for he be violent in his attack on our teaching . at my first meeting with my judge no one take my part but all go away from me . may it not be put to their account . but the lord be by my side and give me strength so that through me the news might be give out in full measure and all the gentile might give ear and i be take out of the mouth of the lion . the lord will keep me safe from every evil work and will give me salvation in his kingdom in heaven to whom be glory for ever and ever . so be it . give my love to prisca and aquila and those of the house of onesiphorus . erastus be stop at corinth but trophimus when i last saw him be at miletus ill. do your best to come before the winter . eubulus send you his love and pudens and linus and claudia and all the brother . the lord be with your spirit . grace be with you .paul a servant of god and an apostle of jesus christ in agreement with the faith of the saint of god and the full knowledge of what be true in harmony with religion in the hope of eternal life which be make certain before eternal time by the word of god who be ever true who in his time make clear his word in the good news of which by the order of god our saviour i become a preacher to titus my true child in our common faith grace and peace from god the father and christ jesus our saviour . i do not take you with me when i go away from crete so that you might do what be necessary to put thing in order there place men in authority over the church in every town a i say to you men have a good record husband of one wife whose child be of the faith child of whom it may not be say that they be give to loose living or be uncontrolled . for it be necessary for a bishop to be a man of virtue a god 's servant not push himself forward not quickly move to wrath or blow not desiring profit for himself but open his house freely to guests a lover of what be good serious mind upright holy self control keep to the true word of the teaching so that he may be able to give comfort by right teaching and overcome the argument of the doubter . for there be men who be not rule by law foolish talker false teacher specially those of the circumcision by whom some family have be completely overturn who take money for teach thing which be not right these will have to be stop . one of their prophet have say the men of crete be ever false evil beasts lover of food hating work . this witness be true . so say sharp word to them so that they may come to the right faith give no attention to the fiction of the jew and the rule of men who have no true knowledge . to the clean in heart all thing be clean but to those who be unclean and without faith nothing be clean they become unclean in mind and in thought . they say that they have knowledge of god while by their act they be turn their back on him they be hat by all hard hearted and judge to be without value for any good work .but let your word be in agreement with true and right teaching that old men be to be simple in their taste serious wise true in faith in love and of a quiet mind . that old woman be to be self respect in behaviour not say evil of others not give to take much wine teacher of that which be good train the young woman to have love for their husband and child to be wise in mind clean in heart kind work in their house live under the authority of their husband so that no evil may be say of the word of god . to the young men give order to be wise and serious mind in all thing see that you be an example of good work holy in your teach serious in behaviour say true and right word against which no protest may be make so that he who be not on our side may be put to shame unable to say any evil of u . servant be to be under the authority of their master please them in all thing without argument not take what be not theirs but give clear sign of their good faith in all thing do credit to the teaching of god our saviour . for the grace of god have come give salvation to all men train u so that turn away from evil and the desire of this world we may be live wisely and uprightly in the knowledge of god in this present life look for the glad hope the revelation of the glory of our great god and saviour jesus christ who give himself for u so that he might make u free from all wrongdoing and make for himself a people clean in heart and on fire with good work . on all these point give teaching and help and make clear what be right with all authority . let all men give you honour .make clear to them that they be to put themselves under ruler and authority to do what they be order to be ready for every good work to say no evil of any man not to be fighter to give way to others to be gentle in behaviour to all men . for in the past we be foolish hard in heart turn from the true way servant of evil desire and pleasure live in bad feeling and envy hat and hat one another . but when the mercy of god our saviour and his love to man be see not by work of righteousness which we do ourselves but in the measure of his mercy he give u salvation through the washing of the new birth and the give of new life in the holy spirit which he give u freely through jesus christ our saviour so that have be give righteousness through grace we might have a part in the heritage the hope of eternal life . this be a true saying and it be my desire that you may give certain witness about these thing so that those who have have faith in god may give attention to good work . these thing be good and of profit to men but have nothing to do with foolish questioning and list of generation and fight and argument about the law for they be of no profit and foolish . a man whose opinion be not those of the church after a first and second protest be to be keep out of your society clearly he be in error and a sinner be self judge . when i send artemas or tychicus to you do your best to come to me at nicopolis for it be my purpose to be there for the winter . send zenas the man of law and apollo on their journey with all care so that they may be in need of nothing . and let our people go on with good work for necessary purpose so that they may not be without fruit . all who be with me send you their love . give our love to our friend in the faith . grace be with you all .paul a prisoner of jesus christ and timothy our brother to philemon our dear helper in the faith and to apphia our sister and to archippus our brother in god 's army and to the church in your house grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ . i give praise to god at all time and make prayer for you hearing of the love and the faith which you have to the lord jesus and to all the saint that the faith which you have in common with them may be work with power in the knowledge of every good thing in you for christ . for i have great joy and comfort in your love because the heart of the saint have be make strong again through you brother . and so though i might in the name of christ give you order to do what be right still because of love in place of an order i make a request to you i paul an old man and now a prisoner of christ jesus my request be for my child onesimus the child of my chain who in the past be of no profit to you but now be of profit to you and to me whom i have send back to you him who be my very heart though my desire be to keep him with me to be my servant in the chain of the good news in your place but without your approval i would do nothing so that your good work might not be force but do freely from your heart . for it be possible that for this reason he be part from you for a time so that you might have him for ever no longer a a servant but more than a servant a brother very dear to me specially but much more to you in the flesh as well a in the lord . if then you take me to be your friend and brother take him in a myself . if he have do you any wrong or be in debt to you for anything put it to my account . i paul write this myself say i will make payment to you and i do not say to you that you be in debt to me even for your life . so brother let me have joy of you in the lord give new life to my heart in christ . be certain that you will do my desire i be write to you in the knowledge that you will do even more than i say . and make a room ready for me for i be hop that through your prayer i will be give to you . epaphras my brother prisoner in christ jesus send you his love and so do mark aristarchus demas and luke my brother worker . the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit . so be it .in time past the word of god come to our father through the prophet in different part and in different way but now at the end of these day it have come to u through his son to whom he have give all thing for a heritage and through whom he make the order of the generation who be the outshining of his glory the true image of his substance support all thing by the word of his power have give himself a an offering make clean from sin take his seat at the right hand of god in heaven have become by so much good than the angel a the name which be his heritage be more noble than theirs . to which of the angel do god say at any time you be my son this day i have give you be ? or i will be his father and he will be my son ? and again when he be send his only son into the world he say let all the angel of god give him worship . and of the angel he say who make his angels wind and his servant flame of fire but of the son he say your seat of power o god be for ever and ever and the rod of your kingdom be a rod of righteousness . you have be a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil and so god your god have put the oil of joy on your head more than on the head of those who be with you . you lord at the first do put the earth on it base and the heaven be the work of your hand they will come to their end but you be for ever they will become old a a robe they will be roll up like a cloth even like a robe and they will be change but you be the same and your year will have no end . but of which of the angel have he say at any time take your seat at my right hand till i put all those who be against you under your foot ? be they not all help spirit who be send out a servant to those whose heritage will be salvation ?for this reason there be the more need for u to give attention to the thing which have come to our ear for fear that by chance we might be slip away . because if the word which come through the angel be fix and in the past every evil act against god 's order be give it full punishment what will come on u if we do not give our mind to such a great salvation ? a salvation of which our father first have knowledge through the word of the lord and which be make certain to u by those to whom his word come and god be a witness with them by sign and wonder and by more than natural power and by his distribution of the holy spirit at his pleasure . for he do not make the angel ruler over the world to come of which i be write . but a certain writer have give his witness say what be man that you keep him in mind ? what be the son of man that you take him into account ? you make him a little low than the angel you give him a crown of glory and honour and make him ruler over all the work of your hand you put all thing under his foot . for in make man the ruler over all thing god do not put anything outside his authority though we do not see everything under him now . but we see him who be make a little low than the angel even jesus crown with glory and honour because he let himself be put to death so that by the grace of god he might undergo death for all men . because it be right for him for whom and through whom all thing have be in guide his son to glory to make the captain of their salvation complete through pain . for he who make holy and those who be make holy be all of one family and for this reason it be no shame for him to give them the name of brother say i will give the knowledge of your name to my brother i will make a song of praise to you before the church . and again he say i will put my faith in him . and again see i be here and the child which god have give to me . and because the child be flesh and blood he take a body himself and become like them so that by his death he might put an end to him who have the power of death that be to say the evil one and let those who all their life be in chain because of their fear of death go free . for truly he do not take on the life of angel but that of the seed of abraham . because of this it be necessary for him to be make like his brother in every way so that he might be a high priest full of mercy and keep faith in everything to do with god making offering for the sin of the people . for have be put to the test himself he be able to give help to others when they be test .for this reason holy brother mark out to have a part in heaven give thought to jesus the representative and high priest of our faith who keep faith with god who give him his place even a moses do in all his house . and it be right for this man to have more honour than moses even a the builder of a house have more honour than the house . for every house have a builder but the builder of all thing be god . and moses certainly kept faith a a servant in all his house and a a witness of those thing which be to be say later but christ a a son over his house whose house be we if we keep our heart fix in the glad and certain hope till the end . and so a the holy spirit say today if you let his voice come to your ear be not hard of heart a when you make me angry on the day of test in the waste land when your father put me to the test and saw my work for forty year . so that i be angry with this generation and i say their heart be in error at all time and they have no knowledge of my way and be angry i make an oath say they may not come into my rest . my brother take care that there be not by chance in any one of you an evil heart without belief turn away from the living god but give comfort to one another every day as long a it be still today so that no one among you may be make hard by the deceit of sin for if we keep the substance of the faith which we have at the start even till the end we have a part with christ a it be say today if you will let his voice come to your ear be not hard of heart a when you make him angry . who make him angry when his voice come to them ? be it not all those who come out of egypt with moses ? and with whom be he angry for forty year ? be it not with those who do evil who come to their death in the waste land ? and to whom do he make an oath that they might not come into his rest ? be it not to those who go against his order ? so we see that they be not able to go in because they have no belief .let u then though we still have god 's word that we may come into his rest go in fear that some of you may be unable to do so . and truly the good news come to u even a it do to them but the hearing of the word do them no good because they be not unite in faith with the true hearer . for those of u who have belief come into his rest even a he have say a i say in my oath when i be angry they may not come into my rest though the work be do from the time of the making of the world . for in one place he have say of the seventh day and god have rest from all his work on the seventh day and in the same place he say again they will not come into my rest . so that a it be clear that some have to go in and that the first hearer of the good news be not able to go in because they go against god 's order after a long time again name a certain day he say in david today a he have say before today if you will let his voice come to your ear be not hard of heart for if joshua have give them rest he would not have say anything about another day . so that there be still a sabbath keep for the people of god . for the man who come into his rest have have rest from his work a god do from his . because of this let u have a strong desire to come into that rest and let no one go after the example of those who go against god 's order . for the word of god be live and full of power and be sharp than any two edge sword cutting through and make a division even of the soul and the spirit the bone and the muscle and quick to see the thought and purpose of the heart . and there be nothing make which be not completely clear to him there be nothing cover but all thing be open to the eye of him with whom we have to do . have then a great high priest who have make his way through the heaven even jesus the son of god let u be strong in our faith . for we have not a high priest who be not able to be touch by the feeling of our feeble flesh but we have one who have be test in all point a we ourselves be test but without sin . then let u come near to the seat of grace without fear so that mercy may be give to u and we may get grace for our help in time of need .every high priest who be take from among men be give his position to take care of the interest of men in those thing which have to do with god so that he may make offering for sin . he be able to have feeling for those who have no knowledge and for those who be wander from the true way because he himself be feeble and be feeble he have to make sin offering for himself as well a for the people . and no man who be not give authority by god a aaron be take this honour for himself . in the same way christ do not take for himself the glory of be make a high priest but be give it by him who say you be my son this day i have give you be a he say in another place you be a priest for ever after the order of melchizedek . who in the day of his flesh have send up prayer and request with strong cry and weep to him who be able to give him salvation from death have his prayer answer because of his fear of god . and though he be a son through the pain which he undergo the knowledge come to him of what it be to be under god 's order and when he have be make complete he become the giver of eternal salvation to all those who be under his order be name by god a high priest of the order of melchizedek . of whom we have much to say which it be hard to make clear because you be slow of hear . and though by this time it would be right for you to be teacher you still have need of someone to give you teach about the first simple rule of god 's revelation you have become like baby who have need of milk and not of solid food . for everyone who take milk be without experience of the word of righteousness he be a child . but solid food be for men of full growth even for those whose sens be train by use to see what be good and what be evil .for this reason let u go on from the first thing about christ to full growth not build again that on which it be base that be the turning of the heart from dead work and faith in god the teaching of baptism and of the put on of hand and of the future life of the dead and of the judging on the last day . now we will do this if god let u . a for those who at one time saw the light taste the good thing from heaven and have their part in the holy spirit with knowledge of the good word of god and of the power of the coming time and then let themselves be turn away it be not possible for their heart to be make new a second time because they themselves put the son of god on the cross again openly sham him . for a land drinking in the frequent rain and produce good plant for those for whom it be work have a blessing from god but if it send up thorn and evil plant it be of no use and be ready to be curse it only end be to be burn . but my loved one though we say this we be certain that you have good thing in you thing which go with salvation for god be true and will not put away from him the memory of your work and of your love for his name in the help which you give and still give to the saint . and it be our desire that you may all keep the same high purpose in certain hope to the end so that you may not be slow in heart but may take a your example those to whom god have give their heritage because of their faith and their long waiting . for when god make his oath to abraham because there be no great oath he make it by himself say be certain that i will give you my blessing and make your number very great . and so when he have be wait calmly for a long time god 's word to him be put into effect . for men at all time make their oath by what be great and any argument be end by the decision of the oath . so that when it be god 's desire to make it specially clear to those who by his word be to have the heritage that his purpose be fix he make it more certain with an oath so that we who have go in flight from danger to the hope which have be put before u may have a strong comfort in two unchanging thing in which it be not possible for god to be false and this hope be like a strong band for our soul fix and certain and go in to that which be inside the veil where jesus have go before u a a high priest for ever after the order of melchizedek .for this melchizedek the king of salem a priest of the most high god who give abraham his bless meeting him when he come back after put the king to death and to whom abraham give a tenth part of everything which he have be first name king of righteousness and then in addition king of salem that be to say king of peace be without father or mother or family have no birth or end to his life be make like the son of god be a priest for ever . now see how great this man be to whom our father abraham give a tenth part of what he have get in the fight . and it be true that by the law those of the son of levi who have the position of priest may take a tenth part of the people 's good that be to say they take it from their brother though these be the son of abraham . but this man who be not of their family take the tenth from abraham and give a blessing to him to whom god have give his undertaking . but there be no doubt that the less get his blessing from the great . now at the present time men over whom death have power take the tenth but then it be take by one of whom it be witness that he be live . and we may say that in abraham even levi who have a right to take the tenth part give it because he be still in his father 's body when melchizedek come to him . now if it be possible for thing to be make complete through the priest of the house of levi for the law be give to the people in connection with them what need be there for another priest who be of the order of melchizedek and not of the order of aaron ? because if the priest be change it be necessary to make a change in the law . for he of whom these thing be say come of another tribe of which no man have ever make offering at the altar . because it be clear that our lord come out of judah and moses say nothing about priest from that tribe . and this be even more clear if a second priest have come up who be like melchizedek that be to say not make by a law base on the flesh but by the power of a life without end for it have be witness of him you be a priest for ever after the order of melchizedek . so the law which go before be put on one side because it be feeble and without profit . because the law make nothing complete and in it place there be a good hope through which we come near to god . and a this be not without the taking of an oath for those be make priest without an oath but this one be make a priest with an oath by him who say of him the lord give his oath which he will not take back that you be a priest for ever by so much be it a well agreement which we have through jesus . and it be true that there have be a great number of those priest because death do not let them go on for ever but this priest because his life go on for ever be unchanging . so that he be fully able to be the saviour of all who come to god through him because he be ever live to make prayer to god for them . it be right for u to have such a high priest one who be holy and without evil do no wrong have no part with sinner and make high than the heaven who have no need to make offering for sin every day like those high priest first for himself and then for the people because he do this once and for ever when he make an offering of himself . the law make high priest of men who be feeble but the word of the oath which be make after the law give that position to a son in whom all good be for ever complete .now of the thing we be say this be the chief point we have such a high priest who have take his place at the right hand of god 's high seat of glory in heaven a a servant of the holy thing and of the true tent which be put up by god not by man . now every high priest be give authority to take to god the thing which be give and to make offering so that it be necessary for this man like them to have something for an offering . if he have be on earth he would not have be a priest at all because there be other priest who make the offering order by the law be servant of that which be a copy and an image of the thing in heaven a moses when he be about to make the tent have special order from god for see he say that you make everything like the design which you saw in the mountain . but now his position a priest be high . because through him god have make a well agreement with man base on the give of good thing . for if that first agreement have be as good a possible there would have be no place for a second . for protest against them he say see the day be come when i will make a new agreement with the house of israel and with the house of judah not like the agreement which i make with their father when i take them by the hand to be their guide out of the land of egypt for they do not keep the agreement with me and i give them up say the lord . for this be the agreement which i will make with the people of israel after those day i will put my law into their mind write them in their heart and i will be their god and they will be my people and there will be no need for every man to be teach his brother or his neighbour say this be the knowledge of the lord for they will all have knowledge of me great and small . and i will have mercy on their evil do and i will not keep their sin in mind . when he say a new agreement he have make the first agreement old . but anything which be get old and past use will not be see much longer .now the first agreement have it rule of worship and a holy order . for the first tent be make ready have in it the vessel for the light and the table and the ordering of the bread and this be name the holy place . and inside the second veil be the place which be name the holy of holy have a vessel of gold in it for burn perfume and the ark of the agreement which be cover with gold and which have in it a pot make of gold for the manna and aaron 's rod which put out bud and the stone with the writing of the agreement and over it be the winged one of glory with their wing cover the mercy seat about which it be not possible now to say anything in detail . now while these thing be in existence the priest go into the first tent at all time for prayer and the making of offering . but only the high priest go into the second once a year not without make an offering of blood for himself and for the error of the people the holy spirit witnessing by this that the way into the holy place have not at that time be make open while the first tent be still in be and this be an image of the present time when the offering which be give be not able to make the heart of the worshipper completely clean because they be only rule of the flesh of meat and drink and washing which have their place till the time come when thing will be put right . but now christ have come a the high priest of the good thing of the future through this great and well tent not make with hand that be to say not of this world and have go once and for ever into the holy place have get eternal salvation not through the blood of goat and young ox but through his blood . for if the blood of goat and ox and the dust from the burning of a young cow be put on the unclean make the flesh clean how much more will the blood of christ who be without sin make an offering of himself to god through the holy spirit make your heart clean from dead work to be servant of the living god ? and for this cause it be through him that a new agreement have come into be so that after the error under the first agreement have be take away by his death the word of god might have effect for those who be mark out for an eternal heritage . because where there be a testament there have to be the death of the man who make it . for a testament have effect after death for what power have it while the man who make it be live ? so that even the first agreement be not make without blood . for when moses have give all the rule of the law to the people he take the blood of goat and young ox with water and red wool and hyssop and put it on the book itself and on all the people say this blood be the sign of the agreement which god have make with you . and the blood be put on the tent and all the holy vessel in the same way . and by the law almost all thing be make clean with blood and without blood there be no forgiveness . for this cause it be necessary to make the copy of the thing in heaven clean with these offering but the thing themselves be make clean with good offering than these . for christ do not go into a holy place which have be make by men 's hand a the copy of the true one but he go into heaven itself and now take his place before the face of god for u . and he do not have to make an offering of himself again and again a the high priest go into the holy place every year with blood which be not his for then he would have undergone a number of death from the time of the making of the world but now he have come to u at the end of the old order to put away sin by the offering of himself . and because by god 's law death come to men once and after that they be judge so christ have at his first come take on himself the sin of men will be see a second time without sin by those who be wait for him for their salvation .for the law be only a poor copy of the future good thing and not the true image of those thing be never able to make the people who come to the altar every year with the same offering completely clean . for if this have be possible would there not have be an end of those offering because the worshipper would have be make completely clean and would have be no longer conscious of sin ? but year by year there be a memory of sin in those offering . because it be not possible for the blood of ox and goat to take away sin . so that when he come into the world he say you have no desire for offering but you make a body ready for me you have no joy in burned offering or in offering for sin . then i say see i have come to do your pleasure o god a it be say of me in the roll of the book . after say you have no desire for offering for burned offering or offering for sin which be make by the law and you have no pleasure in them then he say see i have come to do your pleasure . he take away the old order so that he might put the new order in it place . by that pleasure we have be make holy by the offering of the body of jesus christ once and for ever . and every priest take his place at the altar day by day do what be necessary and make again and again the same offering which be never able to take away sin . but when jesus have make one offering for sin for ever he take his place at the right hand of god and have be wait there from that time till all who be against him be make a foot rest for his foot . because by one offering he have make complete for ever those who be make holy . and the holy spirit be a witness for u for after he have say this be the agreement which i will make with them after those day say the lord i will put my law in their heart write them in their mind he say and i will keep no more memory of their sin and of their evil doings . now where there be forgiveness of these there be no more offering for sin . so then my brother be able to go into the holy place without fear because of the blood of jesus by the new and living way which he make open for u through the veil that be to say his flesh and have a great priest over the house of god let u go in with true heart in certain faith have our heart make free from the sense of sin and our body wash with clean water let u keep the witness of our hope strong and unshaking for he be true who have give his word and let u be move one another at all time to love and good work not give up our meeting a be the way of some but keep one another strong in faith and all the more because you see the day come near . for if we do evil on purpose after we have have the knowledge of what be true there be no more offering for sin but only a great fear of be judge and of the fire of wrath which will be the destruction of the hater of god . a man who have go against the law of moses be put to death without pity on the word of two or three witness but will not the man by whom the son of god have be crush under foot and the blood of the agreement with which he be wash clean have be take a an unholy thing and who have have no respect for the spirit of grace be judge bad enough for a very much bad punishment ? for we have have experience of him who say punishment be mine i will give reward . and again the lord will be judge of his people . we may well go in fear of fall into the hand of the living god . but give thought to the day after you have see the light when you go through a great war of trouble in part in be attack by angry word and cruel act before the eye of everyone and in part in be united with those who be attack in this way . for you have pity on those who be in prison and have joy in the loss of your property in the knowledge that you still have a good property and one which you would keep for ever . so do not give up your hope which will be greatly reward . for have do what be right in god 's eye you have need of wait before his word have effect for you . in a very little time he who be come will come he will not be slow . but the upright man will be live by his faith and if he go back my soul will have no pleasure in him . but we be not of those who go back to destruction but of those who have faith even to the salvation of the soul .now faith be the substance of thing hop for and the sign that the thing not see be true . for by it our father have god 's approval . by faith it be clear to u that the order of event be fix by the word of god so that what be see have not be make from thing which only seem to be . by faith abel make a well offering to god than cain and he have witness through it of his righteousness god give his approval of his offering and his voice still come to u through it though he be dead . by faith enoch be take up to heaven so that he do not see death he be see no longer for god take him away for before he be take witness have be give that he be well please to god and without faith it be not possible to be well please to him for it be necessary for anyone who come to god to have the belief that god be and that he be a rewarder of all those who make a serious search for him . by faith noah be move by the fear of god make ready an ark for the salvation of his family because god have give him news of thing which be not see at the time and through it the world be judge by him and he get for his heritage the righteousness which be by faith . by faith abraham do a god say when he be order to go out into a place which be to be give to him a a heritage and go out without knowledge of where he be go . by faith he be a wanderer in the land of the agreement a in a strange land living in tent with isaac and jacob who have a part with him in the same heritage for he be look for the strong town whose builder and maker be god . and by faith sarah herself have power to give birth when she be very old because she have faith in him who give his word so that from one man who be near to death come child in number a the star in heaven or a the sand by the seaside which may not be number . all these come to their end in faith not have have the heritage but have see it with delight far away they give witness that they be wanderer and not of the earth . for those who say such thing make it clear that they be search for a country for themselves . and truly if they have keep in mind the country from which they go out they would have have chance of turn back . but now their desire be for a good country that be to say for one in heaven and so it be no shame to god to be name their god for he have make ready a town for them . by faith abraham make an offering of isaac when he be test and he with whom the agreement have be make give up a an offer the only son of his body of whom it have be say from isaac will your seed take their name judging that god be able to give life even to the dead and because of this he do get him back a if from death . by faith isaac bless jacob and esau give news of thing to come . by faith jacob give a blessing to the two son of joseph when he be near to death and give god worship support by his stick . by faith joseph when his end be near say that the child of israel would go out of egypt and give order about his bone . by faith moses be keep secretly by his father and mother for three month after his birth because they saw that he be a fair child and they have no fear of the king 's order . by faith moses when he become a man have no desire to be name the son of pharaoh 's daughter feeling that it be well to undergo pain with the people of god than for a short time to have a taste of the pleasure of sin judge a part in the shame of christ to be good than all the wealth of egypt for he be look forward to his reward . by faith he go out of egypt not be turn from his purpose by fear of the wrath of the king for he keep on his way a see him who be unseen . by faith he keep the passover and put the sign of the blood on the house so that the angel of destruction might not put their old son to death . by faith they go through the red sea a if it have be dry land though the egyptian be overcome by the water when they make an attempt to do the same . by faith the wall of jericho come down after they have be circle for seven day . by faith rahab the loose woman be not put to death with those who have go against god 's order because she have take into her house in peace those send to see the land . what more be i to say ? for there would not be time to give the story of gideon barak samson and jephthah of david and samuel and the prophet who through faith overcame kingdom do righteousness get their reward keep the mouth of lion shut put out the power of fire get safely away from the edge of the sword be make strong when they have be feeble become full of power in war and put to flight the army of the nation . woman have their dead give back to them live others let themselves be cruelly attack have no desire to go free so that they might have a good life to come and others be test by be laugh at or by blow and even with chain and prison they be stone they be cut up with knife they be test they be put to death with the sword they go about in sheepskin and in goatskin be poor and in pain and cruelly attack wander in waste place and in mountain and in hole in the rock for whom the world be not good enough . and not one of these get the good thing of the agreement though they all have a good record through faith because god have keep some good thing for u so that it be not possible for them to become complete without u .for this reason a we be circle by so great a cloud of witness put off every weight and the sin into which we come so readily let u keep on run in the way which be mark out for u have our eye fix on jesus the guide and end of our faith who go through the pain of the cross not care for the shame because of the joy which be before him and who have now take his place at the right hand of god 's seat of power . give think to him who have undergone so much of the hate of sinner against himself so that you may not be tire and feeble of purpose . till now you have not give your blood in your fight against sin and you have not keep in mind the word which say to you a to sons my son do not make little of the lord 's punishment and do not give up hope when you be judge by him for the lord send punishment on his loved one everyone whom he take a his son have experience of his rod . it be for your training that you undergo these thing god be act to you a a father do to his son for what son do not have punishment from his father ? but if you have not that punishment of which we all have our part then you be not true son but child of shame . and again if the father of our flesh give u punishment and have our respect how much more will we be under the authority of the father of spirit and have life ? for they truly give u punishment for a short time a it seem good to them but he do it for our profit so that we may become holy a he be . at the time all punishment seem to be pain and not joy but after those who have be train by it get from it the peace give fruit of righteousness . for this cause let the hand which be hang down be lift up and let the feeble knee be make strong and make straight road for your foot so that the feeble may not be turn out of the way but may be make strong . let your desire be for peace with all men and to be make holy without which no man may see the lord look with care to see that no man among you in his behaviour come short of the grace of god for fear that some bitter root may come up to be a trouble to you and that some of you may be make unclean by it and that there may not be any evil liver or any man without respect for god like esau who let his birthright go for a plate of food . for you have knowledge that even long after when he be desire the blessing for his heritage he be turn away though he make his request frequently and with weeping because the past might not be change . you have not come to a mountain which may be touch and be burn with fire and to a black cloud and a dark smoke and a violent wind and to the sound of a horn and the voice of word the hearer of which make request that not a word more might be say to them for the order which say if the mountain be touch even by a beast the beast be to be stone seemed hard to them and the vision be so overpower that even moses say i be shake and full of fear . but you have come to the mountain of zion to the place of the living god to the jerusalem which be in heaven and to an army of angel which may not be number to the great meeting and church of the first of those who be name in heaven and to god the judge of all and to the spirit of good men make complete and to jesus by whom the new agreement have be make between god and man and to the sign of the blood which say good thing than abel 's blood . see that you give ear to his voice which come to you . for if those whose ear be shut to the voice which come to them on earth do not go free from punishment what chance have we of go free if we give no attention to him whose voice come from heaven ? whose voice be the cause of the shaking of the earth but now he have make an oath say there will be still one more shaking not only of the earth but of heaven . and the word still one more make it clear that there will be a take away of those thing which be shake a of thing which be make so that there may be only those thing of which no shaking be possible . if then we have a kingdom which will never be move let u have grace so that we may give god such worship a be please to him with fear and respect for our god be an all burning fire .go on love your brother in the faith . take care to keep open house because in this way some have have angel a their guest without be conscious of it . keep in mind those who be in chain a if you be chain with them and those who be in trouble a be yourselves in the body . let married life be honour among all of you and not make unclean for men untrue in married life will be judge by god . be free from the love of money and pleased with the thing which you have for he himself have say i will be with you at all time . so that we say with a good heart the lord be my helper i will have no fear what be man able to do to me ? keep in mind those who be over you and who give you the word of god see the outcome of their way of life let your faith be like theirs . jesus christ be the same yesterday and today and for ever . do not be turn away by different strange teaching because it be good for your heart to be make strong by grace and not by meat which be of no profit to those who take so much trouble over them . we have an altar from which those priest who be servant in the tent may not take food . for the body of the beast whose blood be take into the holy place by the high priest a an offering for sin be burn outside the circle of the tent . for this reason jesus be put to death outside the wall so that he might make the people holy by his blood . let u then go out to him outside the circle of the tent take his shame on ourselves . for here we have no fix rest place but our search be for the one which be to come . let u then make offering of praise to god at all time through him that be to say the fruit of lip give witness to his name . but go on do good and give to others because god be well pleased with such offering . give ear to those who be ruler over you and do a they say for they keep watch over your soul ready to give an account of them let them be able to do this with joy and not with grief because that would be of no profit to you . make prayer for u for we be certain that our heart be free from the sense of sin desire the right way of life in all thing . i make this request more strongly in the hope of come back to you more quickly . now may the god of peace who make that great keeper of his flock even our lord jesus come back from the dead through the blood of the eternal agreement make you full of every good work and ready to do all his desire work in u whatever be please in his eye through jesus christ and may the glory be give to him for ever and ever . so be it . but brother take kindly the word which i have say for your profit for i have not send you a long letter . our brother timothy have be let out of prison and if he come here in a short time he and i will come to you together . give word of love from me to those who be ruler over you and to all the saint . those who be in italy send you their love . may grace be with you all .james a servant of god and of the lord jesus christ send word of love to the twelve tribe of the jew live in all part of the earth . let it be all joy to you my brother when you undergo test of every sort because you have the knowledge that the testing of your faith give you the power of go on in hope but let this power have it full effect so that you may be make complete need nothing . but if any man among you be without wisdom let him make his request to god who give freely to all without an unkind word and it will be give to him . let him make his request in faith doubting nothing for he who have doubt in his heart be like the wave of the sea which be trouble by the driving of the wind . let it not seem to such a man that he will get anything from the lord for there be a division in his mind and he be uncertain in all his way . but let the brother of low position be glad that he be lift up but the man of wealth that he be make low because like the flower of the grass he will come to his end . for when the sun come up with it burning heat the grass get dry and the grace of it form be go with the fall flower so the man of wealth come to nothing in his way . there be a blessing on the man who undergo test because if he have god 's approval he will be give the crown of life which the lord have say he will give to those who have love for him . let no man say when he be test i be test by god for it be not possible for god to be test by evil and he himself put no man to such a test but every man be test when he be turn out of the right way by the attraction of his desire . then when it time come desire give birth to sin and sin when it be of full growth give birth to death . do not be turn from the right way dear brother . every good and true thing be give to u from heaven come from the father of light with whom there be no change or any shade make by turn . of his purpose he give u be by his true word so that we might be in a sense the first fruit of all the thing which he have make . you have knowledge of this dear brother . but let every man be quick in hear slow in word slow to get angry for the righteousness of god do not come about by the wrath of man . for this reason put away all dirty behaviour and the overweight of evil take into your soul without pride the word which be plant there be able to give you salvation . but be doer of the word and not only hearer of it blind yourselves with false idea . because if any man be a hearer of the word and not a doer he be like a man look at his natural face in a glass for after look at himself he go away and in a short time he have no memory of what he be like . but he who go on look into the true law which make him free be not a hearer without memory but a doer put it into effect this man will have a blessing on his act . if a man seem to have religion and have no control over his tongue but let himself be trick by what be false this man 's religion be of no value . the religion which be holy and free from evil in the eye of our god and father be this to take care of child who have no father and of widow who be in trouble and to keep oneself untouched by the world .my brother if you have the faith of our lord jesus christ of glory do not take a man 's position into account . for if a man come into your synagogue in fair clothing and with a gold ring and a poor man come in with dirty clothing and you do honour to the man in fair clothing and say come here and take this good place and you say to the poor man take up your position there or be seat at my foot be there not a division in your mind ? have you not become judge with evil thought ? give ear my dear brother be not those who be poor in the thing of this world mark out by god to have faith a their wealth and for their heritage the kingdom which he have say he will give to those who have love for him ? but you have put the poor man to shame . be not the men of wealth ruler over you ? do they not take you by force before their judge ? do they not say evil of the holy name which be give to you ? but if you keep the great law of all a it be give in the holy writing have love for your neighbour a for yourself you do well but if you take a man 's position into account you do evil and be judge a evil doer by the law . for anyone who keep all the law but make a slip in one point be judge to have go against it all . for he who say do not be untrue in married life be the same who say put no man to death . now if you be not untrue in married life but you put a man to death the law be break . let your word and your act be those of men who be to be judge by the law which make free . for the man who have have no mercy will be judge without mercy but mercy take pride in overcome judging . what use be it my brother for a man to say that he have faith if he do nothing ? will such a faith give him salvation ? if a brother or a sister be without clothing and in need of the day 's food and one of you say to them go in peace be warm and full of food but you do not give them the thing of which their body have need what profit be there in this ? even so faith without work be dead . but a man may say you have faith and i have work let me see your faith without your work and i will make my faith clear to you by my work . you have the belief that god be one and you do well the evil spirit have the same belief shake with fear . do you not see o foolish man that faith without work be of no use ? be not the righteousness of abraham our father judge by his work when he make an offering of isaac his son on the altar ? you see that his faith be help his work and be make complete by them and the holy writing be put into effect which say and abraham have faith in god and it be put to his account a righteousness and he be name the friend of god . you see that a man 's righteousness be judge by his work and not by his faith only . and in the same way be not the righteousness of rahab the loose woman judge by her work when she take into her house those who be send and let them go out by another way ? for a the body without the spirit be dead even so faith without work be dead .do not all be teacher my brother because we teacher will be judge more hardly than others . for we all go wrong in a number of thing . if a man never make a slip in his talk then he be a complete man and able to keep all his body in control . now if we put bit of iron into horse ' mouth so that they may be guide by u we have complete control of their body . and again ship though they be so great and be move by violent wind be turn by a very small guiding blade at the impulse of the man who be use it . even so the tongue be a small part of the body but it take credit for great thing . how much wood may be light by a very little fire ! and the tongue be a fire it be the power of evil place in our body make all the body unclean put the wheel of life on fire and get it fire from hell . for every sort of beast and bird and every living thing on earth and in the sea have be control by man and be under his authority but the tongue may not be control by man it be an unresting evil it be full of the poison of death . with it we give praise to our lord and father and with it we put a curse on men who be make in god 's image . out of the same mouth come bless and curse . my brother it be not right for these thing to be so . do the fountain send from the same outlet sweet and bitter water ? be a fig tree able to give u olive my brother or do we get fig from a vine or sweet water from the salt sea ? who have wisdom and good sense among you ? let him make his work clear by a life of gentle wisdom . but if you have bitter envy in your heart and the desire to get the good of others have no pride in this talk falsely against what be true . this wisdom be not from heaven but be of the earth and the flesh and the evil one . for where envy be and the desire to get the good of others there be no order but every sort of evil do . but the wisdom which be from heaven be first holy then gentle readily give way in argument full of peace and mercy and good work not doubt not seem other than it be . and the fruit of righteousness be plant in peace for those who make peace .what be the cause of war and fight among you ? be it not in your desire which be at war in your body ? you be burn with desire and have not your desire so you put men to death you be full of envy and you be not able to get your desire so you be fight and make war you have not your desire because you do not make request for it . you make your request but you do not get it because your request have be wrongly make desire the thing only so that you may make use of it for your pleasure . o you who be false to god do you not see that the friend of this world be not god 's friend ? every man desire to be a friend of this world make himself a hater of god . or do it seem to you that it be for nothing that the holy writing say the spirit which god put into our heart have a strong desire for u ? but he give more grace . so that the writing say god be against the men of pride but he give grace to those who make themselves low before him . for this cause be rule by god but make war on the evil one and he will be put to flight before you . come near to god and he will come near to you . make your hand clean you evil doer put away deceit from your heart you false in mind . be trouble with sorrow and weep let your laugh be turn to sorrow and your joy to grief . make yourselves low in the eye of the lord and you will be lift up by him . do not say evil against one another my brother . he who say evil against his brother or make himself his brother 's judge say evil against the law and be judge the law and in judge the law you become not a doer of the law but a judge . there be only one judge and law giver even he who have the power of salvation and of destruction but who be you to be your neighbour 's judge ? how foolish it be to say today or tomorrow we will go into this town and be there for a year and do business there and get wealth when you be not certain what will take place tomorrow . what be your life ? it be a mist which be see for a little time and then be go . but the right thing to say would be if it be the lord 's pleasure and if we be still live we will do this and that . but now you go on glory in your pride and all such glorying be evil . the man who have knowledge of how to do good and do not do it to him it be sin .come now you men of wealth give yourselves to weep and cry because of the bitter trouble which be come to you . your wealth be unclean and insect have make hole in your clothing . your gold and your silver be waste and their waste will be a witness against you burn into your flesh . you have put by your store in the last day . see the money which you falsely keep back from the worker cut the grass in your field be cry out against you and the cry of those who take in your grain have come to the ear of the lord of army . you have be live delicately on earth and have take your pleasure you have make your heart fat for a day of destruction . you have give your decision against the upright man and have put him to death . he put up no fight against you . go on wait calmly my brother till the come of the lord like the farmer wait for the good fruit of the earth till the early and late rain have come . be a calm in your wait let your heart be strong because the come of the lord be near . say no hard thing against one another brother so that you will not be judge see the judge be wait at the door . take a an example of pain nobly undergone and of strength in trouble the prophet who give to men the word of the lord . we say that those men who have go through pain be happy you have the story of job and the trouble through which he go and have see that the lord be full of pity and mercy in the end . but most of all my brother do not take oath not by the heaven or by the earth or by any other thing but let your yes be yes and your no be no so that you may not be judge . be anyone among you in trouble ? let him say prayer . be anyone glad ? let him make a song of praise . be anyone among you ill ? let him send for the ruler of the church and let them say prayer over him put oil on him in the name of the lord . and by the prayer of faith the man who be ill will be make well and he will be lift up by the lord and for any sin which he have do he will have forgiveness . so then make a statement of your sin to one another and say prayer for one another so that you may be make well . the prayer of a good man be full of power in it working . elijah be a man of flesh and blood a we be and he make a strong prayer that there might be no rain and there be no rain on the earth for three year and six month . and he make another prayer and the heaven send down rain and the earth give her fruit . my brother if one of you have go out of the way of the true faith and another have make him see his error be certain that he through whom a sinner have be turn from the error of his way keep a soul from death and be the cause of forgiveness for sin without number .peter an apostle of jesus christ to the saint who be live in pontus galatia cappadocia asia and bithynia who through the purpose of god have be make holy by the spirit disciple of jesus make clean by his blood may you have grace and peace in full measure . praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ who through his great mercy have give u a new birth and a living hope by the come again of jesus christ from the dead and a heritage fair holy and for ever new wait in heaven for you who by the power of god be keep through faith for that salvation which will be see at the last day . you have cause for great joy in this though it may have be necessary for you to be trouble for a little time be test in all sort of way so that the true metal of your faith be of much great value than gold which though it come to an end be test by fire may come to light in praise and glory and honour at the revelation of jesus christ to whom your love be give though you have not see him and the faith which you have in him though you do not see him now give you joy great than word and full of glory for so you have the true end of your faith even the salvation of your soul . for the prophet who give the news of the grace which would come to you make search with all care for knowledge of this salvation attempt to see what sort of time the spirit of christ which be in them be point to when it give witness to the pain which christ would undergo and the glory which would come after them . and it be make clear to those prophet that they be god 's servant not for themselves but for you to give you word of the thing which have now come to your ear from the preacher of the good news through the holy spirit send down from heaven thing which even angel have a desire to see . so make your mind ready and keep on the watch hop with all your power for the grace which be to come to you at the revelation of jesus christ like child rule by god do not go back to the old desire of the time when you be without knowledge but be holy in every detail of your life a he whose servant you be be holy because it have be say in the writing you be to be holy for i be holy . and if you give the name of father to him who judge every man by his act have no respect for a man 's position then go in fear while you be on this earth be conscious that you have be make free from that foolish way of life which be your heritage from your father not through a payment of thing like silver or gold which come to destruction but through holy blood like that of a clean and unmarked lamb even the blood of christ who be mark out by god before the making of the world but be cause to be see in these last time for you who through him have faith in god who take him up again from the dead into glory so that your faith and hope might be in god . and a you have make your souls clean be rule by what be true and love one another without deceit see that your love be warm and from the heart because you have have a new birth not from the seed of man but from eternal seed through the word of a living and unchanging god . for it be say all flesh be like grass and all it glory like the flower of the grass . the grass become dry and the flower dead but the word of the lord be eternal . and this be the word of the good news which be give to you .so put away all wrongdoing and all trick and deceit and envy and evil talk be full of desire for the true milk of the word a baby at their mother ' breast so that you may go on to salvation if you have have a taste of the grace of the lord to whom you come a to a live stone not honour by men but of great and special value to god you a living stone be be make into a house of the spirit a holy order of priest make those offering of the spirit which be please to god through jesus christ . because it be say in the writing see i be place a keystone in zion of great and special value and the man who have faith in him will not be put to shame . and the value be for you who have faith but it be say for those without faith the very stone which the builder put on one side be make the chief stone of the building and a stone of fall a rock of trouble the word be the cause of their fall because they go against it and this be the purpose of god . but you be a special people a holy nation priest and kings a people give up completely to god so that you may make clear the virtue of him who take you out of the dark into the light of heaven . in the past you be not a people but now you be the people of god then there be no mercy for you but now mercy have be give to you . my loved one i make this request with all my heart that a those for whom this world be a strange country you will keep yourselves from the desire of the flesh which make war against the soul be of good behaviour among the gentile so that though they say now that you be evil doer they may see your good work and give glory to god when he come to be their judge . keep all the law of men because of the lord those of the king who be over all and those of the ruler who be send by him for the punishment of evil doer and for the praise of those who do well . because it be god 's pleasure that foolish and narrow mind men may be put to shame by your good behaviour a those who be free not use your free position a a cover for wrongdoing but live a the servant of god have respect for all love the brother fear god honour the king . servant take order from your master with all respect not only if they be good and gentle but even if they be bad humour . for it be a sign of grace if a man desire to do right in the eye of god undergoes pain a punishment for something which he have not do . what credit be it if when you have do evil you take your punishment quietly ? but if you be give punishment for do right and take it quietly this be please to god . this be god 's purpose for you because jesus himself underwent punishment for you give you an example so that you might go in his footstep who do no evil and there be no deceit in his mouth to sharp word he give no sharp answer when he be undergo pain no angry word come from his lip but he put himself into the hand of the judge of righteousness he take our sin on himself give his body to be nail on the tree so that we be dead to sin might have a new life in righteousness and by his wound we have be make well . because like sheep you have go out of the way but now you have come back to him who keep watch over your soul .wife be rule by your husband so that even if some of them give no attention to the word their heart may be change by the behaviour of their wife when they see your holy behaviour in the fear of god . do not let your ornament be those of the body such a dressing of the hair or put on of jewel of gold or fair clothing but let them be those of the unseen man of the heart the ever shin ornament of a gentle and quiet spirit which be of great price in the eye of god . and these be the ornament of the holy woman of the past whose hope be in god be rule by their husband a sarah be rule by abraham name him lord whose child you be if you do well and be not put in fear by any danger . and you husband give thought to your way of life with your wife give honour to the woman who be the feeble vessel but who have an equal part in the heritage of the grace of life so that you may not be keep from prayer . last of all see that you be all in agreement feeling for one another love one another like brother full of pity without pride not give back evil for evil or curse for curse but in place of curse blessing because this be the purpose of god for you that you may have a heritage of blessing . for it be say let the man who have a love of life desire to see good day keep his tongue from evil and his lip from word of deceit and let him be turn from evil and do good searching for peace and go after it with all his heart . for the eye of the lord be on the upright and his ear be open to their prayer but the face of the lord be against those who do evil . who will do you any damage if you keep your mind fix on what be good ? but you be happy if you undergo pain because of righteousness have no part in their fear and do not be trouble but give honour to christ in your heart a your lord and be ready at any time when you be question about the hope which be in you to give an answer in the fear of the lord and without pride be conscious that you have do no wrong so that those who say evil thing about your good way of life a christian may be put to shame . because if it be god 's purpose for you to undergo pain it be well to do so for well do than for evil do . because christ once go through pain for sin the upright one take the place of sinner so that through him we might come back to god be put to death in the flesh but give life in the spirit by whom he go to the spirit in prison preaching to those who in the day of noah go against god 's order but god in his mercy keep back the punishment while noah get ready the ark in which a small number that be to say eight person get salvation through water and baptism of which this be an image now give you salvation not by wash clean the flesh but by make you free from the sense of sin before god through the come again of jesus christ from the dead who have go into heaven and be at the right hand of god angel and authority and power have be put under his rule .so that a jesus be put to death in the flesh do you yourselves be of the same mind for the death of the flesh put an end to sin so that you may give the rest of your life in the flesh not to the desire of men but to the purpose of god . because for long enough in time past we have be live after the way of the gentile give up to the desire of the flesh to drinking and feasting and loose behaviour and unclean worship of image and they be wonder that you no longer go with them in this violent wasting of life and be say evil thing of you but they will have to give an account of themselves to him who be ready to be the judge of the living and the dead . for this be the reason why the good news of jesus be give even to the dead so that they might be judge a men in the flesh but might be live before god in the spirit . but the end of all thing be near so be serious in your behaviour and keep on the watch with prayer and most of all be warm in your love for one another because in love there be forgiveness for sin without number keep open house for all with a glad heart make distribution among one another of whatever have be give to you like true servant of the unmeasured grace of god if anyone have anything to say let it be a the word of god if anyone have the desire to be the servant of others let him do it in the strength which be give by god so that in all thing god may have the glory through jesus christ whose be the glory and the power for ever . dear brother do not be surprise a if it be something strange if your faith be test a by fire but be glad that you be give a part in the pain of christ so that at the revelation of his glory you may have great joy . if men say evil thing of you because of the name of christ happy be you for the spirit of glory and of god be rest on you . let no one among you undergo punishment a a taker of life or a a thief or a an evil doer or a one who be over interested in other men 's business but if he undergo punishment a a christian that be no shame to him let him give glory to god in this name . for the time have come for the judging start with the church of god but if it make a start with u what will be the end of those who be not under the rule of god ? and if it be hard for even the good man to get salvation what chance have the man without religion or the sinner ? for this reason let those who by the purpose of god undergo punishment keep on in well do and put their soul into the safe hand of their maker .i who be myself one of the ruler of the church and a witness of the death of christ have my part in the come glory send this serious request to the chief men among you keep watch over the flock of god which be in your care use your authority not as force to do so but gladly and not for unclean profit but with a ready mind not a lord over god 's heritage but make yourselves example to the flock . and at the come of the chief keeper of the sheep you will be give the eternal crown of glory . and in the same way let the young men be rule by the old one . let all of you put away pride and make yourselves ready to be servant for god be a hater of pride but he give grace to those who make themselves low . for this cause make yourselves low under the strong hand of god so that when the time come you may be lift up put all your trouble on him for he take care of you . be serious and keep watch the evil one who be against you go about like a lion with open mouth in search of food do not give way to him but be strong in your faith in the knowledge that your brother who be in the world undergo the same trouble . and after you have undergone pain for a little time the god of all grace who have give you a part in his eternal glory through christ jesus will himself give you strength and support and make you complete in every good thing his be the power for ever . so be it . i have send you this short letter by silvanus a true brother in my opinion comfort you and witness that this be the true grace of god keep to it . she who be in babylon who have a part with you in the purpose of god sends you her love and so do my son mark . give one another the kiss of love . peace be to you all in christ .simon peter a servant and apostle of jesus christ to those who with u have a part in the same holy faith in the righteousness of our god and saviour jesus christ may grace and peace ever be increase in you in the knowledge of god and of jesus our lord because by his power he have give u everything necessary for life and righteousness through the knowledge of him who have be our guide by his glory and virtue and through this he have give u the hope of great reward highly to be value so that by them we might have our part in god 's be and be make free from the destruction which be in the world through the desire of the flesh . so for this very cause take every care join virtue to faith and knowledge to virtue and self control to knowledge and a quiet mind to self control and fear of god to a quiet mind and love of the brother to fear of god and to love of the brother love itself . for if you have these thing in good measure they will make you fertile and full of fruit in the knowledge of our lord jesus christ . for the man who have not these thing be blind see only what be near have no memory of how he be make clean from his old sin . for this reason my brother take all the more care to make your selection and approval certain for if you do these thing you will never have a fall for so the way will be open to you into the eternal kingdom of our lord and saviour jesus christ . for this reason i will be ready at all time to keep your memory of these thing awake though you have the knowledge of them now and be well base in your present faith . and it seem right to me as long a i be in this tent of flesh to keep your mind awake by work on your memory for i be conscious that in a short time i will have to put off this tent of flesh a our lord jesus christ have make clear to me . and i will take every care so that you may have a clear memory of these thing after my death . for when we give you news of the power and the come of our lord jesus christ our teaching be not base on story put together by art but we be eye witness of his glory . for god the father give him honour and glory when such a voice come to him out of the great glory say this be my dearly love son with whom i be well pleased . and this voice come from heaven even to our ear when we be with him on the holy mountain . and so the word of the prophet be make more certain and it be well for you to give attention to them a to a light shining in a dark place till the dawn come and the morning star be see in your heart be conscious in the first place that no man by himself may give a special sense to the word of the prophet . for these word do not ever come through the impulse of men but the prophet have them from god be move by the holy spirit .but there be false prophet among the people a there will be false teacher among you who will secretly put forward wrong teaching for your destruction even turn away from the lord who give himself for them whose destruction will come quickly and they themselves will be the cause of it . and a great number will go with them in their evil way through whom the true way will have a bad name . and in their desire for profit they will come to you with word of deceit like trader do business in soul whose punishment have be ready for a long time and their destruction be watch for them . for if god do not have pity for the angel who do evil but send them down into hell to be keep in chain of eternal night till they be judge and do not have mercy on the world which then be but only keep safe noah a preacher of righteousness with seven others when he let loose the water over the world of the evil doer and send destruction on sodom and gomorrah burn them up with fire a an example to those whose way of life might in the future be unpleasing to him and keep safe lot the upright man who be deeply troubled by the unclean life of the evil doer because the soul of that upright man living among them be pain from day to day by see and hear their crime the lord be able to keep the upright safe in the time of test and to keep evil doer under punishment till the day of judge but specially those who go after the unclean desire of the flesh and make sport of authority . ready to take chance uncontrolled they have no fear of say evil of those in high place though the angel who be great in strength and power do not make use of violent language against them before the lord . but these men like beast without reason whose natural use be to be take and put to death cry out against thing of which they have no knowledge will undergo that same destruction which they be design for others for the evil which overtake them be the reward of their evil do such men take their pleasure in the delight of the flesh even in the daytime they be like the mark of a disease like poisoned wound among you feast together with you in joy have eye full of evil desire never have enough of sin turn feeble soul out of the true way they be child of curse whose heart be well use to bitter envy turn out of the true way they have go wandering in error after the way of balaam the son of beor who be pleased to take payment for wrongdoing but his wrongdoing be point out to him an as talk with a man 's voice put a stop to the error of the prophet . these be fountain without water and mist before a driving storm for whom the eternal night be keep in store . for with high sound false word make use of the attraction of unclean desire of the flesh they get into their power those newly make free from those who be live in error say that they will be free while they themselves be the servant of destruction because whatever get the good of a man make a servant of him . for if after they have get free from the unclean thing of the world through the knowledge of the lord and saviour jesus christ they be again take in the net and overcome their last condition be bad than their first . for it would have be good for them to have have no knowledge of the way of righteousness than to go back again from the holy law which be give to them after have knowledge of it . they be an example of that true say the dog have go back to the food it have put out and the pig which have be wash to it rolling in the dirty earth .my loved one this be now my second letter to you and in this a in the first i be attempt to keep your true mind awake so that you may keep in mind the word of the holy prophet in the past and the law of the lord and saviour which be give to you by his apostle . have first of all the knowledge that in the last day there will be men who rule by their evil desire will make sport of holy thing say where be the hope of his come ? from the death of the father till now everything have go on a it be from the making of the world . but in take this view they put out of their mind the memory that in the old day there be a heaven and an earth lift out of the water and circle by water by the word of god and that the world which then be come to an end through the overflowing of the water . but the present heaven and the present earth have be keep for destruction by fire which be wait for them on the day of the judging and destruction of evil men . but my loved one keep in mind this one thing that with the lord one day be the same a a thousand year and a thousand year be no more than one day . the lord be not slow in keep his word a he seem to some but he be wait in mercy for you not desire the destruction of any but that all may be turn from their evil way . but the day of the lord will come like a thief and in that day the heaven will be roll up with a great noise and the substance of the earth will be change by violent heat and the world and everything in it will be burn up . see then that all these thing be come to such an end what sort of person be it right for you to be in all holy behaviour and righteousness look for and truly desire the come of the day of god when the heaven will come to an end through fire and the substance of the earth will be change by the great heat ? but have faith in his word we be look for a new heaven and a new earth which will be the rest place of righteousness . for this reason my loved one a you be look for these thing take great care that when he come you may be in peace before him free from sin and every evil thing . and be certain that the long waiting of the lord be for salvation even a our brother paul have say in his letter to you from the wisdom which be give to him and a he say in all his letter which have to do with these thing in which be some hard saying so that like the rest of the holy writing they be twist by those who be uncertain and without knowledge to the destruction of their soul . for this reason my love one have knowledge of these thing before they take place take care that you be not turn away by the error of the uncontrolled so fall from your true faith . but be increase in grace and in the knowledge of our lord and saviour jesus christ . may he have glory now and for ever . so be it .that which be from the first which have come to our ear and which we have see with our eye look on it and touch it with our hand about the word of life and the life be make clear to u and we have see it and be witness to it and give you word of that eternal life which be with the father and be see by u we give you word of all we have see and everything which have come to our ear so that you may be unite with u and we be united with the father and with his son jesus christ and we be write these thing to you so that our joy may be make complete . this be the word which come to u from him and which we give to you that god be light and in him there be nothing dark . if we say we be join to him and be walk still in the dark our word be false and our act be untrue but if we be walk in the light a he be in the light we be all united with one another and the blood of jesus his son make u clean from all sin . if we say that we have no sin we be false to ourselves and there be nothing true in u . if we say openly that we have do wrong he be upright and true to his word give u forgiveness of sin and make u clean from all evil . if we say that we have no sin we make him false and his word be not in u .my little child i be write these thing to you so that you may be without sin . and if any man be a sinner we have a friend and helper with the father jesus christ the upright one he be the offering for our sin and not for ours only but for all the world . and by this we may be certain that we have knowledge of him if we keep his law . the man who say i have knowledge of him and do not keep his law be false and there be nothing true in him but in every man who keep his word the love of god be make complete . by this we may be certain that we be in him he who say that he be live in him will do a he do . my loved one i do not give you a new law but an old law which you have from the first this old law be the word which come to your ear . again i give you a new law which be true in him and in you for the night be near it end and the true light be even now shin out . he who say that he be in the light and have hate in his heart for his brother be still in the dark . he who have love for his brother be in the light and there be no cause of error in him . but he who have hate for his brother be in the dark walking in the dark with no knowledge of where he be go unable to see because of the dark . i be write to you my child because you have forgiveness of sin through his name . i be write to you father because you have knowledge of him who be from the first . i be write to you young men because you have overcome the evil one . i have send a letter to you child because you have knowledge of the father . i have send a letter to you father because you have knowledge of him who be from the first . i have send a letter to you young men because you be strong and the word of god be in you and because you have overcome the evil one . have no love for the world or for the thing which be in the world . if any man have love for the world the love of the father be not in him . because everything in the world the desire of the flesh the desire of the eye and the pride of life be not of the father but of the world . and the world and it desire be come to an end but he who do god 's pleasure be live for ever . little child it be the last hour and a you be give word that the antichrist would come so now a number of antichrist have come to you and by this we be certain that it be the last hour . they go out from u but they be not of u if they have be of u they would still be with u but they go out from u so that it might be make clear that they be not of u . and you have the spirit from the holy one and you all have knowledge . i have not send you this letter because you have no knowledge of what be true but because you have knowledge and because that which be false have nothing in common with that which be true . who be false but he who say that jesus be not the christ ? he be the antichrist who have no belief in the father or the son . he who have no belief in the son have not the father he who make clear his belief in the son have the father . but a for you keep in your heart the thing which be make clear to you from the first . if you keep these thing in your heart you will be keep in the father and the son . and this be the hope which he give you even eternal life . i be write these thing to you about those whose purpose be that you may be turn out of the true way . a for you the spirit which he give you be still in you and you have no need of any teacher but a his spirit give you teach about all thing and be true and not false so keep your heart in him through the teaching which he have give you . and now my child keep your heart in him so that at his revelation we may have no fear or shame before him at his come . if you have knowledge that he be upright it be clear to you that everyone who do righteousness be his offspring .see what great love the father have give u in name u the child of god and such we be . for this reason the world do not see who we be because it do not see who he be . my loved one now we be child of god and at present it be not clear what we be to be . we be certain that at his revelation we will be like him for we will see him a he be . and everyone who have this hope in him make himself holy even a he be holy . everyone who be a sinner go against the law for sin be go against the law . and you have knowledge that he come to take away sin and in him there be no sin . anyone who be in him do no sin anyone who be a sinner have not see him and have no knowledge of him . my little child let no man take you out of the true way he who do righteousness be upright even a he be upright the sinner be a child of the evil one for the evil one have be a sinner from the first . and the son of god be see on earth so that he might put an end to the work of the evil one . anyone who be a child of god do no sin because he still have god 's seed in him he be not able to be a sinner because god be his father . in this way it be clear who be the child of god and who be the child of the evil one anyone who do not do righteousness or who have no love for his brother be not a child of god . because this be the word which be give to you from the first that we be to have love for one another not be of the evil one like cain who put his brother to death . and why do he put him to death ? because his work be evil and his brother 's work be good . do not be surprised my brother if the world have no love for you . we be conscious that we have come out of death into life because of our love for the brother . he who have no love be still in death . anyone who have hate for his brother be a taker of life and you may be certain that no taker of life have eternal life in him . in this we see what love be because he give his life for u and it be right for u to give our life for the brother . but if a man have this world 's good and see that his brother be in need and keep his heart shut against his brother how be it possible for the love of god to be in him ? my little child do not let our love be in word and in tongue but let it be in act and in good faith . in this way we may be certain that we be true and may give our heart comfort before him when our heart say that we have do wrong because god be great than our heart and have knowledge of all thing . my loved one if our heart do not say that we have do wrong we have no fear before him and he give u all our request because we keep his law and do the thing which be please in his eye . and this be his law that we have faith in the name of his son jesus christ and love for one another even a he say to u . he who keep his law be in god and god be in him . and the spirit which he give u be our witness that he be in u .my loved one do not put your faith in every spirit but put them to the test to see if they be from god because a great number of false prophet have go out into the world . by this you may have knowledge of the spirit of god every spirit which say that jesus christ have come in the flesh be of god and every spirit which do not say this be not from god this be the spirit of antichrist of which you have have word and it be in the world even now . you be of god my little child and you have overcome them because he who be in you be great than he who be in the world . they be of the world so their talk be the world 's talk and the world give ear to them . we be of god he who have the knowledge of god give ear to u he who be not of god do not give ear to u . by this we may see which be the true spirit and which be the spirit of error . my loved one let u have love for one another because love be of god and everyone who have love be a child of god and have knowledge of god . he who have no love have no knowledge of god because god be love . and the love of god be make clear to u when he send his only son into the world so that we might have life through him . and this be love not that we have love for god but that he have love for u and send his son to be an offering for our sin . my loved one if god have such love for u it be right for u to have love for one another . no man have ever see god if we have love for one another god be in u and his love be make complete in u and his spirit which he have give u be the witness that we be in him and he be in u . and we have see and give witness that the father send the son to be the saviour of the world . everyone who say openly that jesus be the son of god have god in him and be in god . and we have see and have faith in the love which god have for u . god be love and everyone who have love be in god and god be in him . in this way love be make complete in u so that we may be without fear on the day of judging because a he be so be we in this world . there be no fear in love true love have no room for fear because where fear be there be pain and he who be not free from fear be not complete in love . we have the power of loving because he first have love for u . if a man say i have love for god and have hate for his brother his word be false for how be the man who have no love for his brother whom he have see able to have love for god whom he have not see ? and this be the word which we have from him that he who have love for god be to have the same love for his brother .everyone who have faith that jesus be the christ be a child of god and everyone who have love for the father have love for his child . in this way we be certain that we have love for the child of god when we have love for god and keep his law . for love god be keep his law and his law be not hard . anything which come from god be able to overcome the world and the power by which we have overcome the world be our faith . who be able to overcome the world but the man who have faith that jesus be the son of god ? this be he who come by water and by blood jesus christ not by water only but by water and by blood . and the spirit be the witness because the spirit be true . there be three witness the spirit the water and the blood and all three be in agreement . if we take the witness of men to be true the witness of god be great because this be the witness which god have give about his son . he who have faith in the son of god have the witness in himself he who have not faith in god make him false because he have not faith in the witness which god have give about his son . and his witness be this that god have give u eternal life and this life be in his son . he who have the son have the life he who have not the son of god have not the life . i have put these thing in write for you who have faith in the name of the son of god so that you may be certain that you have eternal life . and we be certain that if we make any request to him which be right in his eye he will give ear to u and if we be certain that he give ear to all our request we be equally certain that we will get our request . if a man see his brother do a sin which be not bad enough for death let him make a prayer to god and god will give life to him whose sin be not bad enough for death . there be a sin whose punishment be death i do not say that he may make such a request then . all evil do be sin but death be not the punishment for every sort of sin . we be certain that one who be a child of god will do no sin but the son of god keep him so that he be not touch by the evil one . we be certain that we be of god but all the world be in the power of the evil one . and we be certain that the son of god have come and have give u a clear vision so that we may see him who be true and we be in him who be true in his son jesus christ . he be the true god and eternal life . my little child keep yourselves from false god .i a ruler in the church send word to the noble sister who be of god 's selection and to her child for whom i have true love and not only i but all who have knowledge of what be true because of this true knowledge which be in u and will be with u for ever may grace mercy and peace be with u from god the father and from jesus christ the son of the father in all true love . it give me great joy to see some of your child walk in the true way even a we be order to do by the father . and now my sister i make a request to you not send you a new law but the law which we have from the first that we have love for one another . and love be the keep of his law . this be the law which be give to you from the first so that you might keep it . because a number of false teacher have go out into the world who do not give witness that jesus christ come in the flesh . such a one be a false teacher and antichrist . keep watch over yourselves so that you do not make our work of no effect but may get your full reward . anyone who go on and do not keep to the teaching of christ have not god he who keep to the teaching have the father and the son . if anyone come to you not have this teach do not take him into your house or give him word of love for he who give him word of love have a part in his evil work . have much to say to you it be not my purpose to put it all down with paper and ink but i be hop to come to you and to have talk with you face to face so that your joy may be full . the child of your noble sister who be of god 's selection send you their love .i a ruler in the church send word to the well love gaius for whom i have true love . my love one it be my prayer that you may do well in all thing and be healthy in body even a your soul do well . for it give me great joy when some of the brother come and give witness that you have the true faith and be walk in the true way . i have no great joy than to have news that my child be walk in the true way . my love one you be do a good work in be kind to those brother who come from other place who have give witness to the church of your love for them and you will do well to send them on their way well care for as be right for servant of god for they go out for love of the name take nothing from the gentile . so it be right for u to take in such men a guest so that we may take our part in the work of the true faith . i send a letter to the church but diotrephes whose desire be ever to have the first place among them will not have u there . so if i come i will keep in mind the thing he do talk against u with evil word and a if this be not enough he do not take the brother into his house and those who be ready to take them in he keep from do so put them out of the church if they do . my love one do not be copy what be evil but what be good . he who do good be of god he who do evil have not see god . demetrius have the approval of all men and of what be true and we give the same witness and you be certain that our witness be true . i have much to say to you but it be not my purpose to put it all down with ink and pen but i be hop to see you in a short time and to have talk with you face to face . may you have peace . your friend here send you their love . give my love to our friend by name .jude a servant of jesus christ and the brother of james to those of god 's selection who have be make holy by god the father and be keep safe for jesus christ may mercy and peace and love be increase in you . my loved one while my thought be full of a letter which i be go to send you about our common salvation it be necessary for me to send you one request you with all my heart to go on fight strongly for the faith which have be give to the saint once and for ever . for certain men have come among you secretly mark out before in the holy writing for this evil fate men without the fear of god turn his grace into an unclean thing and false to our only master and lord jesus christ . now it be my purpose to put you in mind though you once have knowledge of all these thing of how the lord have take a people safely out of egypt later send destruction on those who have no faith and the angel who do not keep to their kingdom but go out from the place which be theirs he have put in eternal chain and in dark night till the great day of the judging . even a sodom and gomorrah and the town near them have like these give themselves up to unclean desire and go after strange flesh have be make an example undergo the punishment of eternal fire . in the same way these dreamer make the flesh unclean have no respect for authority and say evil of ruler . now when michael one of the chief angel be fight against the evil one for the body of moses fear to make use of violent word against him he only say may the lord be your judge . but these men say evil about such thing a they have no knowledge of and the thing of which they have natural knowledge like beast without reason be the cause of their destruction . a curse on them ! they have go in the way of cain run uncontrolled into the error of balaam for reward and have come to destruction by say evil against the lord like korah . these men be unseen rock at your love feast when they take part in them with you keeper of sheep who without fear take the food of the sheep cloud without water rush before the wind waste tree without fruit twice dead pull up by the root violent wave of the sea stream with their shame wander star for whom the dark night be keep in store for ever . the prophet enoch who be the seventh after adam say of these men the lord come with ten of thousand of his saint to be the judge of all and to give a decision against all those whose life be unpleasing to him because of the evil act which they have do and because of all the hard thing which sinner without fear of god have say against him . these be the men who make trouble ever desire change go after evil pleasure use high sounding word respect men 's position in the hope of reward . but you my love one keep in memory the word which be say before by the apostle of our lord jesus christ how they say to you in the last day there will be men who guide by their evil desire will make sport of holy thing . these be the men who make division natural men not have the spirit . but you my loved one build yourselves up on your most holy faith and make prayer in the holy spirit keep yourselves in the love of god look for life eternal through the mercy of our lord jesus christ . and have pity on those who be in doubt and to some give salvation pull them out of the fire and on some have mercy with fear hat even the clothing which be make unclean by the flesh . now to him who be able to keep you from fall and to give you a place in his glory free from all evil with great joy to the only god our saviour through jesus christ our lord let u give glory and honour and authority and power before all time and now and for ever . so be it .