rejoice at the glad tidings ! the buddha our lord have find the root of all evil he have show u the way of salvation . the buddha dispel the illusion of our mind and redeem u from the terror of death . the buddha our lord bring comfort to the weary and sorrow laden he restore peace to those who be break down under the burden of life . he give courage to the weak when they would fain give up self reliance and hope . ye that suffer from the tribulation of life ye that have to struggle and endure ye that yearn for a life of truth rejoice at the glad tidings ! there be balm for the wounded and there be bread for the hungry . there be water for the thirsty and there be hope for the despairing . there be light for those in darkness and there be inexhaustible bless for the upright . heal your wound ye wound and eat your fill ye hungry . rest ye weary and ye who be thirsty quench your thirst . look up to the light ye that sit in darkness be full of good cheer ye that be forlorn . trust in truth ye that love the truth for the kingdom of righteousness be found upon earth . the darkness of error be dispel by the light of truth . we can see our way and take firm and certain step . the buddha our lord have reveal the truth . the truth cure our disease and redeem u from perdition the truth strengthen u in life and in death the truth alone can conquer the evil of error . rejoice at the glad tidings ! ii . sam ra and nirv na . look about and contemplate life ! everything be transient and nothing endures . there be birth and death growth and decay there be combination and separation . the glory of the world be like a flower it stand in full bloom in the morning and fade in the heat of the day . wherever you look there be a rushing and a struggling and an eager pursuit of pleasure . there be a panic flight from pain and death and hot be the flame of burning desire . the world be vanity fair full of change and transformation . all be sams ra . be there nothing permanent in the world ? be there in the universal turmoil no rest place where our troubled heart can find peace ? be there nothing everlasting ? oh that we could have cessation of anxiety that our burning desire would be extinguish ! when shall the mind become tranquil and compose ? the buddha our lord be grieve at the ill of life . he saw the vanity of worldly happiness and sought salvation in the one thing that will not fade or perish but will abide for ever and ever . ye who long for life know that immortality be hide in transiency . ye who wish for happiness without the sting of regret lead a life of righteousness . ye who yearn for rich receive treasure that be eternal . truth be wealth and a life of truth be happiness . all compound will be dissolve again but the verity which determine all combination and separation a law of nature endure for ever and aye . body fall to dust but the truth of the mind will not be destroy . truth know neither birth nor death it have no beginning and no end . welcome the truth . the truth be the immortal part of mind . establish the truth in your mind for the truth be the image of the eternal it portray the immutable it reveal the everlasting the truth give unto mortal the boon of immortality . the buddha have proclaim the truth let the truth of the buddha dwell in your heart . extinguish in yourselves every desire that antagonize the buddha and in the perfection of your spiritual growth you will become like unto him . that of your heart which can not or will not develop into buddha must perish for it be mere illusion and unreal it be the source of your error it be the cause of your misery . you attain to immortality by fill your mind with truth . therefore become like unto vessel fit to receive the master 's word . cleanse yourselves of evil and sanctify your life . there be no other way of reach truth . learn to distinguish between self and truth . self be the cause of selfishness and the source of evil truth cleaves to no self it be universal and lead to justice and righteousness . self that which seem to those who love their self a their be be not the eternal the everlasting the imperishable . seek not self but seek the truth . if we liberate our soul from our petty self wish no ill to others and become clear a a crystal diamond reflect the light of truth what a radiant picture will appear in u mirror thing a they be without the admixture of burn desire without the distortion of erroneous illusion without the agitation of cling and unrest . yet ye love self and will not abandon self love . so be it but then verily ye should learn to distinguish between the false self and the true self . the ego with all it egotism be the false self . it be an unreal illusion and a perishable combination . he only who identify his self with the truth will attain nirv na and he who have enter nirv na have attain buddhahood he have acquire the high good he have become eternal and immortal . all compound thing shall be dissolve again world will break to piece and our individuality will be scatter but the word of the buddha will remain for ever . the extinction of self be salvation the annihilation of self be the condition of enlightenment the blot out of self be nirv na . happy be he who have cease to live for pleasure and rest in the truth . verily his composure and tranquillity of mind be the high bliss . let u take our refuge in the buddha for he have find the everlasting in the transient . let u take our refuge in that which be the immutable in the change of existence . let u take our refuge in the truth that be establish through the enlightenment of the buddha . let u take our refuge in the community of those who seek the truth and endeavor to live in the truth . iii . truth the saviour . the thing of the world and it inhabitant be subject to change . they be combination of element that exist before and all living creature be what their past action make them for the law of cause and effect be uniform and without exception . but in the change thing there be a constancy of law and when the law be see there be truth . the truth lie hide in sams ra a the permanent in it change . truth desire to appear truth longs to become conscious truth strives to know itself . there be truth in the stone for the stone be here and no power in the world no god no man no demon can destroy it existence . but the stone have no consciousness . there be truth in the plant and it life can expand the plant grows and blossom and bear fruit . it beauty be marvellous but it have no consciousness . there be truth in the animal it move about and perceive it surroundings it distinguish and learn to choose . there be consciousness but it be not yet the consciousness of truth . it be a consciousness of self only . the consciousness of self dim the eye of the mind and hide the truth . it be the origin of error it be the source of illusion it be the germ of evil . self begets selfishness . there be no evil but what flow from self . there be no wrong but what be do by the assertion of self . self be the beginning of all hatred of iniquity and slander of impudence and indecency of theft and robbery of oppression and bloodshed . self be m ra the tempter the evil doer the creator of mischief . self entices with pleasure . self promise a fairy 's paradise . self be the veil of m y the enchanter . but the pleasure of self be unreal it paradisian labyrinth be the road to misery and it fading beauty kindle the flame of desire that never can be satisfy . who shall deliver u from the power of self ? who shall save u from misery ? who shall restore u to a life of blessedness ? there be misery in the world of sams ra there be much misery and pain . but great than all the misery be the bliss of truth . truth give peace to the yearning mind it conquer error it quench the flame of desire it lead to nirv na . bless be he who have find the peace of nirv na . he be at rest in the struggle and tribulation of life he be above all change he be above birth and death he remain unaffected by the evil of life . bless be he who have find enlightenment . he conquer although he may be wound he be glorious and happy although he may suffer he be strong although he may break down under the burden of his work he be immortal although he may die . the essence of his be be purity and goodness . bless be he who have attain the sacred state of buddhahood for he be fit to work out the salvation of his fellow being . the truth have take it abode in him . perfect wisdom illumines his understanding and righteousness ensouls the purpose of all his action . the truth be a live power for good indestructible and invincible ! work the truth out in your mind and spread it among mankind for truth alone be the saviour from evil and misery . the buddha have find the truth and the truth have be proclaim by the buddha ! bless be the buddha ! prince siddhattha become buddha iv . the bodhisatta 's birth there be in kapliavatthu a sakya king strong of purpose and reverence by all men a descendant of the okk ka who call themselves gotama and his name be suddhodana or pure rice . his wife m y dev be beautiful a the water lily and pure in mind a the lotus . a the queen of heaven she live on earth untainted by desire and immaculate . the king her husband honor her in her holiness and the spirit of truth glorious and strong in his wisdom like unto a white elephant descend upon her . when she know that the hour of motherhood be near she ask the king to send her home to her parent and suddhodana anxious about his wife and the child she would bear him willingly grant her request . at lumbin there be a beautiful grove and when m y dev pass through it the tree be one mass of fragrant flower and many bird be warble in their branch . the queen wish to stroll through the shady walk leave her golden palanquin and when she reach the giant s la tree in the midst of the grove felt that her hour have come . she take hold of a branch . her attendant hang a curtain about her and retire . when the pain of travail come upon her four pure mind angel of the great brahm hold out a golden net to receive the babe who come forth from her right side like the rise sun bright and perfect . the brahm angel take the child and place him before the mother say rejoice o queen a mighty son have be bear unto thee . at her couch stand an age woman implore the heaven to bless the child . all the world be flood with light . the blind receive their sight by long to see the come glory of the lord the deaf and dumb spoke with one another of the good omen indicate the birth of the buddha to be . the crooked become straight the lame walk . all prisoner be free from their chain and the fire of all the hell be extinguish . no cloud gather in the sky and the polluted stream become clear whilst celestial music rang through the air and the angel rejoice with gladness . with no selfish or partial joy but for the sake of the law they rejoice for creation engulfed in the ocean of pain be now to obtain release . the cry of beast be hush all malevolent being receive a loving heart and peace reign on earth . m ra the evil one alone be grieve and rejoice not . the n ga king earnestly desire to show their reverence for the most excellent law a they have pay honor to former buddha now go to greet the bodhisatta . they scatter before him mand ra flower rejoice with heartfelt joy to pay their religious homage . the royal father ponder the meaning of these sign be now full of joy and now sore distressed . the queen mother behold her child and the commotion which his birth create felt in her timorous heart the pang of doubt . now the re be at that time in a grove near lumbin asita a rishi lead the life of a hermit . he be a brahman of dignified mien famed not only for wisdom and scholarship but also for his skill in the interpretation of sign . and the king invite him to see the royal babe . the seer behold the prince wept and sigh deeply . and when the king saw the tear of asita he become alarmed and ask why have the sight of my son cause thee grief and pain ? but asita 's heart rejoice and know the king 's mind to be perplex he address him say the king like the moon when full should feel great joy for he have beget a wondrously noble son . i do not worship brahm but i worship this child and the god in the temple will descend from their place of honor to adore him . banish all anxiety and doubt . the spiritual omen manifest indicate that the child now bear will bring deliverance to the whole world . recollect that i myself be old on that account i could not hold my tear for now my end be come on and i shall not see the glory of this babe . for this son of thine will rule the world . the wheel of empire will come to him . he will either be a king of king to govern all the land of the earth or verily will become a buddha . he be bear for the sake of everything that live . his pure teaching will be like the shore that receive the shipwrecked . his power of meditation will be like a cool lake and all creature parch with the drought of lust may freely drink thereof . on the fire of covetousness he will cause the cloud of his mercy to rise so that the rain of the law may extinguish it . the heavy gate of despondency will he open and give deliverance to all creature ensnare in the selfentwined mesh of folly and ignorance . the king of the law have come forth to rescue from bondage all the poor the miserable the helpless . when the royal parent hear asita 's word they rejoice in their heart and name their new bear infant siddhattha that be he who have accomplish his purpose . and the queen say to her sister paj pat a mother who have bear a future buddha will never give birth to another child . i shall soon leave this world my husband the king and siddhattha my child . when i be go be thou a mother to him . and paj pat wept and promise . when the queen have depart from the living paj pat take the boy siddhattha and rear him . and a the light of the moon increase little by little so the royal child grow from day to day in mind and in body and truthfulness and love reside in his heart . when a year have pass suddhodana the king make paj pat his queen and there be never a good stepmother than she . . the tie of life . when siddhattha have grow to youth his father desire to see him married and he send to all his kinsfolk command them to bring their princess that the prince might select one of them a his wife . but the kinsfolk reply and say the prince be young and delicate nor have he learn any of the science . he would not be able to maintain our daughter and should there be war he would be unable to cope with the enemy . the prince be not boisterous but pensive in his nature . he love to stay under the great jambu tree in the garden of his father and observe the way of the world give himself up to meditation . and the prince say to his father invite our kinsfolk that they may see me and put my strength to the test . and his father do a his son bid him . when the kinsfolk come and the people of the city kapilavatthu have assemble to test the prowess and scholarship of the prince he prove himself manly in all the exercise both of the body and of the mind and there be no rival among the youth and men of india who could surpass him in any test bodily or mental . he reply to all the question of the sage but when he question them even the wise among them be silence . then siddhattha choose himself a wife . he select yasodhar his cousin the gentle daughter of the king of koli . and yasodhar be betroth to the prince . in their wedlock be bear a son whom they name r hula which mean fetter or tie and king suddhodana glad that an heir be bear to his son say the prince have beget a son will love him a i love the prince . this will be a strong tie to bind siddhattha 's heart to the interest of the world and the kingdom of the sakyas will remain under the sceptre of my descendant . with no selfish aim but regard his child and the people at large siddhattha the prince attend to his religious duty bath his body in the holy ganges and cleanse his heart in the water of the law . even a men desire to give happiness to their child so do he long to give peace to the world . vi . the three woe . the palace which the king have give to the prince be resplendent with all the luxury of india for the king be anxious to see his son happy . all sorrowful sight all misery and all knowledge of misery be keep away from siddhattha for the king desire that no trouble should come nigh him he should not know that there be evil in the world . but a the chained elephant longs for the wild of the jungle so the prince be eager to see the world and he ask his father the king for permission to do so . and suddhodana order a jewel front chariot with four stately horse to be hold ready and command the road to be adorn where his son would pass . the house of the city be decorate with curtain and banner and spectator arrange themselves on either side eagerly gaze at the heir to the throne . thus siddhattha rode with channa his charioteer through the street of the city and into a country water by rivulet and cover with pleasant tree . there by the wayside they meet an old man with bent frame wrinkle face and sorrowful brow and the prince ask the charioteer who be this ? his head be white his eye be blear and his body be wither . he can barely support himself on his staff . the charioteer much embarrass hardly dare speak the truth . he say these be the symptom of old age . this same man be once a suckling child and a a youth full of sportive life but now a year have pass away his beauty be go and the strength of his life be waste . siddhattha be greatly affect by the word of the charioteer and he sigh because of the pain of old age . what joy or pleasure can men take he think to himself when they know they must soon wither and pine away ! and lo ! while they be pass on a sick man appear on the way side gasp for breath his body disfigure convulsed and groan with pain . the prince ask his charioteer what kind of man be this ? and the charioteer reply and say this man be sick . the four element of his body be confuse and out of order . we be all subject to such condition the poor and the rich the ignorant and the wise all creature that have body be liable to the same calamity . and siddhattha be still more moved . all pleasure appear stale to him and he loathe the joy of life . the charioteer speed the horse on to escape the dreary sight when suddenly they be stop in their fiery course . four person pass by carry a corpse and the prince shuddering at the sight of a lifeless body ask the charioteer what be this they carry ? there be streamer and flower garland but the men that follow be overwhelm with grief ! the charioteer reply this be a dead man his body be stark his life be go his thought be still his family and the friend who love him now carry the corpse to the grave . and the prince be full of awe and terror be this the only dead man he ask or do the world contain other instance ? with a heavy heart the charioteer reply all over the world it be the same . he who begin life must end it . there be no escape from death . with bated breath and stammer accent the prince exclaim o worldly men ! how fatal be your delusion ! inevitably your body will crumble to dust yet carelessly unheedingly ye live on . the charioteer observe the deep impression these sad sight have make on the prince turn his horse and drive back to the city . when they pass by the palace of the nobility kis gotam a young princess and niece of the king saw siddhattha in his manliness and beauty and observe the thoughtfulness of his countenance say happy the father that beget thee happy the mother that nurse thee happy the wife that call husband this lord so glorious . the prince hearing this greeting say happy be they that have find deliverance . long for peace of mind i shall seek the bliss of nirv na . then ask ki gotam how be nirv na attain ? the prince pause and to him whose mind be estrange from wrong the answer come when the fire of lust be go out then nirv na be gain when the fire of hatred and delusion be go out then nirv na be gain when the trouble of mind arise from blind credulity and all other evil have cease then nirv na be gain ! siddhattha hand her his precious pearl necklace a a reward for the instruction she have give him and have return home look with disdain upon the treasure of his palace . his wife welcome him and entreat him to tell her the cause of his grief . he say i see everywhere the impression of change therefore my heart be heavy . men grow old sicken and die . that be enough to take away the zest of life . the king his father hearing that the prince have become estrange from pleasure be greatly overcome with sorrow and like a sword it pierce his heart . vii . the bodhisatta 's renunciation . it be night . the prince find no rest on his soft pillow he arise and go out into the garden . ala ! he cry all the world be full of darkness and ignorance there be no one who know how to cure the ill of existence . and he groan with pain . siddhattha sit down beneath the great jambu tree and give himself to think ponder on life and death and the evil of decay . concentrate his mind he become free from confusion . all low desire vanish from his heart and perfect tranquillity come over him . in this state of ecstasy he saw with his mental eye all the misery and sorrow of the world he saw the pain of pleasure and the inevitable certainty of death that hovers over every be yet men be not awaken to the truth . and a deep compassion seize his heart . while the prince be ponder on the problem of evil he behold with his mind 's eye under the jambu tree a lofty figure endow with majesty calm and dignify . whence comest thou and who mayst thou be ? ask the prince . in reply the vision say i be a samana . trouble at the thought of old age disease and death i have leave my home to seek the path of salvation . all thing hasten to decay only the truth abideth forever . everything change and there be no permanency yet the word of the buddha be immutable . i long for the happiness that do not decay the treasure that will never perish the life that know of no beginning and no end . therefore i have destroy all worldly think . i have retire into an unfrequented dell to live in solitude and beg for food i devote myself to the one thing needful . siddhattha ask can peace be gain in this world of unrest ? i be strike with the emptiness of pleasure and have become disgust with lust . all oppress me and existence itself seem intolerable . the samana reply where heat be there be also a possibility of cold creature subject to pain posse the faculty of pleasure the origin of evil indicates that good can be develop . for these thing be correlative . thus where there be much suffer there will be much bliss if thou but open thine eye to behold it . just a a man who have fall into a heap of filth ought to seek the great pond of water cover with lotus which be near by even so seek thou for the great deathless lake of nirv na to wash off the defilement of wrong . if the lake be not seek it be not the fault of the lake . even so when there be a blessed road lead the man hold fast by wrong to the salvation of nirv na if the road be not walk upon it be not the fault of the road but of the person . and when a man who be oppress with sickness there be a physician who can heal him do not avail himself of the physician 's help that be not the fault of the physician . even so when a man oppress by the malady of wrong do do not seek the spiritual guide of enlightenment that be no fault of the evil destroying guide . the prince listen to the noble word of his visitor and say thou bringest good tidings for now i know that my purpose will be accomplish . my father advise me to enjoy life and to undertake worldly duty such a will bring honor to me and to our house . he tell me that i be too young still that my pulse beat too full to lead a religious life . the venerable figure shake his head and reply thou shouldst know that for seek a religious life no time can be inopportune . a thrill of joy pass through siddhattha 's heart . now be the time to seek religion he say now be the time to sever all tie that would prevent me from attain perfect enlightenment now be the time to wander into homelessness and lead a mendicant 's life to find the path of deliverance . the celestial messenger hear the resolution of siddhattha with approval . now indeed he add be the time to seek religion . go siddhattha and accomplish thy purpose . for thou art bodhisatta the buddha elect thou art destine to enlighten the world . thou art the tath gata the great master for thou wilt fulfil all righteousness and be dharmar ja the king of truth . thou art bhagavat the blessed one for thou art call upon to become the saviour and redeemer of the world . fulfil thou the perfection of truth . though the thunderbolt descend upon thy head yield thou never to the allurement that beguile men from the path of truth . a the sun at all season pursue his own course nor ever go on another even so if thou forsake not the straight path of righteousness thou shalt become a buddha . persevere in thy quest and thou shalt find what thou seekest . pursue thy aim unswervingly and thou shalt gain the prize . struggle earnestly and thou shalt conquer . the benediction of all deity of all saint of all that seek light be upon thee and heavenly wisdom guide thy step . thou shalt be the buddha our master and our lord thou shalt enlighten the world and save mankind from perdition . have thus speak the vision vanish and siddhattha 's heart be fill with peace . he say to himself i have awaken to the truth and i be resolve to accomplish my purpose . i will sever all the tie that bind me to the world and i will go out from my home to seek the way of salvation . the buddha be being whose word can not fail there be no departure from truth in their speech . for a the fall of a stone throw into the air a the death of a mortal a the sunrise at dawn a the lion 's roar when he leave his lair a the delivery of a woman with child a all these thing be sure and certain even so the word of the buddha be sure and can not fail . verily i shall become a buddha . the prince return to the bedroom of his wife to take a last farewell glance at those whom he dearly love above all the treasure of the earth . he long to take the infant once more into his arm and kiss him with a parting kiss . but the child lay in the arm of his mother and the prince could not lift him without awaken both . there siddhattha stand gaze at his beautiful wife and his beloved son and his heart grieve . the pain of part overcame him powerfully . although his mind be determine so that nothing be it good or evil could shake his resolution the tear flow freely from his eye and it be beyond his power to check their stream . but the prince tear himself away with a manly heart suppress his feeling but not extinguish his memory . the bodhisatta mount his noble steed kanthaka and when he leave the palace m ra stand in the gate and stop him depart not o my lord exclaim m ra . in seven day from now the wheel of empire will appear and will make thee sovereign over the four continent and the two thousand adjacent island . therefore stay my lord . the bodhisatta reply well do i know that the wheel of empire will appear to me but it be not sovereignty that i desire . i will become a buddha and make all the world shout for joy . thus siddhattha the prince renounce power and worldly pleasure give up his kingdom sever all tie and go into homelessness . he ride out into the silent night accompany only by his faithful charioteer channa . darkness lay upon the earth but the star shine brightly in the heaven . viii . king bimbis ra . siddhattha have cut his wave hair and have exchange his royal robe for a mean dress of the color of the ground . have send home channa the charioteer together with the noble steed kanthaka to king suddhodana to bear him the message that the prince have leave the world the bodhisatta walk along on the highroad with a beggar 's bowl in his hand . yet the majesty of his mind be ill conceal under the poverty of his appearance . his erect gait betray his royal birth and his eye beam with a fervid zeal for truth . the beauty of his youth be transfigure by holiness and surround his head like a halo . all the people who saw this unusual sight gaze at him in wonder . those who be in haste arrest their step and look back and there be no one who do not pay him homage . have enter the city of r jagaha the prince go from house to house silently wait till the people offer him food . wherever the blessed one come the people give him what they have they bow before him in humility and be fill with gratitude because he condescend to approach their home . old and young people be move and say this be a noble muni ! his approach be bliss . what a great joy for u ! and king bimbis ra notice the commotion in the city inquire the cause of it and when he learn the news send one of his attendant to observe the stranger . have heard that the muni must be a sakya and of noble family and that he have retire to the bank of a flow river in the wood to eat the food in his bowl the king be move in his heart he don his royal robe place his golden crown upon his head and go out in the company of aged and wise counselor to meet his mysterious guest . the king find the muni of the sakya race seat under a tree . contemplate the composure of his face and the gentleness of his deportment bimbis ra greet him reverently and say o samana thy hand be fit to grasp the rein of an empire and should not hold a beggar 's bowl . i be sorry to see thee waste thy youth . believe that thou art of royal descent i invite thee to join me in the government of my country and share my royal power . desire for power be become to the noble minded and wealth should not be despise . to grow rich and lose religion be not true gain . but he who possess all three power wealth and religion enjoy them in discretion and with wisdom him i call a great master . the great sakyamuni lift his eye and reply thou art know o king to be liberal and religious and thy word be prudent . a kind man who make good use of wealth be rightly say to possess a great treasure but the miser who hoard up his rich will have no profit . charity be rich in return charity be the great wealth for though it scatter it bring no repentance . i have sever all tie because i seek deliverance . how be it possible for me to return to the world ? he who seek religious truth which be the high treasure of all must leave behind all that can concern him or draw away his attention and must be bent upon that one goal alone . he must free his soul from covetousness and lust and also from the desire for power . indulge in lust but a little and lust like a child will grow . wield worldly power and you will be burden with care . good than sovereignty over the earth good than living in heaven good than lordship over all the world be the fruit of holiness . the bodhisatta have recognize the illusory nature of wealth and will not take poison a food . will a fish that have be bait still covet the hook or an escaped bird love the net ? would a rabbit rescue from the serpent 's mouth go back to be devour ? would a man who have burn his hand with a torch take up the torch after he have drop it to the earth ? would a blind man who have recover his sight desire to spoil his eye again ? the sick man suffer from fever seek for a cooling medicine . shall we advise him to drink that which will increase the fever ? shall we quench a fire by heap fuel upon it ? i pray thee pity me not . rather pity those who be burden with the care of royalty and the worry of great rich . they enjoy them in fear and tremble for they be constantly threaten with a loss of those boon on whose possession their heart be set and when they die they can not take along either their gold or the kingly diadem . my heart hankers after no vulgar profit so i have put away my royal inheritance and prefer to be free from the burden of life . therefore try not to entangle me in new relationship and duty nor hinder me from complete the work i have begin . i regret to leave thee . but i will go to the sage who can teach me religion and so find the path on which we can escape evil . may thy country enjoy peace and prosperity and may wisdom be shed upon thy rule like the brightness of the noon day sun . may thy royal power be strong and may righteousness be the sceptre in thine hand . the king clasp his hand with reverence bow down before sakyamuni and say mayest thou obtain that which thou seekest and when thou hast obtain it come back i pray thee and receive me a thy disciple . the bodhisatta part from the king in friendship and goodwill and purpose in his heart to grant his request . ix . the bodhisatta 's search . al ra and uddaka be renowned a teacher among the brahman and there be no one in those day who surpass them in learn and philosophical knowledge . the bodhisatta go to them and sit at their foot . he listen to their doctrine of the tman or self which be the ego of the mind and the doer of all doings . he learn their view of the transmigration of soul and of the law of karma how the soul of bad men have to suffer by be reborn in men of low caste in animal or in hell while those who purify themselves by libation by sacrifice and by self mortification would become king or brahman or devas so a to rise high and higher in the grade of existence . he study their incantation and offering and the method by which they attain deliverance of the ego from material existence in state of ecstasy . al ra say what be that self which perceive the action of the five root of mind touch smell taste sight and hearing ? what be that which be active in the two way of motion in the hand and in the foot ? the problem of the soul appear in the expression ' i say ' ' i know and perceive ' ' i come ' and ' i go ' or ' i will stay here . ' thy soul be not thy body it be not thy eye not thy ear not thy nose not thy tongue nor be it thy mind . the i be the one who feel the touch in thy body . the i be the smeller in the nose the taster in the tongue the seer in the eye the hearer in the ear and the thinker in the mind . the i move thy hand and thy foot . the i be thy soul . doubt in the existence of the soul be irreligious and without discern this truth there be no way of salvation . deep speculation will easily involve the mind it lead to confusion and unbelief but a purification of the soul lead to the way of escape . true deliverance be reach by remove from the crowd and lead a hermit 's life depend entirely on alms for food . put away all desire and clearly recognize the non existence of matter we reach a state of perfect emptiness . here we find the condition of immaterial fife . a the mu ja grass when freed from it horny case a a sword when drawn from it scabbard or a the wild bird escape from it prison so the ego liberate itself from all limitation find perfect release . this be true deliverance but those only who will have deep faith will learn . the bodhisatta find no satisfaction in these teaching . he reply people be in bondage because they have not yet remove the idea of the ego . the thing and it quality be different in our thought but not in reality . heat be different from fire in our thought but you can not remove heat from fire in reality . you say that you can remove the quality and leave the thing but if you think your theory to the end you will find that this be not so . be not man an organism of many aggregate ? be we not compose of various attribute ? man consist of the material form of sensation of thought of disposition and lastly of understand . that which men call the ego when they say ' i be ' be not an entity behind the attribute it originate by their co operation . there be mind there be sensation and thought and there be truth and truth be mind when it walk in the path of righteousness . but there be no separate ego soul outside or behind the thought of man . he who believe that the ego be a distinct be have no correct conception of thing . the very search for the tman be wrong it be a wrong start and it will lead you in a false direction . how much confusion of thought come from our interest in self and from our vanity when think ' i be so great ' or ' i have do this wonderful deed ? ' the thought of thine ego stand between thy rational nature and truth banish it and then wilt thou see thing a they be . he who think correctly will rid himself of ignorance and acquire wisdom . the idea ' i be ' and ' i shall be ' or ' i shall not be ' do not occur to a clear thinker . moreover if our ego remain how can we attain true deliverance ? if the ego be to be reborn in any of the three world be it in hell upon earth or be it even in heaven we shall meet again and again the same inevitable doom of sorrow . we shall remain chained to the wheel of individuality and shall be implicate in egotism and wrong . all combination be subject to separation and we can not escape birth disease old age and death . be this a final escape ? say uddaka consider the unity of thing . thing be not their part yet they exist . the member and organ of thy body be not thine ego but thine ego possess all these part . what for instance be the ganges ? be the sand the ganges ? be the water the ganges ? be the hither bank the ganges ? be the farther bank the ganges ? the ganges be a mighty river and it possess all these several quality . exactly so be our ego . but the bodhisatta reply not so sir ! if we except the water the sand the hither bank and the farther bank where can we find any ganges ? in the same way i observe the activity of man in their harmonious union but there be no ground for an ego outside it part . the brahman sage however insist on the existence of the ego say the ego be the doer of our deed . how can there be karma without a self a it performer ? do we not see around u the effect of karma ? what make men different in character station possession and fate ? it be their karma and karma include merit and demerit . the transmigration of the soul be subject to it karma . we inherit from former existence the evil effect of our evil deed and the good effect of our good deed . if that be not so how could we be different ? the tath gata meditate deeply on the problem of transmigration and karma and find the truth that lie in them . the doctrine of karma he say be undeniable but thy theory of the ego have no foundation . like everything else in nature the life of man be subject to the law of cause and effect . the present reaps what the past have sow and the future be the product of the present . but there be no evidence of the existence of an immutable ego be of a self which remain the same and migrates from body to body . there be rebirth but no transmigration . be not this individuality of mine a combination material as well a mental ? be it not make up of quality that spring into be by a gradual evolution ? the five root of sense perception in this organism have come from ancestor who perform these function . the idea which i think come to me partly from others who think them and partly they rise from combination of the idea in my own mind . those who have use the same sense organ and have think the same idea before i be compose into this individuality of mine be my previous existence they be my ancestor as much a the i of yesterday be the father of the i of to day and the karma of my past deed condition the fate of my present existence . suppose there be an tman that perform the action of the sens then if the door of sight be tear down and the eye pluck out that tman would be able to peep through the large aperture and see the form of it surroundings well and more clearly than before . it would be able to hear sound well if the ear be tear away smell well if the nose be cut off taste well if the tongue be pull out and feel well if the body be destroy . i observe the preservation and transmission of character i perceive the truth of karma but see no tman whom your doctrine make the doer of your deed . there be rebirth without the transmigration of a self . for this tman this self this ego in the ' i say ' and in the ' i will ' be an illusion . if this self be a reality how could there be an escape from selfhood ? the terror of hell would be infinite and no release could be grant . the evil of existence would not be due to our ignorance and wrong do but would constitute the very nature of our be . and the bodhisatta go to the priest officiate in the temple . but the gentle mind of the sakyamuni be offend at the unnecessary cruelty perform on the altar of the god . he say ignorance only can make these men prepare festival and hold vast meeting for sacrifice . far good to revere the truth than try to appease the god by shed blood . what love can a man posse who believe that the destruction of life will atone for evil deed ? can a new wrong expiate old wrong ? and can the slaughter of an innocent victim blot out the evil deed of mankind ? this be practise religion by the neglect of moral conduct . purify your heart and cease to kill that be true religion . ritual have no efficacy prayer be vain repetition and incantation have no save power . but to abandon covetousness and lust to become free from evil passion and to give up all hatred and ill will that be the right sacrifice and the true worship . . uruvel the place of mortification . the bodhisatta go in search of a good system and come to a settlement of five bhikkhus in the jungle of uruvel and when the bless one saw the life of those five men virtuously keep in check their sens subdue their passion and practise austere self discipline he admire their earnestness and join their company . with holy zeal and a strong heart the sakyamuni give himself up to meditative thought and rigorous mortification of the body . whereas the five bhikkhus be severe the sakyamuni be severe still and they revere him their junior a their master . so the bodhisatta continue for six year patiently torture himself and suppress the want of nature . he train his body and exercise his mind in the mode of the most rigorous ascetic life . at last he eat each day one hemp grain only seek to cross the ocean of birth and death and to arrive at the shore of deliverance . and when the bodhisatta be ahungered lo ! m ra the evil one approach him and say thou art emaciate from fast and death be near . what good be thy exertion ? deign to live and thou wilt be able to do good work . but the sakyamuni make reply o thou friend of the indolent thou wicked one for what purpose hast thou come ? let the flesh waste away if but the mind become more tranquil and attention more steadfast . what be life in this world ? death in battle be well to me than that i should live defeat . and m ra withdraw say for seven year i have follow the blessed one step by step but i have find no fault in the tath gata . the bodhisatta be shrink and attenuate and his body be like a withered branch but the fame of his holiness spread in the surrounding country and people come from great distance to see him and receive his blessing . however the holy one be not satisfy . seek true wisdom he do not find it and he come to the conclusion that mortification would not extinguish desire nor afford enlightenment in ecstatic contemplation . seat beneath a jambu tree he consider the state of his mind and the fruit of his mortification . his body have become weaker nor have his fast advance him in his search for salvation and therefore when he saw that it be not the right path he propose to abandon it . he go to bathe in the nera jara river but when he strive to leave the water he could not rise on account of his weakness . then espy the branch of a tree and take hold of it he raise himself and leave the stream . but while return to his abode he stagger and fell to the ground and the five bhikkhus think he be dead . there be a chief herdsman living near the grove whose eldest daughter be call nand and nand happen to pass by the spot where the blessed one have swoon and bow down before him she offer him rice milk and he accept the gift . when he have partake of the rice milk all his limb be refresh his mind become clear again and he be strong to receive the high enlightenment . after this occurrence the bodhisatta again take some food . his disciple have witness the scene of nand and observe the change in his mode of living be fill with suspicion . they be convince that siddhattha 's religious zeal be flag and that he whom they have hitherto revere a their master have become oblivious of his high purpose . when the bodhisatta saw the bhikkhus turn away from him he felt sorry for their lack of confidence and be aware of the loneliness in which he live . suppress his grief he wander on alone and his disciple say siddhattha leave u to seek a more pleasant abode . xi m ra the evil one . the holy one direct his step to that bless bodhi tree beneath whose shade he be to accomplish his search . a he walk the earth shook and a brilliant light transfigure the world . when he sit down the heaven resound with joy and all living being be fill with good cheer . m ra alone lord of the five desire bringer of death and enemy of truth be grieve and rejoice not . with his three daughter tanh rag and arati the tempter and with his host of evil demon he go to the place where the great samana sat . but sakyamuni heed him not . m ra uttered fear inspire threat and raise a whirlwind so that the sky be darken and the ocean roar and tremble . but the blessed one under the bodhi tree remain calm and fear not . the enlightened one know that no harm could befall him . the three daughter of m ra tempt the bodhisatta but he pay no attention to them and when m ra saw that he could kindle no desire in the heart of the victorious samana he order all the evil spirit at his command to attack him and overawe the great muni . but the blessed one watch them a one would watch the harmless game of child . all the fierce hatred of the evil spirit be of no avail . the flame of hell become wholesome breeze of perfume and the angry thunderbolt be change into lotus blossom . when m ra saw this he flee away with his army from the bodhi tree whilst from above a rain of heavenly flower fell and voice of good spirit be hear behold the great muni ! his heart unmoved by hatred . the wicked m ra 's host 'gainst him do not prevail . pure be he and wise loving and full of mercy . a the ray of the sun drown the darkness of the world so he who persevere in his search will find the truth and the truth will enlighten him . xii . enlightenment . the bodhisatta have put m ra to flight give himself up to meditation . all the misery of the world the evil produce by evil deed and the suffering arise therefrom pass before his mental eye and he think surely if living creature saw the result of all their evil deeds they would turn away from them in disgust . but selfhood blind them and they cling to their obnoxious desire . they crave pleasure for themselves and they cause pain to others when death destroy their individuality they find no peace their thirst for existence abides and their selfhood reappears in new birth . thus they continue to move in the coil and can find no escape from the hell of their own making . and how empty be their pleasure how vain be their endeavor ! hollow like the plantain tree and without content like the bubble . the world be full of evil and sorrow because it be full of lust . men go astray because they think that delusion be good than truth . rather than truth they follow error which be pleasant to look at in the beginning but in the end cause anxiety tribulation and misery . and the bodhisatta begin to expound the dharma . the dharma be the truth . the dharma be the sacred law . the dharma be religion . the dharma alone can deliver u from error from wrong and from sorrow . ponder on the origin of birth and death the enlightened one recognize that ignorance be the root of all evil and these be the link in the development of life call the twelve nid na in the beginning there be existence blind and without knowledge and in this sea of ignorance there be stirring formative and organize . from stirring formative and organize rise awareness or feeling . feeling beget organism that live a individual being . these organism develop the six field that be the five sens and the mind . the six field come in contact with thing . contact begets sensation . sensation create the thirst of individualized be . the thirst of be create a cleaving to thing . the cleaving produce the growth and continuation of selfhood . selfhood continue in renew birth . the renew birth of selfhood be the cause of suffer old age sickness and death . they produce lamentation anxiety and despair . the cause of all sorrow lie at the very begin it be hide in the ignorance from which life grows . remove ignorance and you will destroy the wrong appetence that rise from ignorance destroy these appetence and you will wipe out the wrong perception that rise from them . destroy wrong perception and there be an end of error in individualized being . destroy the error in individualized being and the illusion of the six field will disappear . destroy illusion and the contact with thing will cease to beget misconception . destroy misconception and you do away with thirst . destroy thirst and you will be free of ail morbid cleave . remove the cleaving and you destroy the selfishness of selfhood . if the selfishness of selfhood be destroy you will be above birth old age disease and death and you will escape all suffering . the enlightened one saw the four noble truth which point out the path that lead to nirv na or the extinction of self the first noble truth be the existence of sorrow . the second noble truth be the cause of suffer . the third noble truth be the cessation of sorrow . the fourth noble truth be the eightfold path that lead to the cessation of sorrow . this be the dharma . this be the truth . this be religion . and the enlightened one utter this stanza through many birth i seek in vain the builder of this house of pain . now builder thee i plainly see ! this be the last abode for me . thy gable 's yoke and rafter break my heart have peace . all lust will cease . there be self and there be truth . where self be truth be not . where truth be self be not . self be the fleeting error of sam ra it be individual separateness and that egotism which beget envy and hatred . self be the yearning for pleasure and the lust after vanity . truth be the correct comprehension of thing it be the permanent and everlasting the real in all existence the bliss of righteousness . the existence of self be an illusion and there be no wrong in this world no vice no evil except what flow from the assertion of self . the attainment of truth be possible only when self be recognize a an illusion . righteousness can be practise only when we have free our mind from passion of egotism . perfect peace can dwell only where all vanity have disappear . bless be he who have understand the dharma . bless be he who do no harm to his fellow being . bless be he who overcome wrong and be free from passion . to the high bliss have he attain who have conquer all selfishness and vanity . he have become the buddha the perfect one the bless one the holy one . xiii . the first convert . the blessed one tarry in solitude seven time seven day enjoy the bliss of emancipation . at that time tapussa and bhallika two merchant come travel on the road near by and when they saw the great samana majestic and full of peace they approach him respectfully and offer him rice cake and honey . this be the first food that the enlightened one ate after he attain buddhahood . and the buddha address them and point out to them the way of salvation . the two merchant conceive in their mind the holiness of the conqueror of m ra bow down in reverence and say we take our refuge lord in the blessed one and in the dharma . tapussa and bhallika be the first that become follower of the buddha and they be lay disciple . xiv . brahm s request . the blessed one have attain buddhahood while rest under the shepherd 's nigrodha tree on the bank of the river nera jar pronounce this solemn utterance how blest in happy solitude be he who hear of truth the call ! how blest to be both kind and good to practice self restraint to all ! how blest from passion to be free all sensuous joy to let pas by ! yet high bliss enjoyeth he who quit the pride of ' i be i . ' i have recognize the deep truth which be sublime and peace give but difficult to understand for most men move in a sphere of worldly interest and find their delight in worldly desire . the worldling will not understand the doctrine for to him there be happiness in selfhood only and the bliss that lie in a complete surrender to truth be unintelligible to him . he will call resignation what to the enlighten mind be the pure joy . he will see annihilation where the perfected one find immortality . he will regard a death what the conqueror of self know to be life everlasting . the truth remain hide from him who be in the bondage of hate and desire . nirv na remain incomprehensible and mysterious to the vulgar whose mind be becloud with worldly interest . should i preach the doctrine and mankind not comprehend it it would bring me only fatigue and trouble . m ra the evil one on hear the word of the bless buddha approach and say be greet thou holy one . thou hast attain the high bliss and it be time for thee to enter into the final nirv na . then brahm sahampati descend from the heaven and have worship the blessed one say ala ! the world must perish should the holy one the tath gata decide not to teach the dharma . be merciful to those that struggle have compassion upon the sufferer pity the creature who be hopelessly entangle in the snare of sorrow . there be some being that be almost free from the dust of worldliness . if they hear not the doctrine preach they will be lose . but if they hear it they will believe and be save . the blessed one full of compassion look with the eye of a buddha upon all sentient creature and he saw among them being whose mind be but scarcely cover by the dust of worldliness who be of good disposition and easy to instruct . he saw some who be conscious of the danger of lust and wrong do . and the blessed one say to brahm sahampati wide open be the door of immortality to all who have ear to hear . may they receive the dharma with faith . and the blessed one turn to m ra say i shall not pass into the final nirv na o evil one until there be not only brother and sister of an order but also lay disciple of both sex who shall have become true hearer wise well train ready and learn verse in the scripture fulfil all the great and less duty correct in life walk accord to the precept until they have thus themselves learn the doctrine shall be able to give information to others concern it preach it make it known establish it open it minutely explain it and make it clear until they when others start vain doctrine shall be able to vanquish and refute them and so to spread the wonderworking truth abroad . i shall not die until the pure religion of truth shall have become successful prosperous widespread and popular in all it full extent until in a word it shall have be well proclaim among men ! then brahm sahampati understood that the blessed one have grant his request and would preach the doctrine . the foundation of the kingdom of righteousness . . upaka . now the bless one thought to whom shall i preach the doctrine first ? my old teacher be dead . they would have receive the good news with joy . but my five disciple be still alive . i shall go to them and to them shall i first proclaim the gospel of deliverance . at that time the five bhikkhus dwelt in the deer park at benares and the blessed one rise and journey to their abode not think of their unkindness in have leave him at a time when he be most in need of their sympathy and help but mindful only of the service which they have minister unto him and pity them for the austerity which they practise in vain . upaka a young brahman and a jain a former acquaintance of siddhattha saw the bless one while he journey to benares and amaze at the majesty and sublime joyfulness of his appearance say thy countenance friend be serene thine eye be bright and indicate purity and blessedness . the holy buddha reply i have obtain deliverance by the extinction of self . my body be chasten my mind be free from desire and the deep truth have take abode in my heart . i have obtain nirvana and this be the reason that my countenance be serene and my eye be bright . i now desire to find the kingdom of truth upon earth to give light to those who be enshroud in darkness and to open the gate of deathlessness . upaka reply thou professest then friend to be jina the conqueror of the world the absolute one and the holy one . the blessed one say jinas be all those who have conquer self and the passion of self those alone be victor who control their mind and abstain from evil . therefore upaka i be the jina . upaka shake his head . venerable gotama he say thy way lie yonder and take another road he go away . xvi . the sermon at benares . on see their old teacher approach the five bhikkhus agree among themselves not to salute him nor to address him a a master but by his name only . for so they say he have break his vow and have abandon holiness . he be no bhikkhu but gotama and gotama have become a man who live in abundance and indulges in the pleasure of worldliness . but when the bless one approach in a dignified manner they involuntarily rise from their seat and greet him in spite of their resolution . still they call him by his name and address him a friend gotama . when they have thus receive the blessed one he say do not call the tath gata by his name nor address him a 'friend ' for he be the buddha the holy one . the buddha look with a kind heart equally on all living being and they therefore call him 'father . ' to disrespect a father be wrong to despise him be wicked . the tath gata the buddha continue do not seek salvation in austerity but neither do he for that reason indulge in worldly pleasure nor live in abundance . the tath gata have find the middle path . there be two extreme o bhikkhus which the man who have give up the world ought not to follow the habitual practice on the one hand of self indulgence which be unworthy vain and fit only for the worldly mind and the habitual practice on the other hand of self mortification which be painful useless and unprofitable . neither abstinence from fish or flesh nor go naked nor shave the head nor wearing mat hair nor dressing in a rough garment nor cover oneself with dirt nor sacrifice to agni will cleanse a man who be not free from delusion . read the veda make offering to priest or sacrifice to the god self mortification by heat or cold and many such penance perform for the sake of immortality these do not cleanse the man who be not free from delusion . anger drunkenness obstinacy bigotry deception envy self praise disparage others superciliousness and evil intention constitute uncleanness not verily the eating of flesh . a middle path o bhikkhus avoid the two extreme have be discover by the tath gata a path which open the eye and bestows understand which lead to peace of mind to the high wisdom to full enlightenment to nirv na ! what be that middle path o bhikkhus avoid these two extreme discover by the tath gata that path which open the eye and bestows understand which lead to peace of mind to the high wisdom to full enlightenment to nirv na ? let me teach you o bhikkhus the middle path which keep aloof from both extreme . by suffer the emaciated devotee produce confusion and sickly thought in his mind . mortification be not conducive even to worldly knowledge how much less to a triumph over the sens ! he who fill his lamp with water will not dispel the darkness and he who try to light a fire with rotten wood will fail . and how can any one be free from self by lead a wretched life if he do not succeed in quench the fire of lust if he still hanker after either worldly or heavenly pleasure . but he in whom self have become extinct be free from lust he will desire neither worldly nor heavenly pleasure and the satisfaction of his natural want will not defile him . however let him be moderate let him eat and drink accord to the need of the body . sensuality be enervate the self indulgent man be a slave to his passion and pleasure seek be degrade and vulgar . but to satisfy the necessity of life be not evil . to keep the body in good health be a duty for otherwise we shall not be able to trim the lamp of wisdom and keep our mind strong and clear . water surround the lotus flower but do not wet it petal . this be the middle path o bhikkhus that keep aloof from both extreme . and the blessed one speak kindly to his disciple pity them for their error and point out the uselessness of their endeavor and the ice of ill will that chill their heart melt away under the gentle warmth of the master 's persuasion . now the blessed one set the wheel of the most excellent law rolling and he begin to preach to the five bhikkhus open to them the gate of immortality and show them the bliss of nirv na . the buddha say the spoke of the wheel be the rule of pure conduct justice be the uniformity of their length wisdom be the tire modesty and thoughtfulness be the hub in which the immovable axle of truth be fix . he who recognize the existence of suffer it cause it remedy and it cessation have fathom the four noble truth . he will walk in the right path . right view will be the torch to light his way . right aspiration will be his guide . right speech will be his dwell place on the road . his gait will be straight for it be right behavior . his refreshment will be the right way of earn his livelihood . right effort will be his step right thought his breath and right contemplation will give him the peace that follow in his footprint . now this o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern suffer birth be attend with pain decay be painful disease be painful death be painful . union with the unpleasant be painful painful be separation from the pleasant and any craving that be unsatisfied that too be painful . in brief bodily condition which spring from attachment be painful . this then o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern suffer . now this o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the origin of suffer verily it be that crave which cause the renewal of existence accompany by sensual delight seek satisfaction now here now there the craving for the gratification of the passion the craving for a future life and the craving for happiness in this life . this then o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the origin of suffer . now this o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the destruction of suffer verily it be the destruction in which no passion remain of this very thirst it be the lay aside of the be free from the dwell no longer upon this thirst . this then o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the destruction of suffer . now this o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the way which lead to the destruction of sorrow . verily ! it be this noble eightfold path that be to say right view right aspiration right speech right behavior right livelihood right effort right thought and right contemplation . this then o bhikkhus be the noble truth concern the destruction of sorrow . by the practice of lovingkindness i have attain liberation of heart and thus i be assure that i shall never return in renewed birth . i have even now attain nirv na . and when the bless one have thus set the royal chariot wheel of truth roll onward a rapture thrill through all the universe . the devas leave their heavenly abode to listen to the sweetness of the truth the saint that have part from life crowd around the great teacher to receive the glad tidings even the animal of the earth felt the bliss that rest upon the word of the tath gata and all the creature of the host of sentient being god men and beast hear the message of deliverance receive and understood it in their own language . and when the doctrine be propound the venerable konda a the old one among the five bhikkhus discern the truth with his mental eye and he say truly o buddha our lord thou hast find the truth ! then the other bhikkhus too join him and exclaim truly thou art the buddha thou hast find the truth . and the devas and saint and all the good spirit of the departed generation that have listen to the sermon of the tath gata joyfully receive the doctrine and shout truly the bless one have found the kingdom of righteousness . the blessed one have move the earth he have set the wheel of truth roll which by no one in the universe be he god or man can ever be turn back . the kingdom of truth will be preach upon earth it will spread and righteousness good will and peace will reign among mankind . xvii . the sangha . have point out to the five bhikkhus the truth the buddha say a man that stand alone have decide to obey the truth may be weak and slip back into his old way . therefore stand ye together assist one another and strengthen one another 's effort . be like unto brother one in love one in holiness and one in your zeal for the truth . spread the truth and preach the doctrine in all quarter of the world so that in the end all living creature will be citizen of the kingdom of righteousness . this be the holy brotherhood this be the church the congregation of the saint of the buddha this be the sangha that establish a communion among all those who have take their refuge in the buddha . and konda a be the first disciple of the buddha who have thoroughly grasp the doctrine of the holy one and the tath gata look into his heart say truly konda a have understand the truth . hence the venerable konda a receive the name a ata konda a that be konda a who have understand the doctrine . then the venerable konda a spoke to the buddha and say lord let u receive the ordination from the bless one . and the buddha say come o bhikkhus ! well taught be the doctrine . lead a holy life for the extinction of suffer . then konda a and the other bhikkhus utter three time these solemn vow to the buddha will i look in faith he the perfect one be holy and supreme . the buddha conveys to u instruction wisdom and salvation he be the blessed one who know the law of be he be the lord of the world who yoketh men like oxen the teacher of god and men the exalted buddha . therefore to the buddha will i look in faith . to the doctrine will i look in faith well preach be the doctrine by the exalted one . the doctrine have be reveal so a to become visible the doctrine be above time and space . the doctrine be not base upon hearsay it mean 'come and see ' the doctrine lead to welfare the doctrine be recognize by the wise in their own heart . therefore to the doctrine will i look in faith . to the community will i look in faith the community of the buddha 's disciple instruct u how to lead a life of righteousness the community of the buddha 's disciple teach u how to exercise honesty and justice the community of the buddha 's disciple show u how to practise the truth . they form a brotherhood in kindness and charity and their saint be worthy of reverence . the community of the buddha 's disciple be found a a holy brotherhood in which men bind themselves together to teach the behest of rectitude and to do good . therefore to the community will i look in faith . and the gospel of the blessed one increase from day to day and many people come to hear him and to accept the ordination to lead thenceforth a holy life for the sake of the extinction of suffer . and the blessed one seeing that it be impossible to attend to all who want to hear the truth and receive the ordination send out from the number of his disciple such a be to preach the dharma and say unto them the dharma and the vinaya proclaim by the tath gata shine forth when they be display and not when they be conceal . but let not this doctrine so full of truth and so excellent fall into the hand of those unworthy of it where it would be despise and contemn treat shamefully ridicule and censure . i now grant you o bhikkhus this permission . confer henceforth in the different country the ordination upon those who be eager to receive it when you find them worthy . go ye now o bhikkhus for the benefit of the many for the welfare of mankind out of compassion for the world . preach the doctrine which be glorious in the beginning glorious in the middle and glorious in the end in the spirit as well a in the letter . there be being whose eye be scarcely cover with dust but if the doctrine be not preach to them they can not attain salvation . proclaim to them a life of holiness . they will understand the doctrine and accept it . and it become an establish custom that the bhikkhus go out preach while the weather be good but in the rainy season they come together again and join their master to listen to the exhortation of the tath gata . xviii . yasa the youth of benares . at that time there be in benares a noble youth yasa by name the son of a wealthy merchant . trouble in his mind about the sorrow of the world he secretly rise up in the night and steal away to the bless one . the blessed one saw yasa the noble youth come from afar . and yasa approach and exclaim ala what distress ! what tribulations ! the blessed one say to yasa here be no distress here be no tribulation . come to me and i will teach you the truth and the truth will dispel your sorrow . and when yasa the noble youth heard that there be neither distress nor tribulation nor sorrow his heart be comfort . he go into the place where the blessed one be and sit down near him . then the bless one preach about charity and morality . he explain the vanity of the thought i be the danger of desire and the necessity of avoid the evil of life in order to walk on the path of deliverance . instead of disgust with the world yasa felt the cool stream of holy wisdom and have obtain the pure and spotless eye of truth he look at his person richly adorn with pearl and precious stone and his heart be fill with shame . the tath gata know his inward thought say though a person be ornament with jewel the heart may have conquer the sens . the outward form do not constitute religion or affect the mind . thus the body of a samana may wear an ascetic 's garb while his mind be immerse in worldliness . a man that dwell in lonely wood and yet covets worldly vanity be a worldling while the man in worldly garment may let his heart soar high to heavenly thought . there be no distinction between the layman and the hermit if but both have banish the thought of self . see that yasa be ready to enter upon the path the blessed one say to him follow me ! and yasa join the brotherhood and have put on a bhikkhu 's robe receive the ordination . while the blessed one and yasa be discuss the doctrine yasa 's father pass by in search of his son and in pass he ask the blessed one pray lord hast thou see yasa my son ? and the buddha say to yasa 's father come in sir thou wilt find thy son and yasa 's father become full of joy and he enter . he sit down near his son but his eye be holden and he know him not and the lord begin to preach . and yasa 's father understand the doctrine of the blessed one say glorious be the truth o lord ! the buddha the holy one our master set up what have be overturn he reveal what have be hide he point out the way to the wanderer who have go astray he light a lamp in the darkness so that all who have eye to see can discern the thing that surround them . i take refuge in the buddha our lord i take refuge in the doctrine reveal by him i take refuge in the brotherhood which he have found . may the blessed one receive me from this day forth while my life last a a lay disciple who have take refuge in him . yasa 's father be the first lay member who become the first lay disciple of the buddha by pronounce the threefold formula of refuge . when the wealthy merchant have take refuge in the buddha his eye be open and he saw his son sit at his side in a bhikkhu 's robe . my son yasa he say thy mother be absorb in lamentation and grief . return home and restore thy mother to life . then yasa look at the blessed one and the blessed one say should yasa return to the world and enjoy the pleasure of a worldly life a he do before ? and yasa 's father reply if yasa my son find it a gain to stay with thee let him stay . he have become deliver from the bondage of worldliness . when the bless one have cheer their heart with word of truth and righteousness yasa 's father say may the blessed one o lord consent to take his meal with me together with yasa a his attendant ? the bless one have don his robe take his alms bowl and go with yasa to the house of the rich merchant . when they have arrive there the mother and also the former wife of yasa salute the bless one and sit down near him . then the bless one preach and the woman have understood his doctrine exclaim glorious be the truth o lord ! we take refuge in the buddha our lord . we take refuge in the doctrine reveal by him . we take refuge in the brotherhood which have be found by him . may the blessed one receive u from this day forth while our life last a lay disciple who have take refuge in him . the mother and the wife of yasa the noble youth of benares be the first woman who become lay disciple and take their refuge in the buddha . now there be four friend of yasa belonging to the wealthy family of benares . their name be vimala sub hu pu aji and gavampati . when yasa 's friend hear that yasa have cut off his hair and put on bhikkhu robe to give up the world and go forth into homelessness they think surely that can not be a common doctrine that must be a noble renunciation of the world if yasa whom we know to be good and wise have shave his hair and put on bhikkhu robe to give up the world and go forth into homelessness . and they go to yasa and yasa address the bless one say may the blessed one administer exhortation and instruction to these four friend of mine . and the blessed one preach to them and yasa 's friend accept the doctrine and take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha . xix kassapa . at that time there live in uruvel the jatilas brahman hermits with matted hair worship the fire and keep a fire dragon and kassapa be their chief . kassapa be renowned throughout all india and his name be honor a one of the wise men on earth and an authority on religion . and the bless one go to kassapa of uruvel the jatila and say let me stay a night in the room where you keep your sacred fire . kassapa see the blessed one in his majesty and beauty thought to himself this be a great muni and a noble teacher . should he stay over night in the room where the sacred fire be keep the serpent will bite him and he will die . and he say i do not object to your stay over night in the room where the sacred fire be keep but the serpent life there he will kill you and i should be sorry to see you perish . but the buddha insist and kassapa admit him to the room where the sacred fire be keep . and the blessed one sit down with his body erect surround himself with watchfulness . in the night the dragon come to the buddha belch forth in rage his fiery poison and fill the air with burn vapor but could do him no harm and the fire consume itself while the world honor one remain compose . and the venomous fiend become very wroth so that he die in his anger . when kassapa saw the light shin forth from the room he say alas what misery ! truly the countenance of gotama the great sakyamuni be beautiful but the serpent will destroy him . in the morning the bless one show the dead body of the fiend to kassapa say his fire have be conquer by my fire . and kassapa think to himself . sakyamuni be a great samana and posse high power but he be not holy like me . there be in those day a festival and kassapa think the people will come hither from all part of the country and will see the great sakyamuni . when he speak to them they will believe in him and abandon me . and he grow envious . when the day of the festival arrive the blessed one retire and do not come to kassapa . and kassapa go to the buddha on the next morning and say why do the great sakyamuni not come ? the tath gata reply didst thou not think o kassapa that it would be good if i stay away from the festival ? and kassapa be astonish and think great be sakyamuni he can read my most secret thought but he be not holy like me . and the blessed one address kassapa and say thou seest the truth but acceptest it not because of the envy that dwell in thy heart . be envy holiness ? envy be the last remnant of self that have remain in thy mind . thou art not holy kassapa thou hast not yet enter the path . and kassapa give up his resistance . his envy disappear and bow down before the blessed one he say lord our master let me receive the ordination from tin . bless one . and the blessed one say thou kassapa art chief of the jatilas . go then first and inform them of thine intention and let them do a thou thinkest fit . then kassapa go to the jatilas and say i be anxious to lead a religious life under the direction of the great sakyamuni who be the enlightened one the buddha . do a ye think best . and the jatilas reply we have conceive a profound affection for the great sakyamuni and if thou wilt join his brotherhood we will do likewise . the jatilas of uruvel now fling their paraphernalia of fire worship into the river and go to the bless one . nadi kassapa and gay kassapa brother of the great uruvel kassapa powerful men and chieftain among the people be dwell below on the stream and when they saw the instrument use in fire worship float in the river they say something have happen to our brother . and they come with their folk to uruvel . hear what have happen they too go to the buddha . the blessed one seeing that the jatilas of nadi and gay who have practise severe austerity and worship fire be now come to him preach a sermon on fire and say everything o jatilas be burn . the eye be burn all the sens be burn thought be burn . they be burn with the fire of lust . there be anger there be ignorance there be hatred and as long a the fire find inflammable thing upon which it can fee so long will it burn and there will be birth and death decay grief lamentation suffer despair and sorrow . consider this a disciple of the dharma will see the four noble truth and walk in the eightfold path of holiness . he will become wary of his eye wary of all his sens wary of his thought . he will divest himself of passion and become free . he will be deliver from selfishness and attain the blessed state of nirv na . and the jatilas rejoice and take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha . the sermon at r jagaha . and the bless one have dwell some time in uruvel go forth to r jagaha accompany by a great number of bhikkhus many of whom have be jatilas before and the great kassapa chief of the jatilas and formerly a fireworshipper go with him . when the magadha king seniya bimbis ra heard of the arrival of gotama sakyamuni of whom the people say he be the holy one the bless buddha guide men a a driver curb bullocks the teacher of high and low he go out surround with his counsellor and general and come to the grove where the blessed one be . there they saw the blessed one in the company of kassapa the great religious teacher of the jatilas and they be astonish and think have the great sakyamuni place himself under the spiritual direction of kassapa or have kassapa become a disciple of gotama ? and the tath gata read the thought of the people say to kassapa what knowledge hast thou gain o kassapa and what have induce thee to renounce the sacred fire and give up thine austere penance ? kassapa say the profit i derive from adore the fire be continuance in the wheel of individuality with all it sorrow and vanity . this service i have cast away and instead of continue penance and sacrifice i have go in quest of the high nirv na . since i have see the light of truth i have abandon worship the fire . the buddha perceiving that the whole assembly be ready a a vessel to receive the doctrine speak thus to bimbis ra the king he who know the nature of self and understand how the sens act find no room for selfishness and thus he will attain peace unending . the world hold the thought of self and from this arise false apprehension . some say that the self endure after death some say it perish . both be wrong and their error be most grievous . for if they say the self be perishable the fruit they strive for will perish too and at some time there will be no hereafter . good and evil would be indifferent . this salvation from selfishness be without merit . when some on the other hand say the self will not perish then in the midst of all life and death there be but one identity unborn and undying . if such be their self then it be perfect and can not be perfect by deed . the last imperishable self could never be change . the self would be lord and master and there would be no use in perfect the perfect moral aim and salvation would be unnecessary . but now we see the mark of joy and sorrow . where be any constancy ? if there be no permanent self that do our deed then there be no self there be no actor behind our action no perceiver behind our perception no lord behind our deed . now attend and listen the sens meet the object and from their contact sensation be bear . thence result recollection . thus a the sun 's power through a burning glass cause fire to appear so through the cognizance born of sense and object the mind originates and with it the ego the thought of self whom some brahman teacher call the lord . the shoot spring from the seed the seed be not the shoot both be not one and the same but successive phase in a continuous growth . such be the birth of animated life . ye that be slave of the self and toil in it service from morn until night ye that live in constant fear of birth old age sickness and death receive the good tidings that your cruel master exist not . self be an error an illusion a dream . open your eye and awaken . see thing a they be and ye will be comfort . he who be awake will no longer be afraid of nightmare . he who have recognize the nature of the rope that seem to be a serpent will cease to tremble . he who have find there be no self will let go all the lust and desire of egotism . the cleave to thing covetousness and sensuality inherit from former existence be the cause of the misery and vanity in the world . surrender the grasp disposition of selfishness and you will attain to that calm state of mind which convey perfect peace goodness and wisdom . and the buddha breathe forth this solemn utterance do not deceive do not despise each other anywhere . do not be angry nor should ye secret resentment bear for a a mother risk her life and watch o'er her child so boundless be your love to all so tender kind and mild . yea cherish good will right and leave all round early and late and without hindrance without stint from envy free and hate while stand walk sit down whate'er you have in mind the rule of life that 's always best be to be love kind . gift be great the founding of vih ra be meritorious meditation and religious exercise pacify the heart comprehension of the truth lead to nirv na but great than all be lovingkindness . a the light of the moon be sixteen time strong than the light of all the star so lovingkindness be sixteen time more efficacious in liberate the heart than all other religious accomplishment take together . this state of heart be the best in the world . let a man remain steadfast in it while he be awake whether he be stand walk sit or lie down . when the enlightened one have finish his sermon the magadha king say to the bless one in former day lord when i be a prince i cherish five wish . i wish o that i might be inaugurate a a king . this be my first wish and it have be fulfil . far i wish might the holy buddha the perfect one appear on earth while i rule and might he come to my kingdom . this be my second wish and it be fulfil now . far i wish might i pay my respect to him . this be my third wish and it be fulfil now . the fourth wish be might the blessed one preach the doctrine to me and this be fulfil now . the great wish however be the fifth wish might i understand the doctrine of the blessed one . and this wish be fulfil too . glorious lord ! most glorious be the truth preach by the tath gata ! our lord the buddha set up what have be overturn he reveal what have be hide he point out the way to the wanderer who have go astray he light a lamp in the darkness so that those who have eye to see may see . i take my refuge in the buddha . i take my refuge in the dharma . i take my refuge in the sangha . the tath gata by the exercise of his virtue and by wisdom show his unlimited spiritual power . he subdue and harmonize all mind . he make them see and accept the truth and throughout the kingdom the seed of virtue be sow . xxi the king 's gift . the king have take his refuge in the buddha invite the tath gata to his palace say will the blessed one consent to take his meal with me to morrow together with the fraternity of bhikkhus ? the next morning seniya bimbis ra the king announce to the bless one that it be time for take food thou art my most welcome guest o lord of the world come the meal be prepare . and the bless one have don his robe take his alms bowl and together with a great number of bhikkhus enter the city of r jagaha . sakka the king of the devas assume the appearance of a young brahman walk in front and say he who teach self control with those who have learn self control the redeemer with those whom he have redeem the blessed one with those to whom he have give peace be enter r jagaha ! hail to the buddha our lord ! honor to his name and blessing to all who take refuge in him . and sakka intone this stanza so blest be an age in which buddhas arise so blest be the truth 's proclamation . so blest be the sangha concordant and wise so blest a devout congregation ! and if by all the truth be know more seed of kindness would be sow and rich crop of good deed grow . when the bless one have finish his meal and have cleanse his bowl and his hand the king sit down near him and think where may i find a place for the blessed one to live in not too far from the town and not too near suitable for go and come easily accessible to all people who want to see him a place that be by day not too crowd and by night not expose to noise wholesome and well fit for a retired life ? there be my pleasure garden the bamboo grove veluvana fulfil all these condition . i shall offer it to the brotherhood whose head be the buddha . the king dedicate his garden to the brotherhood say may the blessed one accept my gift . then the bless one have silently show his consent and have gladden and edify the magadha king by religious discourse rise from his seat and go away . xxii . s riputta and moggall na . at that time s riputta and moggall na two brahman and chief of the follower of sa jaya lead a religious life . they have promise each other he who first attain nirv na shall tell the other one . s riputta see the venerable assaji beg for alms modestly keep his eye to the ground and dignify in deportment exclaim truly this samana have enter the right path i will ask him in whose name he have retire from the world and what doctrine he profess . be address by s riputta assaji reply i be a follower of the buddha the blessed one but be a novice i can tell you the substance only of the doctrine . say s riputta tell me venerable monk it be the substance i want . and assaji recite the stanza the buddha do the cause unfold of all the thing that spring from cause . and far the great sage have tell how finally all passion pause . have hear this stanza s riputta obtain the pure and spotless eye of truth and say now i see clearly whatsoever be subject to origination be also subject to cessation . if this be the doctrine i have reach the state to enter nirv na which heretofore have remain hide from me . s riputta go to moggall na and tell him and both say we will go to the bless one that he the blessed one may be our teacher . when the buddha saw s riputta and moggall na come from afar he say to his disciple these two monk be highly auspicious . when the two friend have take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha the holy one say to his other disciple s riputta like the first born son of a world ruling monarch be well able to assist the king a his chief follower to set the wheel of the law rolling . and the people be annoy . see that many distinguish young men of the kingdom of magadha lead a religious life under the direction of the bless one they become angry and murmured gotama sakyamuni induce father to leave their wife and cause family to become extinct . when they saw the bhikkhus they revile them say the great sakyamuni have come to r jagaha subdue the mind of men . who will be the next to be lead astray by him ? the bhikkhus tell it to the bless one and the blessed one say this murmuring o bhikkhus will not last long . it will last seven day . if they revile you o bhikkhus answer them with these word 'it be by preach the truth that tath gatas lead men . who will murmur at the wise ? who will blame the virtuous ? who will condemn self control righteousness and kindness ? ' and the blessed one proclaim this verse commit no wrong but good deed do and let thy heart be pure . all buddhas teach this doctrine true which will for aye endure . xxiii . an thapindika . at this time there be an thapindika a man of unmeasured wealth visit r jagaha . be of a charitable disposition he be call the supporter of orphan and the friend of the poor . hearing that the buddha have come into the world and be stop in the bamboo grove near the city he set out in the very night to meet the bless one . and the blessed one saw at once the sterling quality of an thapindika 's heart and greet him with word of religious comfort . and they sit down together and an thapindika listen to the sweetness of the truth preach by the blessed one . and the buddha say the restless busy nature of the world this i declare be at the root of pain . attain that composure of mind which be rest in the peace of immortality . self be but a heap of composite quality and it world be empty like a fantasy . who be it that shape our life ? be it i vara a personal creator ? if i vara be the maker all living thing should have silently to submit to their maker 's power . they would be like vessel form by the potter 's hand and if it be so how would it be possible to practise virtue ? if the world have be make by i vara there should be no such thing a sorrow or calamity or evil for both pure and impure deed muse come from him . if not there would be another cause beside him and he would not be self existent . thus thou seest the thought of i vara be overthrow . again it be say that the absolute have create u . but that which be absolute can not be a cause . all thing around u come from a cause a the plant come from the seed but how can the absolute be the cause of all thing alike ? if it pervade them then certainly it do not make them . again it be say that self be the maker . but if self be the maker why do it not make thing please ? the cause of sorrow and joy be real and objective . how can they have be make by self ? again if we adopt the argument that there be no maker our fate be such a it be and there be no causation what use would there be in shape our life and adjust mean to an end ? therefore we argue that all thing that exist be not without cause . however neither i vara nor the absolute nor the self nor causeless chance be the maker but our deed produce result both good and evil accord to the law of causation . let u then abandon the heresy of worship i vara and of pray to him let u no longer lose ourselves in vain speculation of profitless subtlety let u surrender self and all selfishness and a all thing be fix by causation let u practise good so that good may result from our action . and an thapindika say i see that thou art the buddha the bless one the tath gata and i wish to open to thee my whole mind . have listen to my word advise me what i shall do . my life be full of work and have acquire great wealth i be surround with care . yet i enjoy my work and apply myself to it with all diligence . many people be in my employ and depend upon the success of my enterprise . now i have hear thy disciple praise the bliss of the hermit and denounce the unrest of the world . 'the holy one ' they say 'has give up his kingdom and his inheritance and have find the path of righteousness thus set an example to all the world how to attain nirv na . ' my heart yearn to do what be right and to be a blessing unto my fellow . let me then ask thee must i give up my wealth my home and my business enterprise and like thyself go into homelessness in order to attain the bliss of a religious life ? and the buddha reply the bliss of a religious life be attainable by every one who walk in the noble eightfold path . he that cleave to wealth have good cast it away than allow his heart to be poison by it but he who do not cleave to wealth and possess rich use them rightly will be a blessing unto his fellow . it be not life and wealth and power that enslave men but the cleaving to life and wealth and power . the bhikkhu who retire from the world in order to lead a life of leisure will have no gain for a life of indolence be an abomination and lack of energy be to be despise . the dharma of the tath gata do not require a man to go into homelessness or to resign the world unless he feel call upon to do so but the dharma of the tath gata require every man to free himself from the illusion of self to cleanse his heart to give up his thirst for pleasure and lead a life of righteousness . and whatever men do whether they remain in the world a artisan merchant and officer of the king or retire from the world and devote themselves to a life of religious meditation let them put their whole heart into their task let them be diligent and energetic and if they be like the lotus which although it grow in the water yet remain untouched by the water if they struggle in life without cherish envy or hatred if they live in the world not a life of self but a life of truth then surely joy peace and bliss will dwell in their mind . xxiv . the sermon on charity . an thapindika rejoice at the word of the bless one and say i dwell at s vatthi the capital of kosala a land rich in produce and enjoy peace . pasenadi be the king of the country and his name be renowned among our own people and our neighbor . now i wish to find there a vih ra which shall be a place of religious devotion for your brotherhood and i pray you kindly to accept it . the buddha saw into the heart of the supporter of orphan and know that unselfish charity be the move cause of his offer in acceptance of the gift the bless one say the charitable man be love by all his friendship be prize highly in death his heart be at rest and full of joy for he suffer not from repentance he receive the opening flower of his reward and the fruit that ripen from it . hard it be to understand by give away our food we get more strength by bestow clothing on others we gain more beauty by donate abode of purity and truth we acquire great treasure . there be a proper time and a proper m ode in charity just a the vigorous warrior go to battle so be the man who be able to give . he be like an able warrior a champion strong and wise in action . loving and compassionate he give with reverence and banishes all hatred envy and anger . the charitable man have find the path of salvation . he be like the man who plant a sapling securing thereby the shade the flower and the fruit in future year . even so be the result of charity even so be the joy of him who help those that be in need of assistance even so be the great nirv na . we reach the immortal path only by continuous act of kindliness and we perfect our soul by compassion and charity . an thapindika invite s riputta to accompany him on his return to kosala and help him in select a pleasant site for the vih ra . . jetavana . an thapindika the friend of the destitute and the supporter of orphan have return home saw the garden of the heir apparent jeta with it green grove and limpid rivulet and thought this be the place which will be most suitable a a vih ra for the brotherhood of the blessed one . and he go to the prince and ask leave to buy the ground . the prince be not incline to sell the garden for he value it highly . he at first refuse but say at last if thou canst cover it with gold then and for no other price shalt thou have it . an thapindika rejoice and begin to spread his gold but jeta say spare thyself the trouble for i will not sell . but an thapindika insist . thus they contend until they resort to the magistrate . meanwhile the people begin to talk of the unwonted proceeding and the prince hear more of the detail and know that an thapindika be not only very wealthy but also straightforward and sincere inquire into his plan . on hear the name of the buddha the prince become anxious to share in the foundation and he accept only one half of the gold say yours be the land but mine be the tree . i will give the tree a my share of this offering to the buddha . then an thapindika take the land and jeta the tree and they place them in trust of s riputta for the buddha . after the foundation be lay they begin to build the hall which rise loftily in due proportion accord to the direction which the buddha have suggest and it be beautifully decorate with appropriate carving . this vih ra be call jetavana and the friend of the orphan invite the lord to come to s vatthi and receive the donation . and the blessed one leave kapilavatthu and come to s vatthi . while the blessed one be enter jetavana an thapindika scatter flower and burn incense and a a sign of the gift he pour water from a golden dragon decanter say this jetavana vih ra i give for the use of the brotherhood throughout the world . the blessed one receive the gift and reply may all evil influence be overcome may the offering promote the kingdom of righteousness and be a permanent blessing to mankind in general to the land of kosala and especially also to the giver . then the king pasenadi hearing that the lord have come go in his royal equipage to the jetavana vih ra and salute the bless one with clasped hand say bless be my unworthy and obscure kingdom that it have meet with so great a fortune . for how can calamity and danger befall it in the presence of the lord of the world the dharmar ja the king of truth . now that i have see thy sacred countenance let me partake of the refresh water of thy teaching . worldly profit be fleeting and perishable but religious profit be eternal and inexhaustible . a worldly man though a king be full of trouble but even a common man who be holy have peace of mind . know the tendency of the king 's heart weigh down by avarice and love of pleasure the buddha seize the opportunity and say even those who by their evil karma have be bear in low degree when they see a virtuous man feel reverence for him . how much more must an independent king on account of merit acquire in previous existence when meet a buddha conceive reverence for him . and now a i briefly expound the law let the mah r ja listen and weigh my word and hold fast that which i deliver ! our good or evil deed follow u continually like shadow . that which be most need be a loving heart ! regard thy people a men do an only son . do not oppress them do not destroy them keep in due check every member of thy body forsake unrighteous doctrine and walk in the straight path . exalt not thyself by trample down others but comfort and befriend the suffering . neither ponder on kingly dignity nor listen to the smooth word of flatterer . there be no profit in vex oneself by austerity but meditate on the buddha and weigh his righteous law . we be encompass on all side by the rock of birth old age disease and death and only by consider and practise the true law can we escape from this sorrow pile mountain . what profit then in practise iniquity ? all who be wise spurn the pleasure of the body . they loathe lust and seek to promote their spiritual existence . when a tree be burn with fierce flame how can the bird congregate therein ? truth can not dwell where passion live . he who do not know this though he be a learned man and be praise by others a a sage be becloud with ignorance . to him who have this knowledge true wisdom dawn and he will beware of hanker after pleasure . to acquire this state of mind wisdom be the one thing needful . to neglect wisdom will lead to failure in life . the teaching of all religion should center here for without wisdom there be no reason . this truth be not for the hermit alone it concern every human be priest and layman alike . there be no distinction between the monk who have take the vow and the man of the world living with his family . there be hermit who fall into perdition and there be humble householder who mount to the rank of rishis . hankering after pleasure be a danger common to all it carry away the world . he who be involve in it eddy find no escape . but wisdom be the handy boat reflection be the rudder . the slogan of religion call you to overcome the assault of m ra the enemy . since it be impossible to escape the result of our deed let u practise good work . let u guard our thought that we do no evil for a we sow so shall we reap . there be way from light into darkness and from darkness into light . there be way also from the gloom into deep darkness and from the dawn into brighter light . the wise man will use the light he have to receive more fight . he will constantly advance in the knowledge of truth . exhibit true superiority by virtuous conduct and the exercise of reason meditate deeply on the vanity of earthly thing and understand the fickleness of life . elevate the mind and seek sincere faith with firm purpose transgress not the rule of kingly conduct and let your happiness depend not upon external thing but upon your own mind . thus you will lay up a good name for distant age and will secure the favor of the tath gata . the king listen with reverence and remember all the word of the buddha in his heart . xxvi . the three characteristic and the uncreate . when the buddha be stay at the veluvana the bamboo grove at r jagaha he address the brother thus whether buddhas arise o priest or whether buddha do not arise it remain a fact and the fixed and necessary constitution of be that all conformation be transitory . this fact a buddha discovers and master and when he have discover and master it he announce teach publishes proclaim discloses minutely explains and make it clear that all conformation be transitory . whether buddhas arise o priest or whether buddha do not arise it remain a fact and a fixed and necessary constitution of be that all conformation be suffer . this fact a buddha discovers and master and when he have discover and master it he announce publishes proclaim discloses minutely explains and make it clear that all conformation be suffer . whether buddhas arise o priest or whether buddha do not arise it remain a fact and a fixed and necessary constitution of be that all conformation be lack a self . this fact a buddha discovers and master and when he have discover and master it he announce teach publishes proclaim discloses minutely explains and make it clear that all conformation be lack a self . and on another occasion the bless one dwelt at s vatthi in the jetavana the garden of an thapindika . at that time the bless one edify arouse quicken and gladden the monk with a religious discourse on the subject of nirv na . and these monk grasp the meaning think it out and accept with their heart the whole doctrine listen attentively . but there be one brother who have some doubt leave in his heart . he arise and clasp his hand make the request may i be permit to ask a question ? when permission be grant he speak a follow the buddha teach that all conformation be transient that all conformation be subject to sorrow that all conformation be lack a self . how then can there be nirv na a state of eternal bliss ? and the blessed one in this connection on that occasion breathe forth this solemn utterance there be o monk a state where there be neither earth nor water nor heat nor air neither infinity of space nor infinity of consciousness nor nothingness nor perception nor non perception neither this world nor that world neither sun nor moon . it be the uncreate . that o monk i term neither come nor go nor stand neither death nor birth . it be without stability without change it be the eternal which never originate and never pass away . there be the end of sorrow . it be hard to realize the essential the truth be not easily perceive desire be master by him who know and to him who see aright all thing be naught . there be o monk an unborn unoriginated uncreated unformed . be there not o monk this unborn unoriginated uncreated unformed there would be no escape from the world of the born originate create form . since o monk there be an unborn unoriginated uncreated and unformed therefore be there an escape from the born originate create form . xxvii . the buddha 's father . the buddha 's name become famous over all india and suddhodana his father send word to him say i be grow old and wish to see my son before i die . others have have the benefit of his doctrine but not his father nor his relative . and the messenger say o world honor tath gata thy father look for thy come a the lily longs for the rising of the sun . the blessed one consent to the request of his father and set out on his journey to kapilavatthu . soon the tidings spread in the native country of the buddha prince siddhattha who wander forth from home into homelessness to obtain enlightenment have attain his purpose be come back . suddhodana go out with his relative and minister to meet the prince . when the king saw siddhattha his son from afar he be strike with his beauty and dignity and he rejoice in his heart but his mouth find no word to utter . this indeed be his son these be the feature of siddhattha . how near be the great samana to his heart and yet what a distance lay between them ! that noble muni be no long siddhattha his son he be the buddha the bless one the holy one lord of truth and teacher of mankind . suddhodana the king consider the religious dignity of his son descend from his chariot and after salute his son say it be now seven year since i have see thee . how i have long for this moment ! then the sakyamuni take a seat opposite his father and the king gaze eagerly at his son . he long to call him by his name but he dare not . siddhattha he exclaim silently in his heart siddhattha come back to thine age father and be his son again ! but see the determination of his son he suppress his sentiment and desolation overcame him . thus the king sit face to face with his son rejoice in his sadness and sad in his rejoicing . well might he be proud of his son but his pride break down at the idea that his great son would never be his heir . i would offer thee my kingdom say the king but if i do thou wouldst account it but a ash . and the buddha say i know that the king 's heart be full of love and that for his son 's sake he feel deep grief . but let the tie of love that bind him to the son whom he lose embrace with equal kindness all his fellow being and he will receive in his place a great one than siddhattha he will receive the buddha the teacher of truth the preacher of righteousness and the peace of nirv na will enter into his heart . suddhodana tremble with joy when he hear the melodious word of his son the buddha and clasp his hand exclaim with tear in his eye wonderful be this change ! the overwhelming sorrow have pass away . at first my sorrow heart be heavy but now i reap the fruit of thy great renunciation . it be right that move by thy mighty sympathy thou shouldst reject the pleasure of royal power and achieve thy noble purpose in religious devotion . now that thou hast find the path thou canst preach the law of immortality to all the world that yearn for deliverance . the king return to the palace while the buddha remain in the grove before the city . xxviii . yasodhar . on the next morning the buddha take his bowl and set out to beg his food . and the news spread abroad prince siddhattha be go from house to house to receive alms in the city where he use to ride in a chariot attend by bi retinue . his robe be like a red clod and he hold in his hand an earthen bowl . on hear the strange rumor the king go forth in great haste and when he meet his son he exclaim why dost thou thus disgrace me ? knowest thou not that i can easily supply thee and thy bhikkhus with food ? and the buddha reply it be the custom of my race . but the king say how can this be ? thou art descend from king and not one of them ever beg for food . o great king rejoin the buddha thou and thy race may claim descent from king my descent be from the buddha of old . they beg their food live on alms . the king make no reply and the blessed one continue it be customary o king when one have find a hidden treasure for him to make an offering of the most precious jewel to his father . suffer me therefore to open this treasure of mine which be the dharma and accept from me this gem and the blessed one recite the follow stanza rise from dream and loiter not open to truth thy mind . practise righteousness and thou eternal bliss shalt find . then the king conduct the prince into the palace and the minister and all the member of the royal family greet him with great reverence but yasodhar the mother of r hula do not make her appearance . the king sent for yasodhar but she reply surely if i be deserve of any regard siddhattha will come and see me . the blessed one have greet all his relative and friend ask where be yasodhar ? and on be inform that she have refuse to come he rise straightway and go to her apartment . i be free the blessed one say to his disciple s riputta and moggall na whom he have bid to accompany him to the princess 's chamber the princess however be not a yet free . not have see me for a long time she be exceedingly sorrowful . unless her grief be allow it course her heart will cleave . should she touch the tath gata the holy one ye must not prevent her . yasodhar sat in her room dress in mean garment and her hair cut . when prince siddhattha enter she be from the abundance of her affection like an overflow vessel unable to contain her love . forgetting that the man whom she love be the buddha the lord of the world the preacher of truth she hold him by his foot and weep bitterly . remember however that suddhodana be present she felt ashamed and rise seat herself reverently at a little distance . the king apologize for the princess say this arise from her deep affection and be more than a temporary emotion . during the seven year that she have lose her husband when she hear that siddhattha have shave his head she do likewise when she hear that he have leave off the use of perfume and ornament she also refuse their use . like her husband she have eat at appoint time from an earthen bowl only . like him she have renounce high bed with splendid covering and when other prince ask her in marriage she reply that she be still his . therefore grant her forgiveness . and the blessed one speak kindly to yasodhar telling of her great merit inherit from former life . she have indeed be again and again of great assistance to him . her purity her gentleness her devotion have be invaluable to the bodhisatta when he aspire to attain enlightenment the high aim of mankind . and so holy have she be that she desire to become the wife of a buddha . this then be her karma and it be the result of great merit . her grief have be unspeakable but the consciousness of the glory that surround her spiritual inheritance increase by her noble attitude during her life will be a balm that will miraculously transform all sorrow into heavenly joy . xxix . r hula . many people in kapilavatthu believe in the tath gata and take refuge in his doctrine among them nanda siddhattha 's halfbrother the son of paj pat devadatta his cousin and brother in law up li the barber and anuruddha the philosopher . some year later nanda another cousin of the blessed one also join the sangha . nanda be a man after the heart of the blessed one he be his most beloved disciple profound in comprehension and gentle in spirit . and nanda remain always near the blessed master of truth until death part them . on the seventh day after the buddha 's arrival in kapilavatthu yasodhar dress r hula now seven year old in all the splendor of a prince and say to him this holy man whose appearance be so glorious that he look like the great brahm be thy father . he possess four great mine of wealth which i have not yet see . go to him and entreat him to put thee in possession of them for the son ought to inherit the property of his father . r hula reply i know of no father but the king . who be my father ? the princess take the boy in her arm and from the window she point out to him the buddha who happen to be near the palace partaking of food . r hula then go to the buddha and look up into his face say without fear and with much affection my father ! and stand near by him he add o samana even thy shadow be a place of bliss ! when the tath gata have finish his repast he give blessing and go away from the palace but r hula follow and ask his father for his inheritance . no one prevent the boy nor do the blessed one himself . then the bless one turn to s riputta say my son ask for his inheritance . i can not give him perishable treasure that will bring care and sorrow but i can give him the inheritance of a holy life which be a treasure that will not perish . address r hula with earnestness the bless one say gold and silver and jewel be not in my possession . but if thou art willing to receive spiritual treasure and art strong enough to carry them and to keep them i shall give thee the four truth which will teach thee the eightfold path of righteousness . dost thou desire to be admit to the brotherhood of those who devote their life to the culture of the heart seek for the high bliss attainable ? and r hula reply with firmness i do . i want to join the brotherhood of the buddha . when the king heard that r hula have join the brotherhood of bhikkhus he be grieve . he have lose siddhattha and nanda his son and devadatta his nephew . but now that his grandson have be take from him he go to the bless one and speak to him . and the blessed one promise that from that time forward he would not ordain any minor without the consent of his parent or guardian . consolidation of the buddha 's religion . . j vaka the physician . long before the blessed one have attain enlightenment self mortification have be the custom among those who earnestly seek for salvation . deliverance of the soul from all the necessity of life and finally from the body itself they regard a the aim of religion . thus they avoid everything that might be a luxury in food shelter and clothing and live like the beast in the wood . some go naked while others wear the rag cast away upon cemetery or dungheaps . when the bless one retire from the world he recognize at once the error of the naked ascetic and consider the indecency of their habit clad himself in cast off rag . have attain enlightenment and reject all unnecessary self mortification the bless one and his bhikkhus continue for a long time to wear the cast off rag of cemetery and dung heap . then it happen that the bhikkhus be visit with disease of all kind and the blessed one permit and explicitly order the use of medicine and among them he even enjoin whenever need the use of unguent . one of the brother suffer from a sore on his foot and the blessed one enjoin the bhikkhus to wear foot covering . now it happen that a disease befell the body of the blessed one himself and nanda go to j vaka physician to bimbis ra the king . and j vaka a faithful believer in the holy one minister unto the blessed one with medicine and bath until the body of the blessed one be completely restore . at that time pajjota king of ujjen be suffer from jaundice and j vaka the physician to king bimbis ra be consult . when king pajjota have be restore to health he send to j vaka a suit of the most excellent cloth . and j vaka say to himself this suit be make of the best cloth and nobody be worthy to receive it but the blessed one the perfect and holy buddha or the magadha king senija bimbis ra . then j vaka take that suit and go to the place where the blessed one be have approach him and have respectfully salute the blessed one he sit down near him and say lord i have a boon to ask of the blessed one . the buddha reply the tath gatas j vaka do not grant boon before they know what they be . j vaka say lord it be a proper and unobjectionable request . speak j vaka say the bless one . lord of the world the bless one wear only robes make of rag take from a dung heap or a cemetery and so also do the brotherhood of bhikkhus . now lord this suit have be send to me by king pajjota which be the best and most excellent and the fine and the most precious and the noble that can be find . lord of the world may the blessed one accept from me this suit and may he allow the brotherhood of bhikkhus to wear lay robe . the blessed one accept the suit and after have deliver a religious discourse he address the bhikkhus thus henceforth ye shall be at liberty to wear either cast off rag or lay robe . whether ye be please with the one or with the other i will approve of it . when the people at r jagaha hear the bless one have allow the bhikkhus to wear lay robe those who be willing to bestow gift become glad . and in one day many thousand of robe be present at r jagaha to the bhikkhus . xxxi . the buddha 's parent attain nirv na . when suddhodana have grow old he fell sick and send for his son to come and see him once more before he die and the blessed one come and stay at the sick bed and suddhodana have attain perfect enlightenment die in the arm of the blessed one . and it be say that the blessed one for the sake of preach to his mother m y dev ascend to heaven and dwell with the devas . have conclude his pious mission he return to the earth and go about again convert those who listen to his teaching . xxxii . woman admit to the sangha . yasodhar have three time request of the buddha that she might be admit to the sangha but her wish have not be grant . now paj pat the foster mother of the blessed one in the company of yasodhar and many other woman go to the tath gata entreat him earnestly to let them take the vow and be ordain a disciple . and the blessed one foresee the danger that lurk in admit woman to the sangha protest that while the good religion ought surely to last a thousand year it would when woman join it likely decay after five hundred year but observe the zeal of paj pat and yasodhar for lead a religious life he could no longer resist and assent to have them admit a his disciple . then the venerable nanda address the blessed one thus be woman competent venerable lord if they retire from household life to the homeless state under the doctrine and discipline announce by the tath gata to attain to the fruit of conversion to attain to a release from a wearisome repetition of rebirth to attain to saintship ? and the blessed one declare woman be competent nanda if they retire from household life to the homeless state under the doctrine and discipline announce by the tath gata to attain to the fruit of conversion to attain to a release from a wearisome repetition of rebirth to attain to saintship . consider nanda how great a benefactress paj pat have be . she be the sister of the mother of the bless one and a foster mother and nurse rear the bless one after the death of his mother . so nanda woman may retire from household life to the homeless state under the doctrine and discipline announce by the tath gata . paj pat be the first woman to become a disciple of the buddha and to receive the ordination a a bhikkhun . xxxiii . the bhikkhus ' conduct toward woman . the bhikkhus come to the bless one and ask him o tath gata our lord and master what conduct toward woman dost thou prescribe to the samanas who have leave the world ? and the blessed one say guard against look on a woman . if ye see a woman let it be a though ye saw her not and have no conversation with her . if after all ye must speak with her let it be with a pure heart and think to yourself ' i a a samana will live in this sinful world a the spotless leaf of the lotus unsoiled by the mud in which it grow . ' if the woman be old regard her a your mother if young a your sister if very young a your child . the samana who look on a woman a a woman or touch her a a woman have break his vow and be no longer a disciple of the tath gata . the power of lust be great with men and be to be fear withal take then the bow of earnest perseverance and the sharp arrow point of wisdom . cover your head with the helmet of right thought and fight with fixed resolve against the five desire . lust becloud a man 's heart when it be confuse with woman 's beauty and the mind be daze . well far with red hot iron bore out both your eye than encourage in yourself sensual thought or look upon a woman 's form with lustful desire . good fall into the fierce tiger 's mouth or under the sharp knife of the executioner than dwell with a woman and excite in yourself lustful thought . a woman of the world be anxious to exhibit her form and shape whether walk stand sit or sleep . even when represent a a picture she desire to captivate with the charm of her beauty and thus to rob men of their steadfast heart . how then ought ye to guard yourselves ? by regard her tear and her smile a enemy her stooping form her hanging arm and her disentangled hair a toil design to entrap man 's heart . therefore i say restrain the heart give it no unbridled license . xxxiv . vi kh . vi kh a wealthy woman in s vatthi who have many child and grandchild have give to the order the pubb r ma or eastern garden and be the first in northern kosala to become a matron of the lay sister . when the bless one stay at s vatthi vi kh go up to the place where the blessed one be and tender him an invitation to take his meal at her house which the bless one accept . and a heavy rain fell during the night and the next morning and the bhikkhus doff their robe to keep them dry and let the rain fall upon their body . when on the next day the bless one have finish his meal she take her seat at his side and speak thus eight be the boon lord which i beg of the blessed one . say the bless one the tath gatas o vi kh grant no boon until they know what they be . vi kh reply befitting lord and unobjectionable be the boon i ask . have receive permission to make known her request vis kh say i desire lord through all my life long to bestow robe for the rainy season on the sangha and food for incoming bhikkhus and food for outgo bhikkhus and food for the sick and food for those who wait upon the sick and medicine for the sick and a constant supply of rice milk for the sangha and bathing robe for the bhikkhun s the sister . say the buddha but what circumstance be it o vi kh that thou hast in view in ask these eight boon of the tath gata ? and vi kh reply i give command lord to my maid servant say 'go and announce to the brotherhood that the meal be ready . ' and the maid go but when she come to the vih ra she observe that the bhikkhus have doff their robe while it be rain and she think 'these be not bhikkhus but naked ascetic let the rain fall on them . ' so she return to me and report accordingly and i have to send her a second time . impure lord be nakedness and revolt . it be this circumstance lord that i have in view in desire to provide the sangha my life long with special garment for use in the rainy season . a to my second wish lord an incoming bhikkhu not be able to take the direct road and not know the place where food can be procure come on his way tire out by seek for alms . it be this circumstance lord that i have in view in desire to provide the sangha my life long with food for incoming bhikkhus . thirdly lord an outgoing bhikkhu while seek about for alms may be leave behind or may arrive too late at the place whither he desire to go and will set out on the road in weariness . fourthly lord if a sick bhikkhu do not obtain suitable food his sickness may increase upon him and he may die . fifthly lord a bhikkhu who be wait upon the sick will lose his opportunity of go out to seek food for himself . sixthly lord if a sick bhikkhu do not obtain suitable medicine his sickness may increase upon him and he may die . seventhly lord i have hear that the bless one have praise rice milk because it give readiness of mind dispels hunger and thirst it be wholesome for the healthy a nourishment and for the sick a a medicine . therefore i desire to provide the sangha my life long with a constant supply of rice milk . finally lord the bhikkhun s be in the habit of bath in the river achiravat with the courtesan at the same landing place and naked . and the courtesan lord ridicule the bhikkhun s say 'what be the good lady of your maintain chastity when you be young ? when you be old maintain chastity then thus will you obtain both worldly pleasure and religious consolation . ' impure lord be nakedness for a woman disgust and revolt . these be the circumstance lord that i have in view . the blessed one say but what be the advantage you have in view for yourself o vi kh in ask the eight boon of the tath gatha ? vi kh reply bhikkhus who have spend the rainy season in various place will come lord to s vatthi to visit the blessed one . and on come to the bless one they will ask say 'such and such a bhikkhu lord have die . what now be his destiny ? ' then will the blessed one explain that he have attain the fruit of conversion that he have attain arahatship or have enter nirv na a the case may be . and i go up to them will ask 'was that brother sirs one of those who have formerly be at s vatthi ? ' if they reply to me 'he have formerly be at s vatthi ' then shall i arrive at the conclusion 'for a certainty do that brother enjoy either the robe for the rainy season or the food for the incoming bhikkhus or the food for the outgoing bhikkhus or the food for the sick or the food for those that wait upon the sick or the medicine for the sick or the constant supply of rice milk . ' then will gladness spring up within me thus gladden joy will come to me and so rejoice all my mind will be at peace . be thus at peace i shall experience a blissful feeling of content and in that bliss my heart will be at rest . that will be to me an exercise of my moral sense an exercise of my moral power an exercise of the seven kind of wisdom ! this lord be the advantage i have in view for myself in ask those eight boon of the blessed one . the blessed one say it be well it be well vis kh . thou hast do well in ask these eight boon of the tath gata with such advantage in view . charity bestow upon those who be worthy of it be like good seed sow on a good soil that yield an abundance of fruit . but alms give to those who be yet under the tyrannical yoke of the passion be like seed deposit in a bad soil . the passion of the receiver of the alms choke a it be the growth of merit . and the blessed one give thanks to vis kh in these verse o noble woman of an upright life disciple of the blessed one thou givest unstintedly in purity of heart . thou spread joy assuagest pain and verily thy gift will be a blessing as well to many others a to thee . . the uposatha and p timokkha . when seniya bimbis ra the king of magadha be advance in year he retire from the world and lead a religious life . he observe that there be brahmanical sect in r jagaha keep sacred certain day and the people go to their meeting house and listen to their sermon . concern the need of keep regular day for retirement from worldly labor and religious instruction the king go to the bless one and say the parivr jaka who belong to the titthiya school prosper and gain adherent because they keep the eighth day and also the fourteenth or fifteenth day of each half month . would it not be advisable for the reverend brother of the sangha also to assemble on day duly appoint for that purpose ? and the blessed one command the bhikkhus to assemble on the eighth day and also on the fourteenth or fifteenth day of each half month and to devote these day to religious exercise . a bhikkhu duly appoint should address the congregation and expound the dharma . he should exhort the people to walk in the eightfold path of righteousness he should comfort them in the vicissitude of life and gladden them with the bliss of the fruit of good deed . thus the brother should keep the uposatha . now the bhikkhus in obedience to the rule lay down by the blessed one assemble in the vih ra on the day appoint and the people go to hear the dharma but they be greatly disappoint for the bhikkhus remain silent and deliver no discourse . when the bless one heard of it he order the bhikkhus to recite the p timokkha which be a ceremony of disburden the conscience and he command them to make confession of their trespass so a to receive the absolution of the order . a fault if there be one should be confess by the bhikkhu who remember it and desire to be cleanse . for a fault when confess shall be light on him . and the blessed one say the p timokkha must be recite in this way let a competent and venerable bhikkhu make the following proclamation to the sangha 'may the sangha hear me ! to day be uposatha the eighth or the fourteenth or fifteenth day of the half month . if the sangha be ready let the sangha hold the uposatha service and recite the p timokkha . i will recite the p timokkha . ' and the bhikkhus shall reply 'we hear it well and we concentrate well our mind on it all of u . ' then the officiate bhikkhu shall continue 'let him who have commit an offence confess it if there be no offence let all remain silent from your be silent i shall understand that the reverend brother be free from offence . 'as a single person who have be ask a question answer it so also if before an assembly like this a question be solemnly proclaim three time an answer be expect if a bhikkhu after a threefold proclamation do not confess an exist offence which he remember he commit an intentional falsehood . 'now reverend brother an intentional falsehood have be declare an impediment by the blessed one . therefore if an offence have be commit by a bhikkhu who remember it and desire to become pure the offence should be confess by the bhikkhu and when it have be confess it be treat duly . ' xxxvi . the schism . while the blessed one dwelt at kosamb a certain bhikkhu be accuse of have commit an offence and a he refuse to acknowledge it the brotherhood pronounce against him the sentence of expulsion . now that bhikkhu be erudite . he know the dharma have study the rule of the order and be wise learn intelligent modest conscientious and ready to submit himself to discipline . and he go to his companion and friend among the bhikkhus say this be no offence friends this be no reason for a sentence of expulsion . i be not guilty . the verdict be unconstitutional and invalid . therefore i consider myself still a a member of the order . may the venerable brother assist me in maintain my right . those who side with the expelled brother go to the bhikkhus who have pronounce the sentence say this be no offence while the bhikkhus who have pronounce the sentence reply this be an offence . thus altercation and quarrel arise and the sangha be divide into two party revile and slander each other . and all these happening be report to the bless one . then the bless one go to the place where the bhikkhus be who have pronounce the sentence of expulsion and say to them do not think o bhikkhus that you be to pronounce expulsion against a bhikkhu whatever be the fact of the case simply by say 'it occurs to u that it be so and therefore we be pleased to proceed thus against our brother . ' let those bhikkhus who frivolously pronounce a sentence against a brother who know the dharma and the rule of the order who be learn wise intelligent modest conscientious and ready to submit himself to discipline stand in awe of cause division . they must not pronounce a sentence of expulsion against a brother merely because he refuse to see his offence . then the bless one rise and go to the brother who side with the expelled brother and say to them do not think o bhikkhus that if you have give offence you need not atone for it think 'we be without offence . ' when a bhikkhu have commit an offence which he consider no offence while the brotherhood consider him guilty he should think 'these brother know the dharma and the rule of the order they be learn wise intelligent modest conscientious and ready to submit themselves to discipline it be impossible that they should on my account act with selfishness or in malice or in delusion or in fear . ' let him stand in awe of cause division and rather acknowledge his offence on the authority of his brother . both party continue to keep uposatha and perform official act independently of one another and when their doings be relate to the bless one he rule that the keep of uposatha and the performance of official act be lawful unobjectionable and valid for both party . for he say the bhikkhus who side with the expelled brother form a different communion from those who pronounce the sentence . there be venerable brother in both party . a they do not agree let them keep uposatha and perform official act separately . and the blessed one reprimand the quarrelsome bhikkhus say to them loud be the voice which worldling make but how can they be blame when division arise also in the sangha ? hatred be not appease in those who think 'he have revile me he have wrong me he have injure me . ' for not by hatred be hatred appeased . hatred be appease by not hatred . this be an eternal law . there be some who do not know the need of self restraint if they be quarrelsome we may excuse their behavior . but those who know good should learn to live in concord . if a man find a wise friend who live righteously and be constant in his character he may live with him overcome all danger happy and mindful . but if he find not a friend who live righteously and be constant in his character let him rather walk alone like a king who leave his empire and the care of government behind him to lead a life of retirement like a lonely elephant in the forest . with fool there be no companionship . rather than to live with men who be selfish vain quarrelsome and obstinate let a man walk alone . and the blessed one thought to himself it be no easy task to instruct these headstrong and infatuate fool . and he rise from his seat and go away . xxxvii . the re establishment of concord . whilst the dispute between the party be not yet settle the bless one leave kosamb and wander from place to place he come at last to s vatthi . and in the absence of the bless one the quarrel grow bad so that the jay devotee of kosamb become annoyed and they say these quarrelsome monk be a great nuisance and will bring upon u misfortune . worry by their altercation the blessed one be go and have select another abode for his residence . let u therefore neither salute the bhikkhus nor support them . they be not worthy of wear yellow robe and must either propitiate the blessed one or return to the world . and the bhikkhus of kosamb when no longer honor and no longer support by the lay devote begin to repent and say let u go to the bless one and let him settle the question of our disagreement . and both party go to savatthi to the bless one . and the venerable s riputta have hear of their arrival address the bless one and say these contentious disputatious and quarrelsome bhikkhus of kosamb the author of dissension have come to s vatthi . how be i to behave o lord toward those bhikkhus . do not reprove them s riputta say the bless one for harsh word do not serve a a remedy and be pleasant to no one . assign separate dwelling place to each party and treat them with impartial justice . listen with patience to both party . he alone who weigh both side be call a muni . when both party have present their case let the sangha come to an agreement and declare the re establishment of concord . and p japat the matron ask the blessed one for advice and the blessed one say let both party enjoy the gift of lay member be they rob or food a they may need and let no one receive any noticeable preference over any other . and the venerable up li have approach the blessed one ask concern the re establishment of peace in the sangha would it be right o lord say he that the sangha to avoid further disputation should declare the restoration of concord without inquire into the matter of the quarrel ? and the blessed one say if the sangha declare the re establishment of concord without have inquire into the matter the declaration be neither right nor lawful . there be two way of re establish concord one be in the letter and the other one be in the spirit and in the letter . if the sangha declare the re establishment of concord without have inquire into the matter the peace be conclude in the letter only . but if the sangha have inquire into the matter and have go to the bottom of it decide to declare the re establishment of concord the peace be conclude in the spirit and also in the letter . the concord re establish in the spirit and in the letter be alone right and lawful . and the blessed one address the bhikkhus and tell them the story of prince d gh vu the long lived . he say in former time there live at benares a powerful king whose name be brahmadatta of k si and he go to war against d gh ti the long suffer a king of kosala for he think 'the kingdom of kosala be small and d gh ti will not be able to resist my army . ' and d gh ti see that resistance be impossible against the great host of the king of k si flee leave his little kingdom in the hand of brahmadatta and have wander from place to place he come at last to benares and live there with his consort in a potter 's dwelling outside the town . and the queen bore him a son and they call him d gh vu . when d gh vu have grow up the king thought to himself 'king brahmadatta have do u great harm and he be fear our revenge he will seek to kill u . should he find u he will slay all three of u . ' and he send his son away and d gh vu have receive a good education from his father apply himself diligently to learn all art become very skilful and wise . at that time the barber of king d gh ti dwelt at benares and he saw the king his former master and be of an avaricious nature betray him to king brahmadatta . when brahmadatta the king of k si heard that the fugitive king of kosala and his queen unknown and in disguise be live a quiet life in a potter 's dwelling he order them to be bind and execute and the sheriff to whom the order be give seized king d gh ti and lead him to the place of execution . while the captive king be be lead through the street of benares he saw his son who have return to visit his parent and careful not to betray the presence of his son yet anxious to communicate to him his last advice he cry ' o d gh vu my son ! be not far sight be not near sight for not by hatred be hatred appeased hatred be appease by not hatred only . ' the king and queen of kosala be execute but d gh vu their son buy strong wine and make the guard drunk . when the night arrive he lay the body of his parent upon a funeral pyre and burn them with all honor and religious rite . when king brahmadatta heard of it he become afraid for he think 'd gh vu the son of king d gh ti be a wise youth and he will take revenge for the death of his parent . if he espy a favorable opportunity he will assassinate me . ' young d gh vu go to the forest and wept to his heart 's content . then he wipe his tear and return to benares . hear that assistant be want in the royal elephant ' stable he offer his service and be engage by the master of the elephant . and it happen that the king heard a sweet voice ring through the night and singing to the lute a beautiful song that gladden his heart . and have inquire among his attendant who the singer might be be tell that the master of the elephant have in his service a young man of great accomplishment and beloved by all his comrade . they say 'he be wont to sing to the lute and he must have be the singer that gladden the heart of the king . ' and the king summon the young man before him and be much please with d gh vu give him employment in the royal castle . observe how wisely the youth act how modest he be and yet punctilious in the performance of his work the king very soon give him a position of trust . now it come to pass that the king go hunt and become separate from his retinue young d gh vu alone remain with him . and the king wear out from the hunt lay his head in the lap of young d gh vu and slept . and d gh vu think 'people will forgive great wrong which they have suffer but they will never be at ease about the wrong which they themselves have do . they will persecute their victim to the bitter end . this king brahmadatta have do u great injury he rob u of our kingdom and slew my father and my mother . he be now in my power . ' think thus he unsheathe his sword . then d gh vu thought of the last word of his father . 'be not far sight be not near sight . for not by hatred be hatred appeased . hatred be appease by not hatred alone . ' think thus he put his sword back into the sheath . the king become restless in his sleep and he awake and when the youth ask 'why art thou frighten o king ? ' he reply 'my sleep be always restless because i often dream that young d gh vu be come upon me with his sword . while i lay here with my head in thy lap i dream the dreadful dream again and i awake full of terror and alarm . ' then the youth lay his left hand upon the defenceless king 's head and with his right hand draw his sword say ' i be d gh vu the son of king d gh ti whom thou hast robbed of his kingdom and slay together with his queen my mother . i know that men overcome the hatred entertain for wrong which they have suffer much more easily than for the wrong which they have do and so i can not expect that thou wilt take pity on me but now a chance for revenge have come to me . ' the king seeing that he be at the mercy of young d gh vu raise his hand and say 'grant me my life my dear d gh vu grant me my life . i shall be forever grateful to thee . ' and d gh vu say without bitterness or ill will 'how can i grant thee thy life o king since my life be endanger by thee . i do not mean to take thy life . it be thou o king who must grant me my life . ' and the king say 'well my dear d gh vu then grant me my life and i will grant thee thine . ' thus king brahmadatta of k si and young d gh vu grant each other 's life and take each other 's hand and swore an oath not to do any harm to each other . and king brahmadatta of k si say to young d gh vu 'why do thy father say to thee in the hour of his death be not far sight be not near sight for hatred be not appease by hatred . hatred be appease by not hatred alone what do thy father mean by that ? ' the youth reply 'when my father o king in the hour of his death say be not far sight he mean let not thy hatred go far . and when my father say be not near sight he mean be not hasty to fall out with thy friend . and when he say for not by hatred be hatred appeased hatred be appease by not hatred he mean this thou hast kill my father and mother o king and if i should deprive thee of thy life then thy partisan in turn would take away my life my partisan again would deprive thine of their life . thus by hatred hatred would not be appease . but now o king thou hast grant me my life and i have grant thee thine thus by not hatred hatred have be appease . ' then king brahmadatta of k si think 'how wise be young d gh vu that he understand in it full extent the meaning of what his father speak concisely . ' and the king give him back his father 's kingdom and give him his daughter in marriage . have finish the story the blessed one say brother ye be my lawful son in the faith beget by the word of my mouth . child ought not to trample under foot the counsel give them by their father do ye henceforth follow my admonition . then the bhikkhus meet in conference they discuss their difference in mutual good will and the concord of the sangha be re establish . xxxviii . the bhikkhus rebuke . and it happen that the blessed one walk up and down in the open air unshod . when the elder saw that the blessed one walk unshod they put away their shoe and do likewise . but the novice do not heed the example of their elder and keep their foot cover . some of the brother notice the irreverent behavior of the novice and tell the bless one and the blessed one rebuke the novice and say if the brother even now while i be yet live show so little respect and courtesy to one another what will they do when i have pass away ? and the blessed one be fill with anxiety for the welfare of the truth and he continue even the layman o bhikkhus who move in the world pursue some handicraft that they may procure them a living will be respectful affectionate and hospitable to their teacher . do ye therefore o bhikkhus so let your light shine forth that ye have leave the world and devote your entire life to religion and to religious discipline may observe the rule of decency be respectful affectionate and hospitable to your teacher and superior or those who rank a your teacher and superior . your demeanor o bhikkhus do not conduce to the conversion of the unconverted and to the increase of the number of the faithful . it serve o bhikkhus to repel the unconverted and to estrange them . i exhort you to be more considerate in the future more thoughtful and more respectful xxxix . devadatta . when devadatta the son of suprabuddha and a brother of yasodhar become a disciple he cherish the hope of attain the same distinction and honor a gotama siddhattha . be disappoint in his ambition he conceive in his heart a jealous hatred and attempt to excel the perfect one in virtue he find fault with his regulation and reprove them a too lenient . devadatta go to r jagaha and gain the ear of aj tasattu the son of king bimbis ra . and aj tasattu build a new vih ra for devadatta and found a sect whose disciple be pledge to severe rule and self mortification . soon afterwards the blessed one himself come to r jagaha and stay at the veluvana vih ra . devadatta call on the bless one request him to sanction his rule of great stringency by which a great holiness might be procure . the body he say consist of it thirty two part and have no divine attribute . it be conceive in sin and bear in corruption . it attribute be liability to pain and dissolution for it be impermanent . it be the receptacle of karma which be the curse of our former existence it be the dwell place of sin and disease and it organ constantly discharge disgust secretion . it end be death and it goal the charnel house . such be the condition of the body it behoove u to treat it a a carcass full of abomination and to clothe it in such rag only as have be gather in cemetery or upon dung hill . the blessed one say truly the body be full of impurity and it end be the charnel house for it be impermanent and destine to be dissolve into it element . but be the receptacle of karma it lie in our power to make it a vessel of truth and not of evil . it be not good to indulge in the pleasure of the body but neither be it good to neglect our bodily need and to heap filth upon impurity . the lamp that be not cleanse and not fill with oil will be extinguish and a body that be unkempt unwashed and weaken by penance will not be a fit receptacle for the light of truth . attend to your body and it need a you would treat a wound which you care for without love it . severe rule will not lead the disciple on the middle path which i have teach . certainly no one can be prevent from keep more stringent rule if he see fit to do so but they should not be impose upon any one for they be unnecessary . thus the tath gata refuse devadatta 's proposal and devadatta leave the buddha and go into the vih ra speak evil of the lord 's path of salvation a too lenient and altogether insufficient . when the bless one heard of devadatta 's intrigue he say among men there be no one who be not blame . people blame him who sit silent and him who speak they also blame the man who preach the middle path . devadatta instigate aj tasattu to plot against his father bimbis ra the king so that the prince would no longer be subject to him bimbis ra be imprison by his son in a tower where he die leave the kingdom of magadha to his son aj tasattu . the new king listen to the evil advice of devadatta and he give order to take the life of the tath gata . however the murderer send out to kill the lord could not perform their wicked deed and become convert as soon a they saw him and listen to his preaching . the rock hurl down from a precipice upon the great master split in twain and the two piece pass by on either side without do any harm . nalagiri the wild elephant let loose to destroy the lord become gentle in his presence and aj tasattu suffer greatly from the pang of his conscience go to the bless one and seek peace in his distress . the blessed one receive aj tasattu kindly and teach him the way of salvation but devadatta still try to become the founder of a religious school of his own . devadatta do not succeed in his plan and have be abandon by many of his disciple he fell sick and then repent . he entreat those who have remain with him to carry his litter to the buddha say take me child take me to him though i have do evil to him i be his brother in law . for the sake of our relationship the buddha will save me . and they obey although reluctantly . and devadatta in his impatience to see the blessed one rise from his litter while his carrier be wash their hand . but his foot burn under him he sink to the ground and have chant a hymn on the buddha die . . name and form . on one occasion the bless one enter the assembly hall and the brother hush their conversation . when they have greet him with clasp hand they sit down and become compose . then the bless one say your mind be inflame with intense interest what be the topic of your discussion ? and s riputta rise and spake world honor master we be discuss the nature of man 's own existence . we be try to grasp the mixture of our own be which be call name and form . every human be consists of conformation and there be three group which be not corporeal . they be sensation perception and the disposition all three constitute consciousness and mind be comprise under the term name . and there be four element the earthy element the watery element the fiery element and the gaseous element and these four element constitute man 's bodily form be hold together so that this machine move like a puppet . how do this name and form endure and how can it live ? say the bless one life be instantaneous and living be die . just a a chariot wheel in roll roll only at one point of the tire and in rest rest only at one point in exactly the same way the life of a living be last only for the period of one thought . as soon a that thought have cease the be be say to have cease . a it have be say 'the be of a past moment of thought have live but do not live nor will it live . the be of a future moment of thought will live but have not live nor do it live . the be of the present moment of thought do live but have not live nor will it live . ' a to name and form we must understand how they interact . name have no power of it own nor can it go on of it own impulse either to eat or to drink or to utter sound or to make a movement . form also be without power and can not go on of it own impulse . it have no desire to eat or to drink or to utter sound or to make a movement . but form go on when support by name and name when support by form . when name have a desire to eat or to drink or to utter sound or to make a movement then form eats drink utters sound make a movement . it be a if two men the one blind from birth and the other a cripple be desirous of go travel and the man blind from birth be to say to the cripple a follow 'see here ! i be able to use my leg but i have no eye with which to see the rough and the smooth place in the road . ' and the cripple be to say to the man blind from birth a follow 'see here ! i be able to use my eye but i have no leg with which to go forward and back . ' and the man blind from birth please and delight be to mount the cripple on his shoulder . and the cripple sit on the shoulder of the man blind from birth be to direct him say 'leave the left and go to the right leave the right and go to the left . ' here the man blind from birth be without power of his own and weak and can not go of his own impulse or might . the cripple also be without power of his own and weak and can not go of his own impulse or might . yet when they mutually support one another it be not impossible for them to go . in exactly the same way name be without power of it own and can not spring up of it own might nor perform this or that action . form also be without power of it own and can not spring up of it own might nor perform this or that action . yet when they mutually support one another it be not impossible for them to spring up and go on . there be no material that exist for the production of name and form and when name and form cease they do not go anywhither in space . after name and form have cease they do not exist anywhere in the shape of heap up music material . thus when a lute be play upon there be no previous store of sound and when the music cease it do not go anywhither in space . when it have cease it exist nowhere in a store up state . have previously be non existent it come into existence on account of the structure and stem of the lute and the exertion of the performer and a it come into existence so it pass away . in exactly the same way all the element of be both corporeal and non corporeal come into existence after have previously be non existent and have come into existence pas away . there be not a self reside in name and form but the cooperation of the conformation produce what people call a man . just a the word 'chariot ' be but a mode of expression for axle wheel the chariot body and other constituent in their proper combination so a living be be the appearance of the group with the four element a they be join in a unit . there be no self in the carriage and there be no self in man . o bhikkhus this doctrine be sure and an eternal truth that there be no self outside of it part . this self of ours which constitute name and form be a combination of the group with the four element but there be no ego entity no self in itself . paradoxical though it may sound there be a path to walk on there be walk be do but there be no traveler . there be deed be do but there be no doer . there be a blowing of the air but there be no wind that do the blowing . the thought of self be an error and all existence be as hollow a the plantain tree and as empty a twirl water bubble . therefore o bhikkhus a there be no self there be no transmigration of a self but there be deed and the continued effect of deed . there be a rebirth of karma there be reincarnation . this rebirth this reincarnation this reappearance of the conformation be continuous and depend on the law of cause and effect . just a a seal be impress upon the wax reproduce the configuration of it device so the thought of men their character their aspiration be impressed upon others in continuous transference and continue their karma and good deed will continue in blessing while bad deed will continue in curse . there be no entity here that migrate no self be transfer from one place to another but there be a voice utter here and the echo of it come back . the teacher pronounce a stanza and the disciple who attentively listen to his teacher 's instruction repeat the stanza . thus the stanza be reborn in the mind of the disciple . the body be a compound of perishable organ . it be subject to decay and we should take care of it a of a wound or a sore we should attend to it need without be attach to it or love it . the body be like a machine and there be no self in it that make it walk or act but the thought of it a the windy element cause the machine to work . the body move about like a cart . therefore 't be say a ship be by the wind impel a arrow from their bowstring speed so likewise when the body move the windy element must lead . machine be gear to work by rope so too this body be in fact direct by a mental pull whene'er it stand or sit or act . no independent self be here that could intrinsic force prove to make man act without a cause to make him stand or walk or move . he only who utterly abandon all thought of the ego escape the snare of the evil one he be out of the reach of m ra . thus say the pleasure promising tempter so long a to the thing call 'mine ' and ' i ' and 'me ' thine anxious heart still cling my snare thou canst not flee . the faithful disciple reply naught 's mine and naught of me the self i do not mind ! thus m ra i tell thee my path thou canst not find . dismiss the error of the self and do not cling to possession which be transient but perform deed that be good for deed be endure and in deed your karma continue . since then o bhikkhus there be no self there can not be any after life of a self . therefore abandon all thought of self . but since there be deed and since deed continue be careful with your deed . all being have karma a their portion they be heir of their karma they be spring from their karma their karma be their kinsman their karma be their refuge karma allots being to meanness or to greatness . assail by death in life 's last throe on quit all thy joy and woe what be thine own thy recompense ? what stay with thee when pass hence ? what like a shadow follow thee and will beyond thine heirloom be ? t'is deed thy deed both good and bad naught else can after death be have . thy deed be thine thy recompense they be thine own when go hence they like a shadow follow thee and will beyond thine heirloom be . let all then here perform good deed for future weal a treasure store there to reap crop from noble seed a bliss increase evermore . xli . the goal . and the blessed one thus address the bhikkhus it be through not understand the four noble truth o bhikkhus that we have to wander so long in the weary path of sams ra both you and i. through contact think be bear from sensation and be reborn by a reproduction of it form . start from the simple form the mind rise and fall accord to deed but the aspiration of a bodhisatta pursue the straight path of wisdom and righteousness until they reach perfect enlightenment in the buddha . all creature be what they be through the karma of their deed do in former and in present existence . the rational nature of man be a spark of the true light it be the first step on the upward road . but new birth be require to insure an ascent to the summit of existence the enlightenment of mind and heart where the immeasurable light of moral comprehension be gain which be the source of all righteousness . have attain this high birth i have find the truth and have teach you the noble path that lead to the city of peace . i have show you the way to the lake of ambrosia which wash away all evil desire . i have give you the refresh drink call the perception of truth and he who drink of it become free from excitement passion and wrong do . the very god envy the bliss of him who have escape from the flood of passion and have climb the shore of nirv na . his heart be cleanse from all defilement and free from all illusion . he be like unto the lotus which grow in the water yet not a drop of water adheres to it petal . the man who walk in the noble path life in the world and yet his heart be not defile by worldly desire . he who do not see the four noble truth he who do not understand the three characteristic and have not ground himself in the uncreate have still a long path to traverse by repeated birth through the desert of ignorance with it mirage of illusion and through the morass of wrong . but now that you have gain comprehension the cause of further migration and aberration be remove . the goal be reach . the craving of selfishness be destroy and the truth be attain . this be true deliverance this be salvation this be heaven and the bliss of a life immortal . xlii . miracle forbidden . jotikkha the son of subhadda be a householder living in r jagaha . have receive a precious bowl of sandalwood decorate with jewel he erect a long pole before his house and put the bowl on it top with this legend should a samana take this bowl down without use a ladder or a stick with a hook or without climb the pole but by magic power he shall receive a reward whatever he desire . and the people come to the bless one full of wonder and their mouth overflow with praise say great be the tath gata . his disciple perform miracle . kassapa the disciple of the buddha saw the bowl on jotikkha 's pole and stretch out his hand he take it down carry it away in triumph to the vih ra . when the bless one heard what have happen he go to kassapa and break the bowl to piece forbid his disciple to perform miracle of any kind . soon after this it happen that in one of the rainy season many bhikkhus be stay in the vajj territory during a famine . and one of the bhikkhus propose to his brother that they should praise one another to the householder of the village say this bhikkhu be a saint he have see celestial vision and that bhikkhu possess supernatural gift he can work miracle . and the villager say it be lucky very lucky for u that such saint be spend the rainy season with u . and they give willingly and abundantly and the bhikkhus prosper and do not surfer from the famine . when the bless one heard it he tell nanda to call the bhikkhus together and he ask them tell me o bhikkhus when do a bhikkhu cease to be a bhikkhu ? and s riputta reply an ordained disciple must not commit any unchaste act . the disciple who commit an unchaste act be no longer a disciple of the sakyamuni . again an ordained disciple must not take except what have be give him . the disciple who take be it so little a a penny 's worth be no longer a disciple of the sakyamuni . and lastly an ordained disciple must not knowingly and malignantly deprive any harmless creature of life not even an earth worm or an ant . the disciple who knowingly and malignantly deprive any harmless creature of it life be no longer a disciple of the sakyamuni . these be the three great prohibition . and the blessed one address the bhikkhus and say there be another great prohibition which i declare to you an ordained disciple must not boast of any superhuman perfection . the disciple who with evil intent and from covetousness boast of a superhuman perfection be it celestial vision or miracle be no longer a disciple of the sakyamuni . i forbid you o bhikkhus to employ any spell or supplication for they be useless since the law of karma governs all thing . he who attempt to perform miracle have not understand the doctrine of the tath gata . xliii . the vanity of worldliness . there be a poet who have acquire the spotless eye of truth and he believe in the buddha whose doctrine give him peace of mind and comfort in the hour of affliction . and it happen that an epidemic swept over the country in which he live so that many die and the people be terrify . some of them tremble with fright and in anticipation of their fate be smite with all the horror of death before they die while others begin to be merry shout loudly let u enjoy ourselves to day for we know not whether to morrow we shall live yet be their laughter no genuine gladness but a mere pretence and affectation . among all these worldly men and woman tremble with anxiety the buddhist poet live in the time of the pestilence a usual calm and undisturbed help wherever he could and minister unto the sick soothe their pain by medicine and religious consolation . and a man come to him and say my heart be nervous and excite for i see people die . i be not anxious about others but i tremble because of myself . help me cure me of my fear . the poet reply there be help for him who have compassion on others but there be no help for thee so long a thou clingest to thine own self alone . hard time try the soul of men and teach them righteousness and charity . canst thou witness these sad sight around thee and still be fill with selfishness ? canst thou see thy brother sister and friend suffer yet not forget the petty craving and lust of thine own heart ? notice the desolation in the mind of the pleasure seek man the buddhist poet compose this song and teach it to the brother in the vih ra unless refuge you take in the buddha and find in nirv na rest your life be but vanity empty and desolate vanity . to see the world be idle and to enjoy life be empty . the world include man be but like a phantom and the hope of heaven be a a mirage . the worldling seek pleasures fatten himself like a caged fowl . but the buddhist saint fly up to the sun like the wild crane . the fowl in the coop have food but will soon be boil in the pot . no provision be give to the wild crane but the heaven and the earth be his . the poet say the time be hard and teach the people a lesson yet do they not heed it . and he compose another poem on the vanity of worldliness it be good to reform and it be good to exhort people to reform . the thing of the world will all be sweep away . let others be busy and bury with care . my mind all unvexed shall be pure . after pleasure they hanker and find no satisfaction riches they covet and can never have enough . they be like unto puppet hold up by a string . when the string break they come down with a shock . in the domain of death there be neither great nor small neither gold nor silver be use nor precious jewel . no distinction be make between the high and the low . and daily the dead be bury beneath the fragrant sod . look at the sun set behind the western hill . you lie down to rest but soon the cock will announce morn . reform to day and do not wait until it be too late . do not say it be early for the time quickly pass by . it be good to reform and it be good to exhort people to reform . it be good to lead a righteous life and take refuge in the buddha 's name . your talent may reach to the sky your wealth may be untold but all be in vain unless you attain the peace of nirv na . xliv . secrecy and publicity . the buddha say three thing o disciple be characterize by secrecy love affair priestly wisdom and all aberration from the path of truth . woman who be in love o disciple seek secrecy and shun publicity priest who claim to be in possession of special revelation o disciple seek secrecy and shun publicity all those who stray from the path of truth o disciple seek secrecy and shun publicity . three thing o disciple shine before the world and can not be hide . what be the three ? the moon o disciples illumine the world and can not be hide the sun o disciples illumine the world and can not be hide and the truth proclaim by the tath gata illumine the world and can not be hide . these three thing o disciple illumine the world and can not be hide . there be no secrecy about them . . the annihilation of suffer . and the buddha say what my friend be evil ? killing be evil stealing be evil yield to sexual passion be evil lying be evil slandering be evil abuse be evil gossip be evil envy be evil hatred be evil to cling to false doctrine be evil all these thing my friend be evil . and what my friend be the root of evil ? desire be the root of evil hatred be the root of evil illusion be the root of evil these thing be the root of evil . what however be good ? abstain from kill be good abstain from theft be good abstain from sensuality be good abstain from falsehood be good abstain from slander be good suppression of unkindness be good abandon gossip be good let go all envy be good dismissing hatred be good obedience to the truth be good all these thing be good . and what my friend be the root of the good ? freedom from desire be the root of the good freedom from hatred and freedom from illusion these thing my friend be the root of the good . what however o brother be suffer ? what be the origin of suffer ? what be the annihilation of suffer ? birth be suffer old age be suffer disease be suffer death be suffer sorrow and misery be suffer affliction and despair be suffer to be unite with loathsome thing be suffer the loss of that which we love and the failure in attain that which be long for be suffer all these thing o brother be suffer . and what o brother be the origin of suffer ? it be lust passion and the thirst for existence that yearn for pleasure everywhere lead to a continual rebirth ! it be sensuality desire selfishness all these thing o brother be the origin of suffer . and what be the annihilation of suffer ? the radical and total annihilation of this thirst and the abandonment the liberation the deliverance from passion that o brother be the annihilation of suffer . and what o brother be the path that lead to the annihilation of suffer ? it be the holy eightfold path that lead to the annihilation of suffer which consist of right view right decision right speech right action right live right struggle right thought and right meditation . in so far o friend a a noble youth thus recognize suffering and the origin of suffering a he recognize the annihilation of suffering and walk on the path that lead to the annihilation of suffer radically forsake passion subdue wrath annihilate the vain conceit of the i be leave ignorance and attain to enlightenment he will make an end of all suffer even in this life . xlvi . avoid the ten evils . the buddha say all act of living creature become bad by ten thing and by avoid the ten thing they become good . there be three evil of the body four evil of the tongue and three evil of the mind . the evil of the body be murder theft and adultery of the tongue lie slander abuse and idle talk of the mind covetousness hatred and error . i exhort you to avoid the ten evils i. kill not but have regard for life . ii . steal not neither do ye rob but help everybody to be master of the fruit of his labor . iii . abstain from impurity and lead a life of chastity . iv . lie not but be truthful . speak the truth with discretion fearlessly and in a loving heart . . invent not evil report neither do ye repeat them . carp not but look for the good side of your fellow being so that ye may with sincerity defend them against their enemy . vi . swear not but speak decently and with dignity . vii . waste not the time with gossip but speak to the purpose or keep silence . viii . covet not nor envy but rejoice at the fortune of other people . ix . cleanse your heart of malice and cherish no hatred not even against your enemy but embrace all living being with kindness . . free your mind of ignorance and be anxious to learn the truth especially in the one thing that be needful lest you fall a prey either to scepticism or to error . scepticism will make you indifferent and error will lead you astray so that you shall not find the noble path that lead to life eternal . xlvii . the preacher 's mission . and the blessed one say to his disciple when i have pass away and can no longer address you and edify your mind with religious discourse select from among you men of good family and education to preach the truth in my stead . and let those men be invest with the robe of the tath gata let them enter into the abode of the tath gata and occupy the pulpit of the tath gata . the robe of the tath gata be sublime forbearance and patience . the abode of the tath gata be charity and love of all being . the pulpit of the tath gata be the comprehension of the good law in it abstract meaning as well a in it particular application . the preacher must propound the truth with unshrinking mind . he must have the power of persuasion root in virtue and in strict fidelity to his vow . the preacher must keep in his proper sphere and be steady in his course . he must not flatter his vanity by seek the company of the great nor must he keep company with person who be frivolous and immoral . when in temptation he should constantly think of the buddha and he will conquer . all who come to hear the doctrine the preacher must receive with benevolence and his sermon must be without invidiousness . the preacher must not be prone to carp at others or to blame other preacher nor speak scandal nor propagate bitter word . he must not mention by name other disciple to vituperate them and reproach their demeanor . clad in a clean robe dye with good color with appropriate undergarment he must ascend the pulpit with a mind free from blame and at peace with the whole world . he must not take delight in quarrelous disputation or engage in controversy so a to show the superiority of his talent but be calm and compose . no hostile feeling shall reside in his heart and he must never abandon the disposition of charity toward all being . his sole aim must be that all being become buddhas . let the preacher apply himself with zeal to his work and the tath gata will show to him the body of the holy law in it transcendent glory . he shall be honor a one whom the tath gata have bless . the tath gata bless the preacher and also those who reverently listen to him and joyfully accept the doctrine . all those who receive the truth will find perfect enlightenment . and verily such be the power of the doctrine that even by the reading of a single stanza or by recite copying and keep in mind a single sentence of the good law person may be convert to the truth and enter the path of righteousness which lead to deliverance from evil . creature that be sway by impure passion when they listen to the voice will be purify . the ignorant who be infatuate with the folly of the world will when ponder on the profundity of the doctrine acquire wisdom . those who act under the impulse of hatred will when take refuge in the buddha be fill with good will and love . a preacher must be full of energy and cheerful hope never tire and never despairing of final success . a preacher must be like a man in quest of water who dig a well in an arid tract of land . so long a he see that the sand be dry and white he know that the water be still far off . but let him not be trouble or give up the task a hopeless . the work of remove the dry sand must be do so that he can dig down deeper into the ground . and often the deeper he have to dig the cooler and purer and more refreshing will the water be . when after some time of dig he see that the sand become moist he accept it a a token that the water be near . so long a the people do not listen to the word of truth the preacher know that he have to dig deep into their heart but when they begin to heed his word he apprehend that they will soon attain enlightenment . into your hand o ye men of good family and education who take the vow of preach the word of the tath gata the blessed one transfer intrusts and commend the good law of truth . receive the good law of truth keep it read and reread it fathom it promulgate it and preach it to all being in all the quarter of the universe . the tath gata be not avaricious nor narrow mind and he be willing to impart the perfect buddha knowledge unto all who be ready and willing to receive it . be ye like unto him . imitate him and follow his example in bounteously give show and bestow the truth . gather round you hearer who love to listen to the benign and comfort word of the law rouse the unbeliever to accept the truth and fill them with delight and joy . quicken them edify them and lift them high and high until they see the truth face to face in all it splendor and infinite glory . when the bless one have thus speak the disciple say o thou who rejoicest in kindness have it source in compassion thou great cloud of good quality and of benevolent mind thou quenchest the fire that vexeth living being thou pourest out nectar the rain of the law ! we shall do o lord what the tath gata command . we shall fulfil his behest the lord shall find u obedient to his word . and this vow of the disciple resound through the universe and like an echo it come back from all the bodhisattas who be to be and will come to preach the good law of truth to future generation . and the blessed one say the tath gata be like unto a powerful king who rule his kingdom with righteousness but be attack by envious enemy go out to wage war against his foe . when the king see his soldier fight he be delight with their gallantry and will bestow upon them donation of all kind . ye be the soldier of the tath gata while m ra the evil one be the enemy who must be conquer . and the tath gata will give to his soldier the city of nirv na the great capital of the good law . and when the enemy be overcome the dharma r ja the great king of truth will bestow upon all his disciple the most precious crown which jewel brings perfect enlightenment supreme wisdom and undisturbed peace . the teacher . xlviii . the dhammapada . this be the dhammapada the path of religion pursue by those who be follower of the buddha creature from mind their character derive mind marshal be they mind make . mind be the source either of bliss or of corruption . by oneself evil be do by oneself one suffers by oneself evil be leave undone by oneself one be purify . purity and impurity belong to oneself no one can purify another . you yourself must make an effort . the tath gatas be only preacher . the thoughtful who enter the way be free from the bondage of m ra . he who do not rouse himself when it be time to rise who though young and strong be full of sloth whose will and thought be weak that lazy and idle man will never find the way to enlightenment . if a man hold himself dear let him watch himself carefully the truth guard him who guard himself . if a man make himself a he teach others to be then be himself subdue he may subdue others one 's own self be indeed difficult to subdue . if some men conquer in battle a thousand time a thousand men and if another conquer himself he be the great of conqueror . it be the habit of fool be they laymen or member of the clergy to think this be do by me . may others be subject to me . in this or that transaction a prominent part should be play by me . fool do not care for the duty to be perform or the aim to be reach but think of their self alone . everything be but a pedestal of their vanity . bad deed and deed hurtful to ourselves be easy to do what be beneficial and good that be very difficult . if anything be to be do let a man do it let him attack it vigorously ! before long ala ! this body will lie on the earth despise without understand like a useless log yet our thought will endure . they will be think again and will produce action . good thought will produce good action and bad thought will produce bad action . earnestness be the path of immortality thoughtlessness the path of death . those who be in earnest do not die those who be thoughtless be a if dead already . those who imagine they find truth in untruth and see untruth in truth will never arrive at truth but follow vain desire . they who know truth in truth and untruth in untruth arrive at truth and follow true desire . a rain break through an ill thatch house passion will break through an unreflecting mind . a rain do not break through a well thatch house passion will not break through a well reflect mind . well maker lead the water wherever they like fletchets bend the arrow carpenter bend a log of wood wise people fashion themselves wise people falter not amidst blame and praise . have listen to the law they become serene like a deep smooth and still lake . if a man speak or act with an evil thought pain follow him a the wheel follow the foot of the ox that draw the carriage . an evil deed be well left undone for a man will repent of it afterwards a good deed be well do for have do it one will not repent . if a man commit a wrong let him not do it again let him not delight in wrongdoing pain be the outcome of evil . if a man do what be good let him do it again let him delight in it happiness be the outcome of good . let no man think lightly of evil say in his heart it will not come nigh unto me . a by the fall of water drop a water pot be fill so the fool become full of evil though he gather it little by little . let no man think lightly of good say in his heart it will not come nigh unto me . a by the fall of water drop a water pot be fill so the wise man become full of good though he gather it little by little . he who live for pleasure only his sens uncontrolled immoderate in his food idle and weak him m ra the tempter will certainly overthrow a the wind throw down a weak tree . he who live without look for pleasure his sens well control moderate in his food faithful and strong him m ra will certainly not overthrow any more than the wind throw down a rocky mountain . the fool who know his foolishness be wise at least so far . but a fool who think himself wise he be a fool indeed . to the evil doer wrong appear sweet a honey he look upon it a pleasant so long a it bear no fruit but when it fruit ripen then he look upon it a wrong . and so the good man look upon the goodness of the dharma a a burden and an evil so long a it bear no fruit but when it fruit ripen then he see it goodness . a hater may do great harm to a hater or an enemy to an enemy but a wrongly direct mind will do great mischief unto itself . a mother a father or any other relative will do much good but a well direct mind will do great service unto itself . he whose wickedness be very great bring himself down to that state where his enemy wish him to be . he himself be his great enemy . thus a creeper destroy the life of a tree on which it find support . do not direct thy thought to what give pleasure that thou mayest not cry out when burn this be pain . the wicked man burn by his own deed a if burn by fire . pleasure destroy the foolish the foolish man by his thirst for pleasure destroy himself a if he be his own enemy . the field be damage by hurricane and weed mankind be damage by passion by hatred by vanity and by lust . let no man ever take into consideration whether a thing be pleasant or unpleasant . the love of pleasure begets grief and the dread of pain cause fear he who be free from the love of pleasure and the dread of pain know neither grief nor fear . he who give himself to vanity and do not give himself to meditation forget the real aim of life and grasping at pleasure will in time envy him who have exert himself in meditation . the fault of others be easily notice but that of oneself be difficult to perceive . a man winnow his neighbor 's fault like chaff but his own fault he hide a a cheat hide the false die from the gambler . if a man look after the fault of others and be always incline to take offence his own passion will grow and he be far from the destruction of passion . not about the perversity of others not about their sin of commission or omission but about his own misdeed and negligence alone should a sage be worry . good people shine from afar like the snowy mountain have people be conceal like arrow shoot by night . if a man by cause pain to others wish to obtain pleasure for himself he entangle in the bond of selfishness will never be free from hatred . let a man overcome anger by love let him overcome evil by good let him overcome the greedy by liberality the liar by truth ! for hatred do not cease by hatred at any time hatred cease by not hatred this be an old rule . speak the truth do not yield to anger give if thou art ask by these three step thou wilt become divine . let a wise man blow off the impurity of his self a a smith blow off the impurity of silver one by one little by little and from time to time . lead others not by violence but by righteousness and equity . he who possess virtue and intelligence who be just speak the truth and do what be his own business him the world will hold dear . a the bee collect nectar and departs without injure the flower or it color or scent so let a sage dwell in the community . if a traveller do not meet with one who be his better or his equal let him firmly keep to his solitary journey there be no companionship with fool . long be the night to him who be awake long be a mile to him who be tire long be life to the foolish who do not know the true religion . good than live a hundred year not see the high truth be one day in the life of a man who see the high truth . some form their dharma arbitrarily and fabricate it artificially they advance complex speculation and imagine that good result be attainable only by the acceptance of their theory yet the truth be but one there be not different truth in the world . have reflect on the various theory we have go into the yoke with him who have shake off all sin . but shall we be able to proceed together with him ? the best of way be the eightfold path . this be the path . there be no other that lead to the purifying of intelligence . go on this path ! everything else be the deceit of m ra the tempter . if you go on this path you will make an end of pain ! say the tath gata the path be preach by me when i have understand the removal of the thorn in the flesh . not only by discipline and vow not only by much learning do i earn the happiness of release which no worldling can know . bhikkhu be not confident as long a thou hast not attain the extinction of thirst . the extinction of evil desire be the high religion . the gift of religion exceeds all gift the sweetness of religion exceeds all sweetness the delight in religion exceeds all delight the extinction of thirst overcomes all pain . few be there among men who cross the river and reach the goal . the great multitude be run up and down the shore but there be no suffer for him who have finish his journey . a the lily will grow full of sweet perfume and delight upon a heap of rubbish thus the disciple of the truly enlighten buddha shine forth by his wisdom among those who be like rubbish among the people that walk in darkness . let u live happily then not hat those who hate u ! among men who hate u let u dwell free from hatred ! let u live happily then free from all ailment among the ail ! among men who be ail let u dwell free from ailment ! let u live happily then free from greed among the greedy ! among men who be greedy let u dwell free from greed ! the sun be bright by day the moon shine by night the warrior be bright in his armor thinker be bright in their meditation but among all the bright with splendor day and night be the buddha the awaken the holy bless . xlix . the two brahman . at one time when the bless one be journey through kosala he come to the brahman village which be call manas kata . there he stay in a mango grove . and two young brahman come to him who be of different school . one be name v settha and the other bh radv ja . and v settha say to the bless one we have a dispute a to the true path . i say the straight path which lead unto a union with brahm be that which have be announce by the brahman pokkharas ti while my friend say the straight path which lead unto a union with brahm be that which have be announce by the brahman t rukkha . now regard thy high reputation o samana and knowing that thou art call the enlightened one the teacher of men and god the blessed buddha we have come to ask thee be all these path path of salvation ? there be many road all around our village and all lead to manas kata . be it just so with the path of the sage ? be all path path to salvation and do they all lead to a union with brahm ? and the blessed one propose these question to the two brahman do you think that all path be right ? both answer and say yes gotama we think so . but tell me continue the buddha have any one of the brahman verse in the veda see brahm face to face ? no sir ! be the reply . but then say the bless one have any teacher of the brahman verse in the veda see brahm face to face ? the two brahman say no sir . but then say the bless one have any one of the author of the veda see brahm face to face ? again the two brahman answer in the negative and exclaim how can any one see brahm or understand him for the mortal can not understand the immortal . and the blessed one propose an illustration say it be a if a man should make a staircase in the place where four road cross to mount up into a mansion . and people should ask him 'where good friend be this mansion to mount up into which you be make this staircase ? knowest thou whether it be in the east or in the south or in the west or in the north ? whether it be high or low or of medium size ? ' and when so ask he should answer ' i know it not . ' and people should say to him 'but then good friend thou art make a staircase to mount up into something take it for a mansion which all the while thou knowest not neither hast thou see it . ' and when so ask he should answer 'that be exactly what i do yea i know that i can not know it . ' what would you think of him ? would you not say that the talk of that man be foolish talk ? in sooth gotama say the two brahman it would be foolish talk ! the blessed one continue then the brahman should say 'we show you the way unto a union of what we know not and what we have not see . ' this be the substance of brahman lore do it not follow that their task be vain ? it do follow reply bh radv ja . say the bless one thus it be impossible that brahman verse in the three veda should be able to show the way to a state of union with that which they neither know nor have see . just a when a string of blind men be cling one to the other . neither can the foremost see nor can those in the middle see nor can the hindmost see . even so methinks the talk of the brahman verse in the three veda be but blind talk it be ridiculous consists of mere word and be a vain and empty thing . now suppose add the blessed one that a man should come hither to the bank of the river and have some business on the other side should want to cross . do you suppose that if he be to invoke the other bank of the river to come over to him on this side the bank would come on account of his praying ? certainly not gotama . yet this be the way of the brahman . they omit the practice of those quality which really make a man a brahman and say 'indra we call upon thee soma we call upon thee varuna we call upon thee brahm we call upon thee . ' verily it be not possible that these brahmahns on account of their invocation prayer and praise should after death be unite with brahm . now tell me continue the buddha what do the brahman say of brahm ? be his mind full of lust ? and when the brahman deny this the buddha ask be brahm 's mind full of malice sloth or pride ? no sir ! be the reply . he be the opposite of all this . and the buddha go on but be the brahman free from these vice ? no sir ! say v settha . the holy one say the brahman cling to the five thing lead to worldliness and yield to the temptation of the sens they be entangle in the five hindrance lust malice sloth pride and doubt . how can they be unite to that which be most unlike their nature ? therefore the threefold wisdom of the brahman be a waterless desert a pathless jungle and a hopeless desolation . when the buddha have thus speak one of the brahman say we be told gotama that the sakyamuni know the path to a union with brahm . and the blessed one say what do you think o brahman of a man born and bring up in manas kata ? would he be in doubt about the most direct way from this spot to manas kata ? certainly not gotama . thus reply the buddha the tath gata know the straight path that lead to a union with brahm . he know it a one who have enter the world of brahm and have be bear in it . there can be no doubt in the tath gata . and the two young brahman say if thou knowest the way show it to u . and the buddha say the tath gata see the universe face to face and understand it nature . he proclaim the truth both in it letter and in it spirit and his doctrine be glorious in it origin glorious in it progress glorious in it consummation . the tath gata reveal the high life in it purity and perfection . he can show you the way to that which be contrary to the five great hindrance . the tath gata let his mind pervade the four quarter of the world with thought of love . and thus the whole wide world above below around and everywhere will continue to be fill with love far reach grow great and beyond measure . just a a mighty trumpeter make himself heard and that without difficulty in all the four quarter of the earth even so be the come of the tath gata there be not one living creature that the tath gata pass by or leaf aside but regard them all with mind set free and deep felt love . and this be the sign that a man follow the right path uprightness be his delight and he see danger in the least of those thing which he should avoid . he train himself in the command of morality he encompasseth himself with holiness in word and deed he sustain his life by mean that be quite pure good be his conduct guard be the door of his sens mindful and self possess he be altogether happy . he who walk in the eightfold noble path with unswerving determination be sure to reach nirv na . the tath gata anxiously watch over his child and with love care help them to see the light . when a hen have eight or ten or twelve egg over which she have properly brood the wish arises in her heart ' o would that my little chicken would break open the egg shell with their claw or with their beak and come forth into the light in safety ! ' yet all the while those little chicken be sure to break the egg shell and will come forth into the light in safety . even so a brother who with firm determination walk in the noble path be sure to come forth into the light sure to reach up to the high wisdom sure to attain to the high bliss of enlightenment . . guard the six quarter . while the blessed one be stay at the bamboo grove near r jagaha he once meet on his way sig la a householder who clasp his hand turn to the four quarter of the world to the zenith above and to the nadir below . and the blessed one knowing that this be do accord to the traditional religious superstition to avert evil ask sig la why performest thou these strange ceremony ? and sig la in reply say dost thou think it strange that i protect my home against the influence of demon ? know thou wouldst fain tell me o gotama sakyamuni whom people call the tath gata and the bless buddha that incantation be of no avail and posse no save power . but listen to me and know that in perform this rite i honor reverence and keep sacred the word of my father . then the tath gata say thou dost well o sig la to honor reverence and keep sacred the word of thy father and it be thy duty to protect thy home thy wife thy child and thy child 's child against the hurtful influence of evil spirit . i find no fault with the performance of thy father 's rite . but i find that thou dost not understand the ceremony . let the tath gata who now speak to thee a a spiritual father and love thee no less than do thy parent explain to thee the meaning of the six direction . to guard thy home by mysterious ceremony be not sufficient thou must guard it by good deed . turn to thy parent in the east to thy teacher in the south to thy wife and child in the west to thy friend in the north and regulate the zenith of thy religious relation above thee and the nadir of thy servant below thee . such be the religion thy father want thee to have and the performance of the ceremony shall remind thee of thy duty . and sig la look up to the bless one with reverence a to his father and say truly gotama thou art the buddha the bless one the holy teacher . i never know what i be do but now i know . thou hast reveal to me the truth that be hide a one who bringeth a lamp into the darkness . i take my refuge in the enlightened teacher in the truth that enlightens and in the community of brother who have be teach the truth . li . simha 's question concern annihilation . at that time many distinguish citizen be sit together assemble in the town hall and speak in many way in praise of the buddha of the dharma and of the sangha . simha the general in chief a disciple of the niggantha sect be sit among them . and simha think truly the blessed one must be the buddha the holy one . i will go and visit him . then simha the general go to the place where the niggantha chief n taputta be and have approach him he say i wish lord to visit the samana gotama . n taputta say why should you simha who believe in the result of action accord to their moral merit go to visit the samana gotama who deny the result of action ? the samana gotama o simha deny the result of action he teach the doctrine of non action and in this doctrine he train his disciple . then the desire to go and visit the bless one which have arise in simha the general abate . hear again the praise of the buddha of the dharma and of the sangha simha ask the niggantha chief a second time and again n taputta persuade him not to go . when a third time the general heard some men of distinction extol the merit of the buddha the dharma and the sangha the general thought truly the samana gotama must be the holy buddha . what be the nigganthas to me whether they give their consent or not ? i shall go without ask their permission to visit him the bless one the holy buddha . and simha the general say to the bless one i have hear lord that the samana gotama deny the result of action he teach the doctrine of non action say that the action of sentient being do not receive their reward for he teach annihilation and the contemptibleness of all thing and in this doctrine he train his disciple . teachest thou the do away of the soul and the burn away of man 's be ? pray tell me lord do those who speak thus say the truth or do they bear false witness against the blessed one passing off a spurious dharma a thy dharma ? the blessed one say there be a way simha in which one who say so be speak truly of me on the other hand simha there be a way in which one who say the opposite be speak truly of me too . listen and i will tell thee i teach simha the not do of such action a be unrighteous either by deed or by word or by thought i teach the not bring about of all those condition of heart which be evil and not good . however i teach simha the do of such action a be righteous by deed by word and by thought i teach the bring about of all those condition of heart which be good and not evil . i teach simha that all the condition of heart which be evil and not good unrighteous action by deed by word and by thought must be burn away . he who have free himself simha from all those condition of heart which be evil and not good he who have destroy them a a palm tree which be root out so that they can not grow up again such a man have accomplish the eradication of self . i proclaim simha the annihilation of egotism of lust of ill will of delusion . however i do not proclaim the annihilation of forbearance of love of charity and of truth . i deem simha unrighteous action contemptible whether they be perform by deed or by word or by thought but i deem virtue and righteousness praiseworthy . and simha say one doubt still lurk in my mind concern the doctrine of the blessed one . will the blessed one consent to clear the cloud away so that i may understand the dharma a the blessed one teach it ? the tath gata have give his consent simha continue i be a soldier o bless one and be appoint by the king to enforce his law and to wage his war . do the tath gata who teach kindness without end and compassion with all sufferer permit the punishment of the criminal ? and far do the tath gata declare that it be wrong to go to war for the protection of our home our wife our child and our property ? do the tath gata teach the doctrine of a complete self surrender so that i should suffer the evil doer to do what he please and yield submissively to him who threaten to take by violence what be my own ? do the tath gata maintain that all strife include such warfare a be wag for a righteous cause should be forbid ? the buddha reply he who deserve punishment must be punish and he who be worthy of favor must be favor . yet at the same time he teach to do no injury to any living be but to be full of love and kindness . these injunction be not contradictory for whosoever must be punish for the crime which he have commit suffers his injury not through the ill will of the judge but on account of his evil do . his own act have bring upon him the injury that the executer of the law inflicts . when a magistrate punishes let him not harbor hatred in his breast yet a murderer when put do death should consider that this be the fruit of his own act . as soon a he will understand that the punishment will purify his soul he will no longer lament his fate but rejoice at it . and the blessed one continue the tath gata teach that all warfare in which man try to slay his brother be lamentable but he do not teach that those who go to war in a righteous cause after have exhaust all mean to preserve the peace be blameworthy . he must be blame who be the cause of war . the tath gata teach a complete surrender of self but he do not teach a surrender of anything to those power that be evil be they men or god or the element of nature . struggle must be for all life be a struggle of some kind . but he that struggle should look to it l he struggle in the interest of self against truth and righteousness . he who struggle in the interest of self so that he himself may be great or powerful or rich or famous will have no reward but he who struggle for righteousness and truth will have great reward for even his defeat will be a victory . self be not a fit vessel to receive any great success self be small and brittle and it content will soon be spill for the benefit and perhaps also for the curse of others . truth however be large enough to receive the yearning and aspiration of all self and when the self break like soap bubble their content will be preserve and in the truth they will lead a life everlasting . he who goeth to battle o simha even though it be in a righteous cause must be prepare to be slay by his enemy for that be the destiny of warrior and should his fate overtake him he have no reason for complaint . but he who be victorious should remember the instability of earthly thing . his success may be great but be it ever so great the wheel of fortune may turn again and bring him down into the dust . however if he moderate himself and extinguish all hatred in his heart lift his down trodden adversary up and say to him 'come now and make peace and let u be brother ' he will gain a victory that be not a transient success for it fruit will remain forever . great be a successful general o simha but he who have conquer self be the great victor . the doctrine of the conquest of self o simha be not teach to destroy the soul of men but to preserve them . he who have conquer self be more fit to live to be successful and to gain victory than he who be the slave of self . he whose mind be free from the illusion of self will stand and not fall in the battle of life . he whose intention be righteousness and justice will meet with no failure but be successful in his enterprise and his success will endure . he who harbor in his heart love of truth will live and not die for he have drink the water of immortality . struggle then o general courageously and fight thy battle vigorously but be a soldier of truth and the tath gata will bless thee . when the bless one have speak thus simha the general say glorious lord glorious lord ! thou hast reveal the truth . great be the doctrine of the blessed one . thou indeed art the buddha the tath gata the holy one . thou art the teacher of mankind . thou showest u the road of salvation for this indeed be true deliverance . he who follow thee will not miss the light to enlighten his path . he will find blessedness and peace . i take my refuge lord in the blessed one and in his doctrine and in his brotherhood . may the blessed one receive me from this day forth while my life last a a disciple who have take refuge in him . and the blessed one say consider first simha what thou doest . it be become that person of rank like thyself should do nothing without due consideration . simha 's faith in the blessed one increase . he reply have other teacher lord succeed in make me their disciple they would carry around their banner through the whole city of f l shout 'simha the general have become our disciple ! for the second time lord i take my refuge in the blessed one and in the dharma and in the sangha may the blessed one receive me from this day forth while my life last a a disciple who have take his refuge in him . say the bless one for a long time simha offering have be give to the nigganthas in thy house . thou shouldst therefore deem it right also in the future to give them food when they come to thee on their alms pilgrimage . and simha 's heart be fill with joy . he say i have be tell lord 'the samana gotama say to me alone and to nobody else should gift be give . my pupils alone and the pupil of no one else should receive offering . ' but the blessed one exhort me to give also to the nigganthas . well lord we shall see what be seasonable . for the third time lord i take my refuge in the blessed one and in his dharma and in his fraternity . lii . all existence be spiritual . and there be an officer among the retinue of simha who have heard of the discourse of the bless one and there be some doubt leave in his heart . this man come to the bless one and say it be say o lord that the samana gotama deny the existence of the soul . do they who say so speak the truth or do they bear false witness against the blessed one ? and the blessed one say there be a way in which those who say so be speak truly of me on the other hand there be a way in which those who say so do not speak truly of me . the tath gata teach that there be no self . he who say that the soul be his self and that the self be the thinker of our thought and the actor of our deed teach a wrong doctrine which lead to confusion and darkness . on the other hand the tath gata teach that there be mind . he who understand by soul mind and say that mind exist teach the truth which lead to clearness and enlightenment . the officer say do then the tath gata maintain that two thing exist ? that which we perceive with our sens and that which be mental ? say the bless one verily i say unto thee thy mind be spiritual but neither be the sense perceive void of spirituality . the bodhi be eternal and it dominate all existence a the good law guide all being in their search for truth . it change brute nature into mind and there be no be that can not be transform into a vessel of truth . liii . identity and non identity . k tadanta the head of the brahman in the village of d namat have approach the blessed one respectfully greet him and say i be tell o samana that thou art the buddha the holy one the allknowing the lord of the world . but if thou wert the buddha wouldst thou not come like a king in all thy glory and power ? say the bless one thine eye be holden . if the eye of thy mind be undimmed thou couldst see the glory and the power of truth . say k tadanta show me the truth and i shall see it . but thy doctrine be without consistency . if it be consistent it would stand but a it be not it will pass away . the blessed one reply the truth will never pass away . k tadanta say i be tell that thou teachest the law yet thou tearest down religion . thy disciple despise rite and abandon immolation but reverence for the god can be show only by sacrifice . the very nature of religion consist in worship and sacrifice . say the buddha great than the immolation of bullock be the sacrifice of self . he who offer to the god his evil desire will see the uselessness of slaughter animal at the altar . blood have no cleanse power but the eradication of lust will make the heart pure . good than worship god be obedience to the law of righteousness . k tadanta be of a religious disposition and anxious about his fate after death have sacrifice countless victim . now he saw the folly of atonement by blood . not yet satisfy however with the teaching of the tath gata k tadanta continue thou believest o master that being be reborn that they migrate in the evolution of life and that subject to the law of karma we must reap what we sow . yet thou teachest the non existence of the soul ! thy disciple praise utter self extinction a the high bliss of nirv na . if i be merely a combination of the sankh ras my existence will cease when i die . if i be merely a compound of sensation and idea and desire wither can i go at the dissolution of the body ? say the bless one o brahman thou art religious and earnest . thou art seriously concern about thy soul . yet be thy work in vain because thou art lacking in the one thing that be needful . there be rebirth of character but no transmigration of a self . thy think form reappear but there be no ego entity transfer . the stanza utter by a teacher be reborn in the scholar who repeat the word . only through ignorance and delusion do men indulge in the dream that their soul be separate and self existent entity . thy heart o brahman be cleave still to self thou art anxious about heaven but thou seekest the pleasure of self in heaven and thus thou canst not see the bliss of truth and the immortality of truth . verily i say unto thee the blessed one have not come to teach death but to teach life and thou discernest not the nature of living and die . this body will be dissolve and no amount of sacrifice will save it . therefore seek thou the life that be of the mind . where self be truth can not be yet when truth come self will disappear . therefore let thy mind rest in the truth propagate the truth put thy whole will in it and let it spread . in the truth thou shalt live forever . self be death and truth be life . the cleaving to self be a perpetual dying while move in the truth be partake of nirv na which be life everlasting . k tadanta say where o venerable master be nirv na ? nirv na be wherever the precept be obey reply the blessed one . do i understand thee aright rejoin the brahman that nirv na be not a place and be nowhere it be without reality ? thou dost not understand me aright say the blessed one now listen and answer these question where do the wind dwell ? nowhere be the reply . buddha retort then sir there be no such thing a wind . k tadanta make no reply and the blessed one ask again answer me o brahman where do wisdom dwell ? be wisdom a locality ? wisdom have no allot dwell place reply k tadanta . say the bless one mean thou that there be no wisdom no enlightenment no righteousness and no salvation because nirv na be not a locality ? a a great and mighty wind which passeth over the world in the heat of the day so the tath gata come to blow over the mind of mankind with the breath of his love so cool so sweet so calm so delicate and those torment by fever assuage their suffering and rejoice at the refreshing breeze . say k tadanta i feel o lord that thou proclaimest a great doctrine but i can not grasp it . forbear with me that i ask again tell me o lord if there be no tman how can there be immortality ? the activity of the mind passeth and our thought be go when we have do thinking . buddha reply our thinking be go but our thought continue . reason cease but knowledge remains . say k tadanta how be that ? be not reason and knowledge the same ? the blessed one explain the distinction by an illustration it be a when a man want during the night to send a letter and after have id clerk call have a lamp lit and get the letter write . then when that have be do he extinguish the lamp . but though the writing have be finish and the light have be put out the letter be still there . thus do reason cease and knowledge remain and in the same way mental activity cease but experience wisdom and all the fruit of our act endure . k tadanta continue tell me o lord pray tell me where if the sankh ra be dissolve be the identity of my self . if my thought be propagate and if my soul migrates my thought cease to be my thought and my soul cease to be my soul . give me an illustration but pray o lord tell me where be the identity of my self ? say the bless one suppose a man be to light a lamp would it burn the night through ? yes it might do so be the reply . now be it the same flame that burn in the first watch of the night a in the second ? k tadanta hesitate . he think yes it be the same flame but fear the complication of a hidden meaning and try to be exact he say no it be not . then continue the bless one there be flame one in the first watch and the other in the second watch . no sir say k tadanta . in one sense it be not the same flame but in another sense it be the same flame . it burn the same kind of oil it emit the same land of light and it serve the same purpose . very well say the buddha and would you call those flame the same that have burn yesterday and be burn now in the same lamp fill with the same kind of oil illuminate the same room ? they may have be extinguish during the day suggest k tadanta . say the bless one suppose the flame of the first watch have be extinguish during the second watch would you call it the same if it burn again in the third watch ? reply k tadanta in one sense it be a different flame in another it be not . the tath gata ask again have the time that elapse during the extinction of the flame anything to do with it identity or non identity ? no sir say the brahman it have not . there be a difference and an identity whether many year elapse or only one second and also whether the lamp have be extinguish in the meantime or not . well then we agree that the flame of to day be in a certain sense the same a the flame of yesterday and in another sense it be different at every moment . moreover the flame of the same kind illuminate with equal power the same land of room be in a certain sense the same . yes sir reply k tadanta . the blessed one continue now suppose there be a man who feel like thyself think like thyself and act like thyself be he not the same man a thou ? no sir interrupt k tadanta . say the buddha dost thou deny that the same logic hold good for thyself that hold good for the thing of the world ? k tadanta bethink himself and rejoin slowly no i do not . the same logic hold good universally but there be a peculiarity about my self which render it altogether different from everything else and also from other self . there may be another man who feel exactly like me think like me and act like me suppose even he have the same name and the same kind of possession he would not be myself . true k tadanta answer buddha he would not be thyself . now tell me be the person who go to school one and that same person when he have finish his school another ? be it one who commit a crime another who be punish by have his hand and foot cut off ? they be the same be the reply . then sameness be constitute by continuity only ? ask the tath gata . not only by continuity say k tadanta but also and mainly by identity of character . very well conclude the buddha then thou agreest that person can be the same in the same sense a two flame of the same kind be call the same and thou must recognize that in this sense another man of the same character and product of the same karma be the same a thou . well i do say the brahman . the buddha continue and in this same sense alone art thou the same to day a yesterday . thy nature be not constitute by the matter of which thy body consist but by thy sankh ras the form of the body of sensation of thought . thy person be the combination of the sankh ra . wherever they be thou art . whithersoever they go thou goest . thus thou wilt recognize in a certain sense an identity of thy self and in another sense a difference . but he who do not recognize the identity should deny all identity and should say that the questioner be no longer the same person a he who a minute after receive the answer . now consider the continuation of thy personality which be preserve in thy karma . dost thou call it death and annihilation or fife and continued life ? i call it life and continued life rejoin k tadanta for it be the continuation of my existence but i do not care for that kind of continuation . all i care for be the continuation of self in the other sense which make of every man whether identical with me or not an altogether different person . very well say buddha . this be what thou desirest and this be the cleave to self . this be thy error . all compound thing be transitory they grow and they decay . all compound thing be subject to pain they will be separate from what they love and be join to what they abhor . all compound thing lack a self an tman an ego . how be that ? ask k tadanta . where be thy self ? ask the buddha . and when k tadanta make no reply he continue thy self to which thou cleavest be a constant change . year ago thou wast a small babe then thou wast a boy then a youth and now thou art a man . be there any identity of the babe and the man ? there be an identity in a certain sense only . indeed there be more identity between the flame of the first and the third watch even though the lamp might have be extinguish during the second watch . now which be thy true self that of yesterday that of to day or that of to morrow for the preservation of which thou clamorest ? k tadanta be bewilder . lord of the world he say i see my error but i be still confuse . the tath gata continue it be by a process of evolution that sankh ra come to be . there be no sankh ra which have sprung into be without a gradual become . thy sankh ra be the product of thy deed in former existence . the combination of thy sankh ra be thy self . wheresoever they be impressed thither thy self migrates . in thy sankh ra thou wilt continue to live and thou wilt reap in future existence the harvest sown now and in the past . verily o lord rejoin k tadanta this be not a fair retribution . i can not recognize the justice that others after me will reap what i be sow now . the blessed one wait a moment and then reply be all teach in vain ? dost thou not understand that those others be thou thyself ? thou thyself wilt reap what thou sowest not others . think of a man who be ill breed and destitute suffering from the wretchedness of his condition . a a boy he be slothful and indolent and when he grow up he have not learn a craft to earn a living . wouldst thou say his misery be not the product of his own action because the adult be no longer the same person a be the boy ? verily i say unto thee not in the heaven not in the midst of the sea not if thou hidest thyself away in the cleft of the mountain wilt thou find a place where thou canst escape the fruit of thine evil action . at the same time thou art sure to receive the blessing of thy good action . the man who have long be travel and who return home in safety the welcome of kinsfolk friend and acquaintance awaits . so the fruit of his good work bid him welcome who have walk in the path of righteousness when he pass over from the present life into the hereafter . k tadanta say i have faith in the glory and excellency of thy doctrine . my eye can not a yet endure the light but i now understand that there be no self and the truth dawn upon me . sacrifice can not save and invocation be idle talk . but how shall i find the path to life everlasting ? i know all the veda by heart and have not find the truth . say the buddha learning be a good thing but it availeth not . true wisdom can be acquire by practice only . practise the truth that thy brother be the same a thou . walk in the noble path of righteousness and thou wilt understand that while there be death in self there be immortality in truth . say k tadanta let me take my refuge in the blessed one in the dharma and in the brotherhood . accept me a thy disciple and let me partake of the bliss of immortality . liv . the buddha omnipresent . and the blessed one thus address the brother those only who do not believe call me gotama but you call me the buddha the bless one the teacher . and this be right for i have in this life enter nirv na while the life of gotama have be extinguish . self have disappear and the truth have take it abode in me . this body of mine be gotama 's body and it will be dissolve in due time and after it dissolution no one neither god nor man will see gotama again . but the truth remain . the buddha will not die the buddha will continue to live in the holy body of the law . the extinction of the bless one will be by that pass away in which nothing remain that could tend to the formation of another self . nor will it be possible to point out the blessed one a be here or there . but it will be like a flame in a great body of blaze fire . that flame have cease it have vanish and it can not be say that it be here or there . in the body of the dharma however the blessed one can be point out for the dharma have be preach by the blessed one . ye be my child i be your father through me have ye be release from your suffering . i myself have reach the other shore help others to cross the stream i myself have attain salvation be a saviour of others be comfort i comfort others and lead them to the place of refuge . i shall fill with joy all the being whose limbs languish i shall give happiness to those who be die from distress i shall extend to them succor and deliverance . i be bear into the world a the king of truth for the salvation of the world . the subject on which i meditate be truth . the practice to which i devote myself be truth . the topic of my conversation be truth . my thought be always in the truth . for lo ! my self have become the truth . whosoever comprehendeth the truth will see the blessed one for the truth have be preach by the blessed one . . one essence one law one aim . and the tath gata address the venerable kassapa to dispel the uncertainty and doubt of his mind and he say all thing be make of one essence yet thing be different accord to the form which they assume under different impression . a they form themselves so they act and a they act so they be . it be kassapa a if a potter make different vessel out of the same clay . some of these pot be to contain sugar others rice others curd and milk others still be vessel of impurity . there be no diversity in the clay use the diversity of the pot be only due to the mould hand of the potter who shape them for the various us that circumstance may require . and a all thing originate from one essence so they be develop accord to one law and they be destine to one aim which be nirv na . nirv na come to thee kassapa when thou understandest thoroughly and when thou liv accord to thy understand that all thing be of one essence and that there be but one law . hence there be but one nirv na a there be but one truth not two or three . and the tath gata be the same unto all being differ in his attitude only in so far a all being be different . the tath gata recreate the whole world like a cloud shed it water without distinction . he have the same sentiment for the high a for the low for the wise a for the ignorant for the noble mind a for the immoral . the great cloud full of rain come up in this wide universe cover all country and ocean to pour down it rain everywhere over all grass shrubs herbs tree of various specie family of plant of different name grow on the earth on the hill on the mountain or in the valley . then kassapa the grass shrubs herb and wild tree suck the water emit from that great cloud which be all of one essence and have be abundantly pour down and they will accord to their nature acquire a proportionate development shoot up and produce blossom and their fruit in season . root in one and the same soil all those family of plant and germ be quicken by water of the same essence . the tath gata however o kassapa know the law whose essence be salvation and whose end be the peace of nirv na . he be the same to all and yet know the requirement of every single be he do not reveal himself to all alike . he do not impart to them at once the fulness of omniscience but pay attention to the disposition of various being . lvi . the lesson give to r hula . before r hula the son of gotama siddhattha and yasodhar attain to the enlightenment of true wisdom his conduct be not always mark by a love of truth and the blessed one send him to a distant vih ra to govern his mind and to guard his tongue . after some time the bless one repair to the place and r hula be fill with joy . and the blessed one order the boy to bring him basin of water and to wash his foot and r hula obey . when r hula have wash the tath gata 's foot the bless one ask be the water now fit for drinking ? no my lord reply the boy the water be deny . then the bless one say now consider thine own case . although thou art my son and the grandchild of a king although thou art a samana who have voluntarily give up everything thou art unable to guard thy tongue from untruth and thus defilest thou thy mind . and when the water have be pour away the blessed one ask again be this vessel now fit for hold water to drink ? no my lord reply r hula the vessel too have become unclean . and the blessed one say now consider thine own case . although thou wearest the yellow robe art thou fit for any high purpose when thou hast become unclean like this vessel ? then the bless one lift up the empty basin and whirl it round ask art thou not afraid lest it should fall and break ? no my lord reply r hula the vessel be but cheap and it loss will not amount to much . now consider thine own case say the bless one . thou art whirl about in endless eddy of transmigration and a thy body be make of the same substance a other material thing that will crumble to dust there be no loss if it be break . he who be give to speak untruth be an object of contempt to the wise . r hula be fill with shame and the blessed one address him once more listen and i will tell thee a parable there be a king who have a very powerful elephant able to cope with five hundred ordinary elephant . when go to war the elephant be arm with sharp sword on his tusk with scythe on his shoulder spear on his foot and an iron ball at his tail . the elephant master rejoice to see the noble creature so well equipped and know that a slight wound by an arrow in the trunk would be fatal he have teach the elephant to keep his trunk well coil up . but during the battle the elephant stretch forth his trunk to seize a sword . his master be frighten and consult with the king and they decide that the elephant be no long fit to be use in battle . o r hula ! if men would only guard their tongue all would be well ! be like the fighting elephant who guard his trunk against the arrow that strike in the center . by love of truth the sincere escape iniquity . like the elephant well subdue and quiet who permit the king to mount on his trunk thus the man that revere righteousness will endure faithfully throughout his life . r hula hear these word be fill with deep sorrow he never again give any occasion for complaint and forthwith he sanctify his life by earnest exertion . lvii . the sermon on abuse . and the blessed one observe the way of society and notice how much misery come from malignity and foolish offence do only to gratify vanity and self seek pride . and the buddha say if a man foolishly do me wrong i will return to him the protection of my ungrudging love the more evil come from him the more good shall go from me the fragrance of goodness always come to me and the harmful air of evil go to him . a foolish man learn that the buddha observe the principle of great love which commend the return of good for evil come and abuse him . the buddha be silent pity his folly . when the man have finish his abuse the buddha ask him say son if a man decline to accept a present make to him to whom would it belong ? and he answer in that case it would belong to the man who offer it . my son say the buddha thou hast rail at me but i decline to accept thy abuse and request thee to keep it thyself . will it not be a source of misery to thee ? a the echo belongs to the sound and the shadow to the substance so misery will overtake the evil doer without fail . the abuser make no reply and buddha continue a wicked man who reproach a virtuous one be like one who look up and spit at heaven the spittle soil not the heaven but come back and defile his own person . the slanderer be like one who fling dust at another when the wind be contrary the dust do but return on him who throw it . the virtuous man can not be hurt and the misery that the other would inflict come back on himself . the abuser go away ashamed but he come again and take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha . lviii . the buddha reply to the deva . on a certain day when the bless one dwelt at jetavana the garden of an thapindika a celestial deva come to him in the shape of a brahman whose countenance be bright and whose garment be white like snow . the deva ask question which the bless one answer the deva say what be the sharp sword ? what be be the deadly poison ? what be the fierce fire ? what be the dark night ? the blessed one reply a word speak in wrath be the sharp sword covetousness be the deadly poison passion be the fierce fire ignorance be the dark night . the deva say who gain the great benefit ? who lose most ? which armor be invulnerable ? what be the best weapon ? the blessed one reply he be the great gainer who give to others and he lose most who greedily receives without gratitude . patience be an invulnerable armor wisdom be the best weapon . the deva say who be the most dangerous thief ? what be the most precious treasure ? who be most successful in take away by violence not only on earth but also in heaven ? what be the secure treasure trove ? the blessed one reply evil thought be the most dangerous thief virtue be the most precious treasure . the mind take possession of everything not only on earth but also in heaven and immortality be it secure treasure trove . the deva say what be attractive ? what be disgust ? what be the most horrible pain ? what be the great enjoyment ? the blessed one reply good be attractive evil be disgust . a bad conscience be the most tormenting pain deliverance be the height of bliss . the deva ask what cause ruin in the world ? what break off friendship ? what be the most violent fever ? who be the best physician ? the blessed one reply ignorance cause the ruin of the world . envy and selfishness break off friendship . hatred be the most violent fever and the buddha be the best physician . the deva then ask and say now i have only one doubt to be solve pray clear it away what be it fire can neither burn nor moisture corrode nor wind crush down but be able to reform the whole world ? the blessed one reply blessing ! neither fire nor moisture nor wind can destroy the blessing of a good deed and blessing reform the whole world . the deva have hear the word of the blessed one be full of exceed joy . clasp his hand he bow down before him in reverence and disappear suddenly from the presence of the buddha . lix . word of instruction . the bhikkhus come to the bless one and have salute him with clasp hand they say o master thou all see one we all wish to learn our ear be ready to hear thou art our teacher thou art incomparable . cut off our doubt inform u of the bless dharma o thou of great understanding speak in the midst of u o thou who art all seeing a be the thousand eyed lord of the god . we will ask the muni of great understanding who have cross the stream go to the other shore be bless and of a firm mind how do a bhikkhu wander rightly in the world after have go out from his house and drive away desire ? the buddha say let the bhikkhu subdue his passion for human and celestial pleasure then have conquer existence he will command the dharma . such a one will wander rightly in the world . he whose lust have be destroy who be free from pride who have overcome all the way of passion be subdue perfectly happy and of a firm mind . such a one will wander rightly in the world . faithful be he who be possess of knowledge see the way that lead to nirv na he who be not a partisan he who be pure and virtuous and have remove the veil from his eye . such a one will wander rightly in the world . say the bhikkhus certainly o bhagavat it be so whichever bhikkhu live in this way subdue and have overcome all bond such a one will wander rightly in the world . the blessed one say whatever be to be do by him who aspire to attain the tranquillity of nirv na let him be able and upright conscientious and gentle and not proud . let a man 's pleasure be the dharma let him delight in the dharma let him stand fast in the dharma let him know how to inquire into the dharma let him not raise any dispute that pollute the dharma and let him spend his time in ponder on the well spoken truth of the dharma . a treasure that be lay up in a deep pit profit nothing and may easily be lose . the real treasure that be lay up through charity and piety temperance self control or deed of merit be hid secure and can not pass away . it be never gain by despoil or wrong others and no thief can steal it . a man when he die must leave the fleeting wealth of the world but this treasure of virtuous act he take with him . let the wise do good deed they be a treasure that can never be lose . and the bhikkhus praise the wisdom of the tath gata thou hast pass beyond pain thou art holy o enlighten one we consider thee one that have destroy his passion . thou art glorious thoughtful and of great understanding . o thou who puttest an end to pain thou hast carry u across our doubt . because thou sawst our longing and carriedst u across our doubt adoration be to thee o muni who hast attain the high good in the way of wisdom . the doubt we have before thou hast clear away o thou clearly see one surely thou art a great thinker perfectly enlighten there be no obstacle for thee . and all thy trouble be scatter and cut off thou art calm subdue firm truthful . adoration be to thee o noble sage adoration be to thee o thou best of being in the world of men and god there be none equal to thee . thou art the buddha thou art the master thou art the muni that conquers m ra after have cut off desire thou hast cross over and carriest this generation to the other shore . . amit bha . one of the disciple come to the bless one with a tremble heart and his mind full of doubt . and he ask the blessed one o buddha our lord and master why do we give up the pleasure of the world if thou forbiddest u to work miracle and to attain the supernatural ? be not amit bha the infinite light of revelation the source of innumerable miracle ? and the blessed one see the anxiety of a truth seek mind say o s vaka thou art a novice among the novice and thou art swim on the surface of sams ra . how long will it take thee to grasp the truth ? thou hast not understand the word of the tath gata . the law of karma be irrefragable and supplication have no effect for they be empty word . say the disciple so sayest thou there be no miraculous and wonderful thing ? and the blessed one reply be it not a wonderful thing mysterious and miraculous to the worldling that a man who commit wrong can become a saint that he who attain to true enlightenment will find the path of truth and abandon the evil way of selfishness ? the bhikkhu who renounce the transient pleasure of the world for the eternal bliss of holiness performs the only miracle that can truly be call a miracle . a holy man change the curse of karma into blessing . the desire to perform miracle arise either from covetousness or from vanity . that mendicant do right who do not think 'people should salute me ' who though despise by the world yet cherish no ill will towards it . that mendicant do right to whom omen meteor dream and sign be thing abolished he be free from all their evil . amit bha the unbounded light be the source of wisdom of virtue of buddhahood . the deed of sorcerer and miracle monger be frauds but what be more wondrous more mysterious more miraculous than amit bha ? but master continue the s vaka be the promise of the happy region vain talk and a myth ? what be this promise ? ask the buddha and the disciple reply there be in the west a paradise call the pure land exquisitely adorn with gold and silver and precious gem . there be pure water with golden sand surround by pleasant walk and cover with large lotus flower . joyous music be hear and flower rain down three time a day . there be sing bird whose harmonious note proclaim the praise of religion and in the mind of those who listen to their sweet sound remembrance arises of the buddha the law and the brotherhood . no evil birth be possible there and even the name of hell be unknown . he who fervently and with a pious mind repeat the word 'amit bha buddha ' will be transport to the happy region of this pure land and when death draw nigh the buddha with a company of saintly follower will stand before him and there will be perfect tranquillity . in truth say the buddha there be such a happy paradise . but the country be spiritual and it be accessible only to those that be spiritual . thou sayest it lie in the west . this mean look for it where he who enlighten the world reside . the sun sink down and leave u in utter darkness the shade of night steal over u and m ra the evil one bury our body in the grave . sunset be nevertheless no extinction and where we imagine we see extinction there be boundless light and inexhaustible life . i understand say the s vaka that the story of the western paradise be not literally true . thy description of paradise the buddha continue be beautiful yet it be insufficient and do little justice to the glory of the pure land . the worldly can speak of it in a worldly way only they use worldly simile and worldly word . but the pure land in which the pure live be more beautiful than thou canst say or imagine . however the repetition of the name amit bha buddha be meritorious only if thou speak it with such a devout attitude of mind a will cleanse thy heart and attune thy will to do work of righteousness . he only can reach the happy land whose soul be fill with the infinite light of truth . he only can live and breathe in the spiritual atmosphere of the western paradise who have attain enlightenment . verily i say unto thee the tath gata life in the pure land of eternal bliss even now while he be still in the body and the tath gata preach the law of religion unto thee and unto the whole world so that thou and thy brother may attain the same peace and the same happiness . say the disciple teach me o lord the meditation to which i must devote myself in order to let my mind enter into the paradise of the pure land . buddha say there be five meditation . the first meditation be the meditation of love in which thou must so adjust thy heart that thou long for the weal and welfare of all being include the happiness of thine enemy . the second meditation be the meditation of pity in which thou thinkest of all being in distress vividly represent in thine imagination their sorrow and anxiety so a to arouse a deep compassion for them in thy soul . the third meditation be the meditation of joy in which thou thinkest of the prosperity of others and rejoicest with their rejoicing . the fourth meditation be the meditation on impurity in which thou considerest the evil consequence of corruption the effect of wrong and evil . how trivial be often the pleasure of the moment and how fatal be it consequence ! the fifth meditation be the meditation on serenity in which thou risest above love and hate tyranny and thraldom wealth and want and regardest thine own fate with impartial calmness and perfect tranquillity . a true follower of the tath gata found not his trust upon austerity or ritual but give up the idea of self relies with his whole heart upon amit bha which be the unbounded light of truth . the blessed one after have explain his doctrine of amit bha the immeasurable light which make him who receive it a buddha look into the heart of his disciple and saw still some doubt and anxiety . and the blessed one say ask me my son the question which weigh upon thy soul . and the disciple say can a humble monk by sanctify himself acquire the talent of supernatural wisdom call abhi a and the supernatural power call iddhi ? show me the iddhi p da the path to the high wisdom ? open to me the jh na which be the mean of acquire sam dhi the fixity of mind which enrapture the soul . and the blessed one say which be the abhi a ? the disciple reply there be six abhi a the celestial eye the celestial ear the body at will or the power of transformation the knowledge of the destiny of former dwelling so a to know former state of existence the faculty of read the thought of others and the knowledge of comprehend the finality of the stream of life . and the blessed one reply these be wondrous thing but verily every man can attain them . consider the ability of thine own mind thou wert bear about two hundred league from here and canst thou not in thy thought in an instant travel to thy native place and remember the detail of thy father 's home ? seest thou not with thy mind 's eye the root of the tree which be shake by the wind without be overthrow ? do not the collector of herb see in his mental vision whenever he please any plant with it root it stem it fruit leaf and even the us to which it can be apply ? can not the man who understand languages recall to his mind any word whenever he please know it exact meaning and import ? how much more do the tath gata understand the nature of thing he look into the heart of men and read their thought . he know the evolution of being and foresees their end . say the disciple then the tath gata teach that man can attain through the jh na the bliss of abhi a. and the blessed one ask in reply which be the jh na through which man reach abhi a ? the disciple reply there be four jh na . the first jh na be seclusion in which one must free his mind from sensuality the second jh na be a tranquillity of mind full of joy and gladness the third jh na be a take delight in thing spiritual the fourth jh na be a state of perfect purity and peace in which the mind be above all gladness and grief . good my son enjoin the blessed one . be sober and abandon wrong practice which serve only to stultify the mind . say the disciple forbear with me o bless one for i have faith without understand and i be seek the truth . o bless one o tath gata my lord and master teach me the iddhip da . the blessed one say there be four mean by which iddhi be acquire prevent bad quality from arise . put away bad quality which have arise . produce goodness that do not yet exist . increase goodness which already exist . search with sincerity and persevere in the search . in the end thou wilt find the truth . lxi . the teacher unknown . and the blessed one say to nanda there be various kind of assembly o nanda assembly of noble of brahman of householder of bhikkhus and of other being . when i use to enter an assembly i always become before i seat myself in color like unto the color of my audience and in voice like unto their voice . i speak to them in their language and then with religious discourse i instruct quickened and gladden them . my doctrine be like the ocean have the same eight wonderful quality . both the ocean and my doctrine become gradually deep . both preserve their identity under all change . both cast out dead body upon the dry land . a the great river when fall into the main lose their name and be thenceforth reckon a the great ocean so all the caste have renounce their lineage and enter the sangha become brother and be reckon the son of sakyamuni . the ocean be the goal of all stream and of the rain from the cloud yet be it never overflow and never empty so the dharma be embrace by many million of people yet it neither increase nor decrease . a the great ocean have only one taste the taste of salt so my doctrine have only one flavor the flavor of emancipation . both the ocean and the dharma be full of gem and pearl and jewel and both afford a dwelling place for mighty being . these be the eight wonderful quality in which my doctrine resemble the ocean . my doctrine be pure and it make no discrimination between noble and ignoble rich and poor . my doctrine be like unto water which cleanse all without distinction . my doctrine be like unto fire which consume all thing that exist between heaven and earth great and small . my doctrine be like unto the heaven for there be room in it ample room for the reception of all for men and woman boy and girls the powerful and the lowly . but when i speak they know me not and would say 'who may this be who thus speak a man or a god ? ' then have instruct quickened and gladden them with religious discourse i would vanish away . but they know me not even when i vanish away . parable and story . lxii . parable . and the blessed one thought i have teach the truth which be excellent in the beginning excellent in the middle and excellent in the end it be glorious in it spirit and glorious in it letter . but simple a it be the people can not understand it . i must speak to them in their own language . i must adapt my thought to their thought . they be like unto child and love to hear tale . therefore i will tell them story to explain the glory of the dharma . if they can not grasp the truth in the abstract argument by which i have reach it they may nevertheless come to understand it if it be illustrate in parable . lxiii . the widow 's two mite and the parable of the three merchant . there be once a lone widow who be very destitute and have go to the mountain she behold hermit hold a religious assembly . then the woman be fill with joy and uttering praise say it be well holy priest ! but while others give precious thing such a the ocean cave produce i have nothing to offer . have speak thus and have search herself in vain for something to give she recollect that some time before she have find in a dungheap two copper so take these she offer them forthwith a a gift to the priesthood in charity . the superior of the priest a saint who could read the heart of men disregard the rich gift of others and behold the deep faith dwelling in the heart of this poor widow and wish the priesthood to esteem rightly her religious merit burst forth with full voice in a canto . he raise his right hand and say reverend priest attend ! and then he proceed the copper of this poor widow to all purpose be more worth than all the treasure of the ocean and the wealth of the broad earth . a an act of pure devotion she have do a pious deed she have attain salvation be free from selfish greed . the woman be mightily strengthen in her mind by this thought and say it be even a the teacher say what i have do be as much a if a rich man be to give up all his wealth . and the teacher say do good deed be like hoard up treasure and he expound this truth in a parable three merchant set out on their travel each with his capital one of them gain much the second return with his capital and the third one come home after have lose his capital . what be true in common life applies also to religion . the capital be the state a man have reach the gain be heaven the loss of his capital mean that a man will be bear in a low state a a denizen of hell or a an animal . these be the course that be open to the sinner . he who bring back his capital be like unto one who be bear again a a man . those who through the exercise of various virtue become pious householder will be bear again a men for all being will reap the fruit of their action . but he who increase his capital be like unto one who practise eminent virtue . the virtuous excellent man attain in heaven to the glorious state of the god . lxiv . the man bear blind . there be a man bear blind and he say i do not believe in the world of light and appearance . there be no color bright or sombre . there be no sun no moon no star . no one have witness these thing . his friend remonstrate with him but he cling to his opinion what you say that you see he object be illusion . if color exist i should be able to touch them . they have no substance and be not real . everything real have weight but i feel no weight where you see color . in those day there be a physician who be call to see the blind man . he mix four simple and when he apply them to the cataract of the blind man the gray film melt and his eye acquire the faculty of sight . the tath gata be the physician the cataract be the illusion of the thought i be and the four simple be the four noble truth . . the lost son . there be a householder 's son who go away into a distant country and while the father accumulate immeasurable rich the son become miserably poor . and the son while search for food and clothing happen to come to the country in which his father live . and the father saw him in his wretchedness for he be rag and brutalize by poverty and order some of his servant to call him . when the son saw the place to which he be conduct he think i must have evoke the suspicion of a powerful man and he will throw me into prison . full of apprehension he make his escape before he have see his father . then the father send messenger out after his son who be catch and bring back in spite of his cry and lamentation . thereupon the father order his servant to deal tenderly with his son and he appoint a laborer of his son 's rank and education to employ the lad a a helpmate on the estate . and the son be pleased with his new situation . from the window of his palace the father watch the boy and when he saw that he be honest and industrious he promote him high and high . after some time he summon his son and call together all his servant and make the secret know to them . then the poor man be exceedingly glad and he be full of joy at meet his father . little by little must the mind of men be train for high truth . lxvi . the giddy fish . there be a bhikkhu who have great difficulty in keep his sens and passion under control so resolve to leave the order he come to the bless one to ask him for a release from the vow . and the blessed one say to the bhikkhu take heed my son l thou fall a prey to the passion of thy misguide heart . for i see that in former existence thou hast suffered much from the evil consequence of lust and unless thou learnest to conquer thy sensual desire thou wilt in this life be ruin through thy folly . listen to a story of another existence of thine a a fish . the fish could be see swim lustily in the river playing with his mate . she move in front suddenly perceive the mesh of a net and slip around escape the danger but he blind by love shot eagerly after her and fell straight into the mouth of the net . the fisherman pull the net up and the fish who complain bitterly of his sad fate say 'this indeed be the bitter fruit of my folly ' would surely have die if the bodhisatta have not chance to come by and understand the language of the fish take pity on him . he buy the poor creature and say to him 'my good fish have i not caught sight of thee this day thou wouldst have lose thy life . i shall save thee but henceforth avoid the evil of lust . ' with these word he throw the fish into the water . make the best of the time of grace that be offer to thee in thy present existence and fear the dart of passion which if thou guard not thy sens will lead thee to destruction . lxvii the cruel crane outwit . a tailor who use to make robe for the brotherhood be wont to cheat his customer and thus pride himself on be smart than other men . but once on enter upon an important business transaction with a stranger he find his master in fraudulent practice and suffer a heavy loss . and the blessed one say this be not an isolated incident in the greedy tailor 's fate in other incarnation he suffer similar loss and by try to dupe others ultimately ruin himself . this same greedy character live many generation ago a a crane near a pond and when the dry season set in he say to the fish with a bland voice 'are you not anxious for your future welfare ? there be at present very little water and still less food in this pond . what will you do should the whole pond become dry in this drought ? ' 'yes indeed ' say the fish 'what should we do ? ' reply the crane ' i know a fine large lake which never become dry . would you not like me to carry you there in my beak ? ' when the fish begin to distrust the honesty of the crane he propose to have one of them send over to the lake to see it and a big carp at last decide to take the risk for the sake of the others and the crane carry him to a beautiful lake and bring him back in safety . then all doubt vanish and the fish gain confidence in the crane and now the crane take them one by one out of the pond and devour them on a big varana tree . there be also a lobster in the pond and when it list the crane to eat him too he say ' i have take all the fish away and put them in a fine large lake . come along . i shall take thee too ! ' 'but how wilt thou hold me to carry me along ? ' ask the lobster . ' i shall take hold of thee with my beak ' say the crane . 'thou wilt let me fall if thou carry me like that . i will not go with thee ! ' reply the lobster . 'thou needst not fear ' rejoin the crane ' i shall hold thee quite tight all the way . ' then say the lobster to himself 'if this crane once get hold of a fish he will certainly never let him go in a lake ! now if he should really put me into the lake it would be splendid but if he do not then i will cut his throat and kill him ! ' so he say to the crane 'look here friend thou wilt not be able to hold me tight enough but we lobster have a famous grip . if thou wilt let me catch hold of thee round the neck with my claw i shall be glad to go with thee . ' the crane do not see that the lobster be try to outwit him and agree . so the lobster catch hold of his neck with his claw as securely a with a pair of blacksmith 's pincer and call out 'ready ready go ! ' the crane take him and show him the lake and then turn off toward the varana tree . 'my dear uncle ! ' cry the lobster 'the lake lie that way but thou art take me this other way . ' answer the crane 'thinkest thou so ? be i thy dear uncle ? thou mean me to understand i suppose that i be thy slave who have to lift thee up and carry thee about with him where thou pleasest ! now cast thine eye upon that heap of fish bone at the root of yonder varana tree . just a i have eat those fish every one of them just so will i devour thee also ! ' 'ah ! those fish get eaten through their own stupidity ' answer the lobster 'but i be not go to let thee kill me . on the contrary it be thou that i be go to destroy . for thou in thy folly hast not see that i have outwit thee . if we die we both die together for i will cut off this head of thine and cast it to the ground ! ' so say he give the crane 's neck a pinch with his claw a with a vise . then gasp and with tear trickle from his eye and tremble with the fear of death the crane beseech the lobster say ' o my lord ! indeed i do not intend to eat thee . grant me my life ! ' 'very well ! fly down and put me into the lake ' reply the lobster . and the crane turn round and step down into the lake to place the lobster on the mud at it edge . then the lobster cut the crane 's neck through as clean a one would cut a lotus stalk with a hunt knife and then enter the water ! when the teacher have finish this discourse he add not now only be this man outwit in this way but in other existence too by his own intrigue . lxviii . four kind of merit . there be a rich man who use to invite all the brahman of the neighborhood to his house and give them rich gift offer great sacrifice to the god . and the blessed one say if a man each month repeat a thousand sacrifice and give offering without cease he be not equal to him who but for one moment fix his mind upon righteousness . the world honor buddha continue there be four kind of offer first when the gift be large and the merit small secondly when the gift be small and the merit small thirdly when the gift be small and the merit large and fourthly when the gift be large and the merit be also large . the first be the case of the deluded man who take away life for the purpose of sacrifice to the god accompany by carouse and feast . here the gift be great but the merit be small indeed . the gift be small and the merit be also small when from covetousness and an evil heart a man keep to himself a part of that which he intend to offer . the merit be great however while the gift be small when a man make his offering from love and with a desire to grow in wisdom and in kindness . lastly the gift be large and the merit be large when a wealthy man in an unselfish spirit and with the wisdom of a buddha give donation and found institution for the best of mankind to enlighten the mind of his fellow men and to administer unto their need . lxix . the light of the world . there be a certain brahman in kosamb a wrangler and well verse in the veda . a he find no one whom he regard his equal in debate he use to carry a lighted torch in his hand and when ask for the reason of his strange conduct he reply the world be so dark that i carry this torch to light it up as far a i can . a samana sitting in the market place heard these word and say my friend if thine eye be blind to the sight of the omnipresent light of the day do not call the world dark . thy torch add nothing to the glory of the sun and thy intention to illumine the mind of others be as futile a it be arrogant . whereupon the brahman ask where be the sun of which thou speakest ? and the samana reply the wisdom of the tath gata be the sun of the mind . his radiancy be glorious by day and night and he whose faith be strong will not lack light on the path to nirv na where he will inherit bliss everlasting . . luxurious living . while the buddha be preach his doctrine for the conversion of the world in the neighborhood of savatthi a man of great wealth who suffer from many ailmemts come to him with clasp hand and say world honor buddha pardon me for my want of respect in not salute thee a i ought but i suffer greatly from obesity excessive drowsiness and other complaint so that i can not move without pain . the tath gata see the luxury with which the man be surround ask him hast thou a desire to know the cause of thy ailment ? and when the wealthy man express his willingness to learn the blessed one say there be five thing which produce the condition of which thou complainest opulent dinner love of sleep hankering after pleasure thoughtlessness and lack of occupation . exercise self control at thy meal and take upon thyself some duty that will exercise thy ability and make thee useful to thy fellow men . in follow this advice thou wilt prolong thy life . the rich man remember the word of the buddha and after some time have recover his lightness of body and youthful buoyancy return to the worldhonored one and come afoot without horse and attendant say to him master thou hast cure my bodily ailment i come now to seek enlightenment of my mind . and the blessed one say the worldling nourish his body but the wise man nourish his mind . he who indulge in the satisfaction of his appetite work his own destruction but he who walk in the path will have both the salvation from evil and a prolongation of life . lxxi . the communication of bliss . annabh ra the slave of sumana have just cut the grass on the meadow saw a samana with his bowl beg for food . throw down his bundle of grass he run into the house and return with the rice that have be provide for his own food . the samana eat the rice and gladden him with word of religious comfort . the daughter of sumana have observe the scene from a window call out good ! annabh ra good ! very good ! sumana hear these word inquire what she mean and on be inform about annabh ra 's devotion and the word of comfort he have receive from the samana go to his slave and offer him money to divide the bliss of his offering . my lord say annabh ra let me first ask the venerable man . and approach the samana he say my master have ask me to share with him the bliss of the offering i make thee of my allowance of rice . be it right that i should divide it with him ? the samana reply in a parable . he say in a village of one hundred house a single light be burn . then a neighbor come with his lamp and light it and in this same way the light be communicate from house to house and the brightness in the village be increase . thus the light of religion may be diffuse without stint him who communicate it . let the bliss of thy offering also be diffuse . divide it . annabh ra return to his master 's house and say to him i present thee my lord with a share of the bliss of my offering . deign to accept it . sumana accept it and offer his slave a sum of money but annabh ra reply not so my lord if i accept thy money it would appear a if i sell thee my share . bliss can not be sell i beg thou wilt accept it a a gift . the master reply brother annabh ra from this day forth thou shalt be free . live with me a my friend and accept this present a a token of my respect . lxxii . the listless fool . there be a rich brahman well advance in year who unmindful of the impermanence of earthly thing and anticipate a long life have build himself a large house . the buddha wonder why a man so near to death have build a mansion with so many apartment and he send nanda to the rich brahman to preach to him the four noble truth and the eightfold path of salvation . the brahman show nanda his house and explain to him the purpose of it numerous chamber but to the instruction of the buddha 's teaching he give no heed . nanda say it be the habit of fool to say ' i have child and wealth . ' he who say so be not even master of himself how can he claim possession of child rich and servant ? many be the anxiety of the worldly but they know nothing of the change of the future . scarcely have nanda leave when the old man be stricken with apoplexy and fell dead . the buddha say for the instruction of those who be ready to learn a fool though he live in the company of the wise understand nothing of the true doctrine a a spoon taste not the flavor of the soup . he think of himself only and unmindful of the advice of good counsellor be unable to deliver himself . lxxiii . rescue in the desert . there be a disciple of the blessed one full of energy and zeal for the truth who live under a vow to complete a meditation in solitude flag in a moment of weakness . he say to himself the teacher say there be several kind of men i must belong to the low class and fear that in this birth there will be neither path nor fruit for me . what be the use of a forest life if i can not by my constant endeavor attain the insight of meditation to which i have devote myself ? and he leave the solitude and return to the jetavana . when the brother saw him they say to him thou hast do wrong o brother after take a vow to give up the attempt of carry it out and they take him to the master . when the bless one saw them he say i see o mendicant that you have bring this brother here against his will . what have he do ? lord this brother have take the vow of so sanctify a faith have abandon the endeavor to accomplish the aim of a member of the order and have come back to u . then the teacher say to him be it true that thou hast give up try ? it be true o bless one ! be the reply . the master say this present life of thine be a time of grace . if thou fail now to reach the happy state thou wilt have to suffer remorse in future existence . how be it brother that thou hast prove so irresolute ? why in former state of existence thou wert full of determination . by thy energy alone the men and bullock of five hundred wagon obtain water in the sandy desert and be save . how be it that thou now givest up ? by these few word that brother be re establish in his resolution . but the others beseech the blessed one say lord ! tell u how this be . listen then o mendicant ! say the bless one and have thus excite their attention he make manifest a thing conceal by change of birth . once upon a time when brahmadatta be reign in k si the bodhisatta be bear in a merchant 's family and when he grow up he go about traffic with five hundred cart . one day he arrive at a sandy desert many league across . the sand in that desert be so fine that when take in the closed fist it could not be keep in the hand . after the sun have rise it become as hot a a mass of burn ember so that no man could walk on it . those therefore who have to travel over it take wood and water and oil and rice in their cart and travel during the night . and at daybreak they form an encampment and spread an awning over it and take their meal early they pass the day lie in the shade . at sunset they sup and when the ground have become cool they yoke their ox and go on . the traveling be like a voyage over the sea a desert pilot have to be choose and he bring the caravan safe to the other side by his knowledge of the star . thus the merchant of our story traverse the desert . and when he have pass over fifty nine league he think now in one more night we shall get out of the sand and after supper he direct the wagon to be yoke and so set out . the pilot have cushion arrange on the foremost cart and lay down look at the star and direct the men where to drive . but wear out by want of rest during the long march he fell asleep and do not perceive that the ox have turn round and take the same road by which they have come . the oxen go on the whole night through . towards dawn the pilot wake up and observe the star call out stop the wagon stop the wagon ! the day break just a they stop and be draw up the cart in a line . then the men cry out why this be the very encampment we leave yesterday ! we have but little wood leave and our water be all go ! we be lose ! and unyoke the ox and spread the canopy over their head they lay down in despondency each one under his wagon . but the bodhisatta say to himself if i lose heart all these will perish and walk about while the morning be yet cool . on see a tuft of kusa grass he think this could have grow only by soak up some water which must be beneath it . and he make them bring a spade and dig in that spot . and they dig sixty cubit deep . and when they have get thus far the spade of the digger strike on a rock and as soon a it strike they all give up in despair . but the bodhisatta think there must be water under that rock and descend into the well he get upon the stone and stoop down apply his ear to it and test the sound of it . he hear the sound of water gurgle beneath and when he get out he call his page . my lad if thou givest up now we shall all be lose . do not lose heart . take this iron hammer and go down into the pit and give the rock a good blow . the lad obeyed and though they all stood by in despair he go down full of determination and struck at the stone . the rock split in two and fell below so that it no longer block the stream and water rise till it depth from the bottom to the brim of the well be equal to the height of a palm tree . and they all drank of the water and bath in it . then they cook rice and eat it and feed their ox with it . and when the sun set they put a flag in the well and go to the place appoint . there they sell their merchandise at a good profit and return to their home and when they die they pass away accord to their deed . and the bodhisatta give gift and do other virtuous act and he also pass away accord to his deed . after the teacher have tell the story he form the connection by say in conclusion the caravanleader be the bodhisatta the future buddha the page who at that time despair not but break the stone and give water to the multitude be this brother without perseverance and the other men be attendant on the buddha . lxxiv . the sower . bh radv ja a wealthy brahman farmer be celebrate his harvest thanksgiving when the bless one come with his alms bowl beg for food . some of the people pay him reverence but the brahman be angry and say o samana it would be more fitting for thee to go to work than to beg . i plough and sow and have plough and sow i eat . if thou didst likewise thou too wouldst have something to eat . the tath gata answer him and say o brahman i too plough and sow and have plough and sow i eat . dost thou profess to be a husbandman ? reply the brahman . where then be thy bullock ? where be the seed and the plough ? the blessed one say faith be the seed i sow good work be the rain that fertilize it wisdom and modesty be the plough my mind be the guide rein i lay hold of the handle of the law earnestness be the goad i use and exertion be my draught ox . this ploughing be plough to destroy the weed of illusion . the harvest it yield be the immortal fruit of nirv na and thus all sorrow end . then the brahman pour rice milk into a golden bowl and offer it to the bless one say let the teacher of mankind partake of the rice milk for the venerable gotama plough a ploughing that bear the fruit of immortality . . the outcast . when bhagavat dwelt at s vatthi in the jetavana he go out with his alms bowl to beg for food and approach the house of a brahman priest while the fire of an offering be blaze upon the altar . and the priest say stay there o shaveling stay there o wretched samana thou art an outcast . the blessed one reply who be an outcast ? an outcast be the man who be angry and bear hatred the man who be wicked and hypocritical he who embrace error and be full of deceit . whosoever be a provoker and be avaricious have evil desire be envious wicked shameless and without fear to commit wrong let him be know a an outcast . not by birth do one become an outcast not by birth do one become a brahman by deed one become an outcast by deed one become a brahman . lxxvi . the woman at the well . nanda the favorite disciple of the buddha have be send by the lord on a mission pass by a well near a village and see pakati a girl of the m tanga caste he ask her for water to drink . pakati say o brahman i be too humble and mean to give thee water to drink do not ask any service of me l thy holiness be contaminate for i be of low caste . and nanda reply i ask not for caste but for water and the m tanga girl 's heart leap joyfully and she give nanda to drink . nanda thank her and go away but she follow him at a distance . have heard that nanda be a disciple of gotama sakyamuni the girl repair to the bless one and cry o lord help me and let me live in the place where nanda thy disciple dwells so that i may see him and minister unto him for i love nanda . and the blessed one understood the emotion of her heart and he say pakati thy heart be full of love but thou understandest not thine own sentiment . it be not nanda that thou lovest but his kindness . accept then the kindness thou hast see him practise unto thee and in the humility of thy station practise it unto others . verily there be great merit in the generosity of a king when he be land to a slave but there be a great merit in the slave when he ignore the wrong which he suffer and cherishes kindness and good will to all mankind . he will cease to hate his oppressor and even when powerless to resist their usurpation will with compassion pity their arrogance and supercilious demeanor . bless art thou pakati for though thou art a m tanga thou wilt be a model for nobleman and noblewoman . thou art of low caste but brahman may learn a lesson from thee . swerve not from the path of justice and righteousness and thou wilt outshine the royal glory of queen on the throne . lxxvii . the peacemaker . it be report that two kingdom be on the verge of war for the possession of a certain embankment which be dispute by them . and the buddha see the king and their army ready to fight request them to tell him the cause of their quarrel . have hear the complaint on both side he say i understand that the embankment have value for some of your people have it any intrinsic value aside from it service to your men ? it have no intrinsic value whatever be the reply . the tath gata continue now when you go to battle be it not sure that many of your men will be slay and that you yourselves o king be liable to lose your life ? and they say verily it be sure that many will be slay and our own life be jeopardize . the blood of men however say buddha have it less intrinsic value than a mound of earth ? no the king say the life of men and above all the life of king be priceless . then the tath gata conclude be you go to stake that which be priceless against that which have no intrinsic value whatever ? the wrath of the two monarch abate and they come to a peaceable agreement . lxxviii . the hungry dog . there be a great king who oppress his people and be hat by his subject yet when the tath gata come into his kingdom the king desire much to see him . so he go to the place where the blessed one stayed and ask o sakyamuni canst thou teach a lesson to the king that will divert his mind and benefit him at the same time ? and the blessed one say i shall tell thee the parable of the hungry dog there be a wicked tyrant and the god indra assume the shape of a hunter come down upon earth with the demon m tali the latter appear a a dog of enormous size . hunter and dog enter the palace and the dog howl so wofully that the royal building shook by the sound to their very foundation . the tyrant have the awe inspire hunter bring before his throne and inquire after the cause of the terrible bark . the hunter say the dog be hungry whereupon the frightened king order food for him . all the food prepare at the royal banquet disappear rapidly in the dog 's jaw and still he howl with portentous significance . more food be send for and all the royal store house be empty but in vain . then the tyrant grow desperate and ask 'will nothing satisfy the craving of that woful beast ? ' 'nothing ' reply the hunter 'nothing except perhaps the flesh of all his enemy . ' 'and who be his enemy ? ' anxiously ask the tyrant . the hunter reply 'the dog will howl as long a there be people hungry in the kingdom and his enemy be those who practise injustice and oppress the poor . ' the oppressor of the people remember his evil deed be seize with remorse and for the first time in his life he begin to listen to the teaching of righteousness . have end his story the bless one address the king who have turn pale and say to him the tath gata can quicken the spiritual ear of the powerful and when thou great king hearest the dog bark think of the teaching of the buddha and thou mayst still learn to pacify the monster . lxxix . the despot . king brahmadatta happen to see a beautiful woman the wife of a brahman merchant and conceive a passion for her order a precious jewel secretly to be drop into the merchant 's carriage . the jewel be miss search for and find . the merchant be arrest on the charge of steal and the king pretend to listen with great attention to the defence and with seem regret order the merchant to be execute while his wife be consign to the royal harem . brahmadatta attend the execution in person for such sight be wont to give him pleasure but when the doom man look with deep compassion at his infamous judge a flash of the buddha 's wisdom light up the king 's passion becloud mind and while the executioner raise the sword for the fatal stroke brahmadatta felt the effect in his own mind and he imagine he saw himself on the block . hold executioner ! shout brahmadatta it be the king whom thou slayest ! but it be too late ! the executioner have do the bloody deed . the king fell back in a swoon and when he awake a change have come over him . he have cease to be the cruel despot and henceforth lead a life of holiness and rectitude . the people say that the character of the brahman have be impress into his mind . o ye who commit murder and robbery ! the veil of self delusion cover your eye . if ye could see thing a they be not a they appear ye would no longer inflict injury and pain on your own self . ye see not that ye will have to atone for your evil deed for what ye sow that will ye reap . . v savadatt . there be a courtesan in mathur name v savadatt . she happen to see upagutta one of buddha 's disciple a tall and beautiful youth and fell desperately in love with him . v savadatt send an invitation to the young man but he reply the time have not yet arrive when upagutta will visit v savadatt . the courtesan be astonish at the reply and she send again for him say v savadatt desire love not gold from upagutta . but upagutta make the same enigmatic reply and do not come . a few month later v savadatt have a love intrigue with the chief of the artisan and at that time a wealthy merchant come to mathur who fell in love with v savadatt . see his wealth and fear the jealousy of her other lover she contrive the death of the chief of the artisan and conceal his body under a dunghill . when the chief of the artisan have disappear his relative and friend search for him and find his body . v savadatt however be try by a judge and condemn to have her ear and nose her hand and foot cut off and fling into a graveyard . v savadatt have be a passionate girl but kind to her servant and one of her maid follow her and out of love for her former mistress minister unto her in her agony and chase away the crow . now the time have arrive when upagutta decide to visit v savadatt . when he come the poor woman order her maid to collect and hide under a cloth her severed limb and he greet her kindly but she say with petulance once this body be fragrant like the lotus and i offer thee my love . in those day i be cover with pearl and fine muslin . now i be mangle by the executioner and cover with filth and blood . sister say the young man it be not for my pleasure that i approach thee . it be to restore to thee a nobler beauty than the charm which thou hast lost . i have see with mine eye the tath gata walk upon earth and teach men his wonderful doctrine . but thou wouldst not have listen to the word of righteousness while surround with temptation while under the spell of passion and yearning for worldly pleasure . thou wouldst nor have listen to the teaching of the tath gata for thy heart be wayward and thou didst set thy trust on the sham of thy transient charm . the charm of a lovely form be treacherous and quickly lead into temptation which have prove too strong for thee . but there be a beauty which will not fade and if thou wilt but listen to the doctrine of our lord the buddha thou wilt find that peace which thou wouldst have find in the restless world of sinful pleasure . v savadatt become calm and a spiritual happiness soothe the torture of her bodily pain for where there be much suffering there be also great bliss . have take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha she die in pious submission to the punishment of her crime . lxxxi . the marriage feast in jamb nada . there be a man in jamb nada who be to be marry the next day and he think would that the buddha the bless one might be present at the wedding . and the blessed one pass by his house and meet him and when he read the silent wish in the heart of the bridegroom he consent to enter . when the holy one appear with the retinue of his many bhikkhus the host whose mean be limit receive them a best he could say eat my lord and all thy congregation accord to your desire . while the holy men eat the meat and drink remain undiminished and the host think to himself how wondrous be this ! i should have have plenty for all my relative and friend . would that i have invite them all . when this thought be in the host 's mind all his relative and friend enter the house and although the hall in the house be small there be room in it for all of them . they sit down at the table and ate and there be more than enough for all of them . the blessed one be pleased to see so many guest full of good cheer and he quicken them and gladden them with word of truth proclaim the bliss of righteousness the great happiness which a mortal man can imagine be the bond of marriage that tie together two love heart . but there be a great happiness still it be the embrace of truth . death will separate husband and wife but death will never affect him who have espouse the truth . therefore be marry unto the truth and live with the truth in holy wedlock . the husband who love his wife and desire for a union that shall be everlasting must be faithful to her so a to be like truth itself and she will rely upon him and revere him and minister unto him . and the wife who love her husband and desire a union that shall be everlasting must be faithful to him so a to be like truth itself and he will place his trust in her he will provide for her . verily i say unto you their child will become like unto their parent and will bear witness to their happiness . let no man be single let every one be wed in holy love to the truth . and when m ra the destroyer come to separate the visible form of your be you will continue to live in the truth and you will partake of the life everlasting for the truth be immortal . there be no one among the guest but be strengthen in his spiritual life and recognize the sweetness of a life of righteousness and they take refuge in buddha the dharma and the sangha . lxxxii . a party in search of a thief . have send out his disciple the blessed one himself wander from place to place until he reach uruvel . on his way he sit down in a grove to rest and it happen that in that same grove there be a party of thirty friend who be enjoy themselves with their wife and while they be sport some of their good be steal . then the whole party go in search of the thief and meet the bless one sit under a tree salute him and say pray lord didst thou see the thief pas by with our good ? and the blessed one say which be well for you that you go in search for the thief or for yourselves ? and the youth cry in search for ourselves ! well then say the bless one sit down and i will preach the truth to you . and the whole party sit down and they listen eagerly to the word of the blessed one . have grasp the truth they praise the doctrine and take refuge in the buddha . lxxxiii . in the realm of yamar ja . there be a brahman a religious man and fond in his affection but without deep wisdom . he have a son of great promise who when seven year old be strike with a fatal disease and die . the unfortunate father be unable to control himself he throw himself upon the corpse and lay there a one dead . the relative come and bury the dead child and when the father come to himself he be so immoderate in his grief that he behave like an insane person . he no longer give way to tear but wander about ask for the residence of yamar ja the king of death humbly to beg of him that his child might be allow to return to life . have arrive at a great brahman temple the sad father go through certain religious rite and fell asleep . while wander on in his dream he come to a deep mountain pas where he meet a number of samanas who have acquire supreme wisdom . kind sir he say can you not tell me where the residence of yamar ja be ? and they ask him good friend why wouldst thou know ? whereupon he tell them his sad story and explain his intention . pity his self delusion the samanas say no mortal man can reach the place where yama reign but some four hundred mile westward lie a great city in which many good spirit live every eighth day of the month yama visit the place and there mayst thou see him who be the king of death and ask him for a boon . the brahman rejoice at the news go to the city and find it a the samanas have tell him . he be admit to the dread presence of yama the king of death who on hear his request say thy son now live in the eastern garden where he be disport himself go there and ask him to follow thee . say the happy father how do it happen that my son without have perform one good work be now live in paradise ? yamar ja reply he have obtain celestial happiness not for perform good deed but because he die in faith and in love to the lord and master the most glorious buddha . the buddha say 'the heart of love and faith spread a it be a beneficent shade from the world of men to the world of god . ' this glorious utterance be like the stamp of a king 's seal upon a royal edict . the happy father hasten to the place and saw his beloved child play with other child all transfigure by the peace of the blissful existence of a heavenly life . he run up to his boy and cry with tear run down his cheek my son my son dost thou not remember me thy father who watch over thee with love care and tend thee in thy sickness ? return home with me to the land of the living . but the boy while struggle to go back to his playmate upbraid him for use such strange expression a father and son . in my present state he say i know no such word for i be free from delusion . on this the brahman depart and when he wake from his dream he bethink himself of the blessed master of mankind the great buddha and resolve to go to him lay bare his grief and seek consolation . have arrive at the jetavana the brahman tell his story and how his boy have refuse to recognize him and to go home with him . and the world honor one say truly thou art delude . when man die the body be dissolve into it element but the spirit be not entomb . it lead a high mode of life in which all the relative term of father son wife mother be at an end just a a guest who leave his lodging have do with it a though it be a thing of the past . men concern themselves most about that which pass away but the end of life quickly come a a burning torrent sweep away the transient in a moment . they be like a blind man set to look after a burning lamp . a wise man understand the transiency of worldly relation destroy the cause of grief and escape from the seethe whirlpool of sorrow . religious wisdom lift a man above the pleasure and pain of the world and give him peace everlasting . the brahman ask the permission of the blessed one to enter the community of his bhikkhus so a to acquire that heavenly wisdom which alone can give comfort to an afflicted heart . lxxxiv . the mustard seed . there be a rich man who find his gold suddenly transform into ash and he take to his bed and refuse all food . a friend hearing of his sickness visit the rich man and learn the cause of his grief . and the friend say thou didst not make good use of thy wealth . when thou didst hoard it up it be not good than ash . now heed my advice . spread mat in the bazaar pile up these ash and pretend to trade with them . the rich man do a his friend have tell him and when his neighbor ask him why sellest thou ash ? he say i offer my good for sale . after some time a young girl name ki gotam an orphan and very poor pass by and see the rich man in the bazaar say my lord why pilest thou thus up gold and silver for sale . and the rich man say wilt thou please hand me that gold and silver ? and kis gotam take up a handful of ash and lo ! they change back into gold . consider that ki gotam have the mental eye of spiritual knowledge and saw the real worth of thing the rich man give her in marriage to his son and he say with many gold be no good than ash but with kis gotam ash become pure gold . and kis gotam have an only son and he die . in her grief she carry the dead child to all her neighbor ask them for medicine and the people say she have lose her sens . the boy be dead . at length ki gotam meet a man who reply to her request i can not give thee medicine for thy child but i know a physician who can . and the girl say pray tell me sir who be it ? and the man reply go to sakyamuni the buddha . kis gotam repair to the buddha and cry lord and master give me the medicine that will cure my boy . the buddha answer i want a handful of mustard seed . and when the girl in her joy promise to procure it the buddha add the mustard seed must be take from a house where no one have lose a child husband parent or friend . poor ki gotam now go from house to house and the people pity her and say here be mustard seed take it ! but when she ask do a son or daughter a father or mother die in your family ? they answer her ala ! the living be few but the dead be many . do not remind u of our deep grief . and there be no house but some beloved one have die in it . kis gotam become weary and hopeless and sit down at the wayside watch the light of the city a they flicker up and be extinguish again . at last the darkness of the night reign everywhere . and she consider the fate of men that their life flicker up and be extinguish . and she think to herself how selfish be i in my grief ! death be common to all yet in this valley of desolation there be a path that lead him to immortality who have surrender all selfishness . put away the selfishness of her affection for her child ki gotam have the dead body bury in the forest . return to the buddha she take refuge in him and find comfort in the dharma which be a balm that will soothe all the pain of our troubled heart . the buddha say the life of mortal in this world be troubled and brief and combine with pain . for there be not any mean by which those that have be bear can avoid die after reach old age there be death of such a nature be live being . a ripe fruit be early in danger of fall so mortal when bear be always in danger of death . a all earthen vessel make by the potter end in be break so be the life of mortal . both young and adult both those who be fool and those who be wise all fall into the power of death all be subject to death . of those who overcome by death depart from life a father can not save his son nor kinsmen their relation . mark ! while relative be look on and lament deeply one by one mortal be carry off like an ox that be lead to the slaughter . so the world be afflict with death and decay therefore the wise do not grieve know the term of the world . in whatever manner people think a thing will come to pass it be often different when it happen and great be the disappointment see such be the term of the world . not from weep nor from grieve will any one obtain peace of mind on the contrary his pain will be the great and his body will suffer . he will make himself sick and pale yet the dead be not save by his lamentation . people pass away and their fate after death will be accord to their deed . if a man live a hundred year or even more he will at last be separate from the company of his relative and leave the life of this world . he who seek peace should draw out the arrow of lamentation and complaint and grief . he who have draw out the arrow and have become compose will obtain peace of mind he who have overcome all sorrow will become free from sorrow and be bless . . follow the master over the stream . south of s vatthi be a great river on the bank of which lay a hamlet of five hundred house . thinking of the salvation of the people the world honor one resolved to go to the village and preach the doctrine . have come to the riverside he sit down beneath a tree and the villager see the glory of his appearance approach him with reverence but when he begin to preach they believe him not . when the world honor buddha have leave s vatthi s riputta felt a desire to see the lord and to hear him preach . come to the river where the water be deep and the current strong he say to himself this stream shall not prevent me . i shall go and see the blessed one and he step upon the water which be a firm under his foot a a slab of granite . when he arrive at a place in the middle of the stream where the wave be high s riputta 's heart give way and he begin to sink . but rouse his faith and renew his mental effort he proceed a before and reach the other bank . the people of the village be astonish to see s riputta and they ask how he could cross the stream where there be nether a bridge nor a ferry . and s riputta reply i live in ignorance until i hear the voice of the buddha . a i be anxious to hear the doctrine of salvation i cross the river and i walk over it troubled water because i have faith . faith nothing else enable me to do so and now i be here in the bliss of the master 's presency . the world honor one add s riputta thou hast speak well . faith like thine alone can save the world from the yawn gulf of migration and enable men to walk dryshod to the other shore . and the blessed one urge to the villager the necessity of ever advance in the conquest of sorrow and of cast off all shackle so a to cross the river of worldliness and attain deliverance from death . hear the word of the tath gata the villager be fill with joy and believing in the doctrine of the blessed one embrace the five rule and take refuge in his name . lxxxvi . the sick bhikkhu . an old bhikkhu of a surly disposition be afflict with a loathsome disease the sight and smell of which be so nauseating that no one would come near him or help him in his distress . and it happen that the world honor one come to the vih ra in which the unfortunate man lay hearing of the case he order warm water to be prepare and go to the sick room to administer unto the sore of the patient with his own hand say to his disciple the tath gata have come into the world to befriend the poor to succor the unprotected to nourish those in bodily affliction both the follower of the dharma and unbeliever to give sight to the blind and enlighten the mind of the delude to stand up for the right of orphan as well a the aged and in so do to set an example to others . this be the consummation of his work and thus he attain the great goal of life a the river that lose themselves in the ocean . the world honor one administer unto the sick bhikkhu daily so long a he stay in that place . and the governor of the city come to the buddha to do him reverence and have heard of the service which the lord do in the vih ra ask the bless one about the previous existence of the sick monk and the buddha say in day go by there be a wicked king who use to extort from his subject all he could get and he order one of his officer to lay the lash on a man of eminence . the officer little thinking of the pain he inflict upon others obey but when the victim of the king 's wrath beg for mercy he felt compassion and lay the whip lightly upon him . now the king be reborn a devadatta who be abandon by all his follower because they be no longer willing to stand his severity and he die miserable and full of penitence . the officer be the sick bhikkhu who have often give offence to his brother in the vih ra be leave without assistance in his distress . the eminent man however who be unjustly beat and beg for mercy be the bodhisatta he have be reborn a the tath gata . it be now the lot of the tath gata to help the wretched officer a he have mercy on him . and the world honor one repeat these line he who inflict pain on the gentle or falsely accuse the innocent will inherit one of the ten great calamity . but he who have learn to suffer with patience will be purify and will be the chosen instrument for the alleviation of suffer . the diseased bhikkhu on hear these word turn to the buddha confess his ill natured temper and repent and with a heart cleanse from error do reverence unto the lord . lxxxvii . the patient elephant . while the blessed one be reside in the jetavana there be a householder living in s vatthi know to all his neighbor a patient and kind but his relative be wicked and contrive a plot to rob him . one day they come to the householder and often worry him with all kind of threat take away a goodly portion of his property . he do not go to court nor do he complain but tolerate with great forbearance the wrong he suffer . the neighbor wonder and begin to talk about it and rumor of the affair reach the ear of the brother in jetavana . while the brother discuss the occurrence in the assembly hall the blessed one enter and ask what be the topic of your conversation ? and they tell him . say the bless one the time will come when the wicked relative will find their punishment . o brother this be not the first time that this occurrence take place it have happen before and he tell them a world old tale . once upon a time when brahmadatta be king of benares the bodhisatta be bear in the him laya region a an elephant . he grow up strong and big and range the hill and mountains the peak and cave of the tortuous wood in the valley . once a he go he saw a pleasant tree and take his food stand under it . then some impertinent monkey come down out of the tree and jumping on the elephant 's back insulted and torment him greatly they take hold of his tusk pull his tail and disport themselves thereby cause him much annoyance . the bodhisatta be full of patience kindliness and mercy take no notice at all of their misconduct which the monkey repeat again and again . one day the spirit that live in the tree stand upon the tree trunk address the elephant say my lord elephant why dost thou put up with the impudence of these bad monkey ? and he ask the question in a couplet a follow why dost thou patiently endure each freak these mischievous and selfish monkey wreak ? the bodhisatta on hear this replied if tree sprite i can not endure these monkey ' ill treatment without abuse their birth lineage and person how can i walk in the eightfold noble path ? but these monkey will do the same to others think them to be like me . if they do it to any rogue elephant he will punish them indeed and i shall be deliver both from their annoyance and the guilt of have do harm to others . say this he repeat another stanza if they will treat another one like me he will destroy them and i shall be free . a few day after the bodhisatta go elsewhither and another elephant a savage beast come and stand in his place . the wicked monkey think him to be like the old one climb upon bi back and do a before . the rogue elephant seize the monkey with his trunk throw them upon the ground gore them with his tusk and trample them to mincemeat under his foot . when the master have end this teaching he declare the truth and identify the birth say at that time the mischievous monkey be the wicked relative of the good man the rogue elephant be the one who will punish them but the virtuous noble elephant be the tath gata himself in a former incarnation . after this discourse one of the brother rise and ask leave to propose a question and when permission be grant he say i have hear the doctrine that wrong should be meet with wrong and the evil doer should be check by be make to suffer for if this be not do evil would increase and good would disappear . what shall we do ? say the bless one nay i will tell you ye who have leave the world and have adopt this glorious faith of put aside selfishness ye shall not do evil for evil nor return hate for hate . nor do ye think that ye can destroy wrong by retaliate evil for evil and thus increase wrong . leave the wicked to their fate and their evil deed will sooner or later in one way or another bring on their own punishment . and the tath gata repeat these stanza who harmeth him that doth no harm and striketh him that striketh not shall gravest punishment incur the which his wickedness beget some of the great ill in life either a loathsome dread disease or dread old age or loss of mind or wretched pain without surcease or conflagration loss of wealth or of his near kin he shall see some one die that 's dear to him and then he 'll be reborn in hell . the last day . lxxxviii . the condition of welfare . when the bless one be reside on the mount call vulture 's peak near r jagaha aj tasattu the king of magadha who reign in the place of bimbis ra plan an attack on the vajj s and he say to vassak ra his prime minister i will root out the vajj s mighty though they be . i will destroy the vajj s i will bring them to utter ruin ! come now o brahman and go to the bless one inquire in my name for his health and tell him my purpose . bear carefully in mind what the blessed one may say and repeat it to me for the buddha speak nothing untrue . when vassak ra the prime minister have greet the bless one and deliver his message the venerable nanda stand behind the blessed one and fan him and the blessed one say to him hast thou heard nanda that the vajjis hold full and frequent public assembly ? lord so i have hear reply he . so long nanda say the blessed one a the vajjis hold these full and frequent public assembly they may be expect not to decline but to prosper . so long a they meet together in concord so long a they honor their elder so long a they respect womanhood so long a they remain religious perform all proper rite so long a they extend the rightful protection defence and support to the holy one the vajjis may be expect not to decline but to prosper . then the bless one addressed vassak ra and say when i stay o brahman at f l i teach the vajjis these condition of welfare that so long a they should remain well instruct so long a they will continue in the right path so long a they live up to the precept of righteousness we could expect them not to decline but to prosper . as soon a the king 's messenger have go the blessed one have the brother that be in the neighborhood of r jagaha assemble in the service hall and address them say i will teach you o bhikkhus the condition of the welfare of a community . listen well and i will speak . so lone o bhikkhus a the brother hold full and frequent assembly meeting in concord rising in concord and attend in concord to the affair of the sangha so long a they o bhikkhus do not abrogate that which experience have prove to be good and introduce nothing except such thing a have be carefully test so long a their elder practise justice so long a the brother esteem revere and support their elder and hearken unto their word so long a the brother be not under the influence of crave but delight in the blessing of religion so that good and holy men shall come to them and dwell among them in quiet so long a the brother shall not be addict to sloth and idleness so long a the brother shall exercise themselves in the sevenfold high wisdom of mental activity search after truth energy joy modesty self control earnest contemplation and equanimity of mind so long the sangha may be expect not to decline but to prosper . therefore o bhikkhus be full of faith modest in heart afraid of sin anxious to learn strong in energy active in mind and full of wisdom . lxxxix . s riputta 's faith . the blessed one proceed with a great company of the brother to n land and there he stay in a mango grove . now the venerable s riputta come to the place where the blessed one be and have salute him take his seat respectfully at his side and say lord ! such faith have i in the blessed one that methinks there never have be nor will there be nor be there now any other who be great or wise than the blessed one that be to say a regard the high wisdom . reply the bless one grand and bold be the word of thy mouth s riputta verily thou hast burst forth into a song of ecstasy ! surely then thou hast know all the bless one who in the long age of the past have be holy buddha ? not so o lord ! say s riputta . and the lord continue then thou hast perceive all the bless one who in the long age of the future shall be holy buddhas ? not so o lord ! but at least then o s riputta thou knowest me a the holy buddha now alive and hast penetrate my mind . not even that o lord ! thou seest then s riputta that thou knowest not the heart of the holy buddha of the past nor the heart of those of the future . why therefore be thy word so grand and bold ? why burstest thou forth into such a song of ecstasy ? o lord ! i have not the knowledge of the heart of all the buddha that have be and be to come and now be . i only know the lineage of the faith . just a a king lord might have a border city strong in it foundation strong in it rampart and with one gate only and the king might have a watchman there clever expert and wise to stop all stranger and admit only friend . and on go over the approach all about the city he might not be able so to observe all the joint and crevice in the rampart of that city a to know where such a small creature a a cat could get out . that might well be . yet all living being of large size that enter or leave the city would have to pass through that gate . thus only be it lord that i know the lineage of the faith . i know that the holy buddha of the past put away all lust ill will sloth pride and doubt know all those mental fault which make men weak train their mind in the four kind of mental activity thoroughly exercise themselves in the sevenfold high wisdom receive the full fruition of enlightenment . and i know that the holy buddha of the time to come will do the same . and i know that the blessed one the holy buddha of to day have do so now . great be thy faith o s riputta reply the blessed one but take heed that it be well ground . . p taliputta . when the bless one have stay as long a convenient at n land he go to p taliputta the frontier town of magadha and when the disciple at p taliputta heard of his arrival they invite him to their village rest house . and the blessed one robed himself take his bowl and go with the brother to the rest house . there he wash his foot enter the hall and seat himself against the center pillar with his face towards the east . the brother also have wash their foot enter the hall and take their seat round the blessed one against the western wall face the east . and the lay devotee of p taliputta have also wash their foot enter the hall and take their seat opposite the blessed one against the eastern wall facing towards the west . then the bless one address the lay disciple of p taliputta and he say fivefold o householder be the loss of the wrong doer through his want of rectitude . in the first place the wrong doer devoid of rectitude fall into great poverty through sloth in the next place his evil repute get noise abroad thirdly whatever society he enter whether of brahman noble head of house or samanas he enter shyly and confusedly fourthly he be full of anxiety when he die and lastly on the dissolution of the body after death his mind remain in an unhappy state . wherever his karma continue there will be suffer and woe . this o householder be the fivefold loss of the evil doer ! fivefold o householder be the gain of the well doer through his practice of rectitude . in the first place the well doer strong in rectitude acquires property through his industry in the next place good report of him be spread abroad thirdly whatever society he enter whether of noble brahman head of house or member of the order he enter with confidence and self possession fourthly he die without anxiety and lastly on the dissolution of the body after death his mind remain in a happy state . wherever his karma continue there will be heavenly bliss and peace . this o householder be the fivefold gain of the well doer . when the bless one have teach the disciple and incite them and rouse them and gladden them far into the night with religious edification he dismiss them say the night be far spent o householder . it be time for you to do what ye deem most fit . be it so lord ! answer the disciple of p taliputta and rise from their seat they bow to the bless one and keep him on their right hand a they pass him they depart thence . while the blessed one stay at p taliputta the king of magadha send a messenger to the governor of p taliputta to raise fortification for the security of the town . and the blessed one see the laborer at work predict the future greatness of the place say the men who build the fortress act a if they have consult high power . for this city of p taliputta will be a dwelling place of busy men and a center for the exchange of all kind of good . but three danger hang over p taliputta that of fire that of water that of dissension . when the governor heard of the prophecy of p taliputta 's future he greatly rejoice and name the city gate through which the buddha have go towards the river gang the gotama gate . meanwhile the people live on the bank of the ganges arrive in great number to pay reverence to the lord of the world and many person ask him to do them the honor to cross over in their boat . but the blessed one consider the number of the boat and their beauty do not want to show any partiality and by accept the invitation of one to offend all the others . he therefore cross the river without any boat signify thereby that the raft of asceticism and the gaudy gondola of religious ceremony be not staunch enough to weather the storm of sam ra while the tath gata can walk dry shod over the ocean of worldliness . and a the city gate be call after the name of the tath gata so the people call this passage of the river gotama ford . xci . the mirror of truth . the blessed one proceed to the village n dik with a great company of brother and there he stay at the brick hall . and the venerable nanda go to the bless one and mention to him the name of the brother and sister that have die anxiously inquire about their fate after death whether they have be reborn in animal or in hell or a ghost or in any place of woe . and the blessed one reply to nanda and say those who have die after the complete destruction of the three bond of lust of covetousness and of the egotistical cleaving to existence need not fear the state after death . they will not be reborn in a state of suffer their mind will not continue a a karma of evil deed or sin but be assure of final salvation . when they die nothing will remain of them but their good thought their righteous act and the bliss that proceed from truth and righteousness . a river must at last reach the distant main so their mind will be reborn in high state of existence and continue to be press on to their ultimate goal which be the ocean of truth the eternal peace of nirv na . men be anxious about death and their fate after death but consider it be not at all strange nanda that a human be should die . however that thou shouldst inquire about them and have hear the truth still be anxious about the dead this be wearisome to the bless one . i will therefore teach thee the mirror of truth and let the faithful disciple repeat it 'hell be destroy for me and rebirth a an animal or a ghost or in any place of woe . i be convert i be no longer liable to be reborn in a state of suffering and be assure of final salvation . ' what then nanda be this mirror of truth ? it be the consciousness that the elect disciple be in this world possess of faith in the buddha believe the bless one to be the holy one the fully enlighten one wise upright happy world know supreme the bridler of men 's wayward hearts the teacher of god and men the bless buddha . it be far the consciousness that the disciple be possess of faith in the truth believe the truth to have be proclaim by the blessed one for the benefit of the world pass not away welcome all lead to salvation to which through truth the wise will attain each one by his own effort . and finally it be the consciousness that the disciple be possess of faith in the order believing in the efficacy of a union among those men and woman who be anxious to walk in the noble eightfold path believe this church of the buddha of the righteous the upright the just the law abide to be worthy of honor of hospitality of gift and of reverence to be the supreme sowing ground of merit for the world to be possess of the virtue beloved by the good virtue unbroken intact unspotted unblemished virtue which make men truly free virtue which be praise by the wise be untarnished by the desire of selfish aim either now or in a future life or by the belief in the efficacy of outward act and be conducive to high and holy thought . this be the mirror of truth which teach the straight way to enlightenment which be the common goal of all living creature . he who possess the mirror of truth be free from fear he will find comfort in the tribulation of life and his life will be a blessing to all his fellow creature . xcii . ambap l . then the bless one proceed with a great number of brother to f l and he stay at the grove of the courtesan ambap l . and he say to the brother let a brother o bhikkhus be mindful and thoughtful . let a brother whilst in the world overcome the grief which arise from bodily crave from the lust of sensation and from the error of wrong reasoning . whatever you do act always in full presence of mind . be thoughtful in eating and drinking in walking or standing in sleep or wake while talk or be silent . when the courtesan ambap l heard that the blessed one be stay in her mango grove she be exceedingly glad and go in a carriage as far a the ground be passable for carriage . there she alight and thence proceeding to the place where the blessed one be she take her seat respectfully at his foot on one side . a a prudent woman go forth to perform her religious duty so she appear in a simple dress without any ornament yet beautiful to look upon . and the blessed one thought to himself this woman move in worldly circle and be a favorite of king and prince yet be her heart calm and compose . young in year rich surround by pleasure she be thoughtful and steadfast . this indeed be rare in the world . woman a a rule be scant in wisdom and deeply immerse in vanity but she although living in luxury have acquire the wisdom of a master take delight in piety and able to receive the truth in it completeness . when she be seat the blessed one instruct arouse and gladden her with religious discourse . a she listen to the law her face brighten with delight . then she rise and say to the bless one will the blessed one do me the honor of take his meal together with the brother at my house to morrow ? and the blessed one give by silence his consent . now the licchavi a wealthy family of princely rank hearing that the blessed one have arrive at f l and be stay at ambap l 's grove mount their magnificent carriage and proceed with their retinue to the place where the blessed one be . and the licchavi be gorgeously dress in bright color and decorate with costly jewel . and ambap l drive up against the young licchavi axle to axle wheel to wheel and yoke to yoke and the licchavi say to ambap l the courtesan how be it ambap l that you drive up against u thus ? my lord say she i have just invite the bless one and his brother for their to morrow 's meal . and the prince reply ambap l ! give up this meal to u for a hundred thousand . my lord be you to offer all f l with it subject territory i would not give up so great an honor ! then the licchavi go on to ambap l 's grove . when the bless one saw the licchavi approach in the distance he address the brother and say o brother let those of the brother who have never see the god gaze upon this company of the licchavi for they be dress gorgeously like immortal . and when they have drive as far a the ground be passable for carriages the licchavi alight and go on foot to the place where the blessed one be take their seat respectfully by his side . and when they be thus seat the blessed one instruct arouse and gladden them with religious discourse . then they address the bless one and say will the blessed one do u the honor of take his meal together with the brother at our palace to morrow ? o licchavi say the blessed one i have promise to dine to morrow with ambap l the courtesan . then the licchavi express their approval of the word of the blessed one arose from their seat and bow down before the blessed one and keep him on their right hand a they pass him they depart thence but when they come home they cast up their hand say a worldly woman have outdo u we have be leave behind by a frivolous girl ! and at the end of the night ambap l the courtesan make ready in her mansion sweet rice and cake and on the next day announce through a messenger the time to the bless one say the hour lord have come and the meal be ready ! and the blessed one rob himself early in the morning take his bowl and go with the brother to the place where ambap l 's dwelling house be and when they have come there they seat themselves on the seat prepare for them . and ambap l the courtesan set the sweet rice and cake before the order with the buddha at their head and wait upon them till they refuse to take more . and when the bless one have finish his meal the courtesan have a low stool brought and sit down at his side and address the bless one and say lord i present this mansion to the order of bhikkhus of which the buddha be the chief . and the blessed one accept the gift and after instruct arouse and gladden her with religious edification he rise from his seat and depart thence . xciii . the buddha 's farewell address . when the bless one have remain as long a he wish at ambap l 's grove he go to beluva near f l . there the blessed one address the brother and say o mendicant take up your abode for the rainy season round about f l each one accord to the place where his friend and near companion may five . i shall enter upon the rainy season here at beluva . when the bless one have thus enter upon the rainy season there fell upon him a dire sickness and sharp pain come upon him even unto death . but the blessed one mindful and self possess bore his ailment without complaint . then this thought occur to the bless one it would not be right for me to pass away from life without address the disciple without take leave of the order . let me now by a strong effort of the will subdue this sickness and keep my hold on life till the allotted time have come . and the bless one by a strong effort of the will subdue the sickness and keep his hold on life till the time he fix upon should come . and the sickness abate . thus the blessed one begin to recover and when he have quite got rid of the sickness he go out from the monastery and sit down on a seat spread out in the open air . and the venerable nanda accompany by many other disciple approach where the blessed one be salute him and take a seat respectfully on one side say i have behold lord how the blessed one be in health and i have behold how the blessed one have to suffer . and though at the sight of the sickness of the blessed one my body become weak a a creeper and the horizon become dim to me and my faculty be no long clear yet notwithstanding i take some little comfort from the thought that the blessed one would not pass away from existence until at least he have leave instruction a touch the order . and the blessed one addressed nanda in behalf of the order say what then nanda do the order expect of me ? i have preach the truth without make any distinction between exoteric and esoteric doctrine for in respect of the truth nanda the tath gata have no such thing a the closed fist of a teacher who keep some thing back . surely nanda should there be any one who harbor the thought 'it be i who will lead the brotherhood ' or 'the order be dependent upon me ' he should lay down instruction in any matter concern the order . now the tath gata nanda think not that it be he who should lead the brotherhood or that the order be dependent upon him . why then should the tath gata leave instruction in any matter concern the order ? i be now grown old o nanda and full of year my journey be draw to it close i have reach the sum of my day i be turn eighty year of age . just a a worn out cart can not be make to move along without much difficulty so the body of the tath gata can only be keep go with much additional care . it be only nanda when the tath gata cease to attend to any outward thing becomes plunge in that devout meditation of heart which be concern with no bodily object it be only then that the body of the tath gata be at ease . therefore o nanda be ye lamp unto yourselves . rely on yourselves and do not rely on external help . hold fast to the truth a a lamp . seek salvation alone in the truth . look not for assistance to any one besides yourselves . and how nanda can a brother be a lamp unto himself rely on himself only and not on any external help hold fast to the truth a his lamp and seek salvation in the truth alone look not for assistance to any one besides himself ? herein o nanda let a brother a he dwell in the body so regard the body that he be strenuous thoughtful and mindful may whilst in the world overcome the grief which arise from the body 's craving . while subject to sensation let him continue so to regard the sensation that he be strenuous thoughtful and mindful may whilst in the world overcome the grief which arise from the sensation . and so also when he think or reason or feel let him so regard his thought that be strenuous thoughtful and mindful he may whilst in the world overcome the grief which arise from the crave due to idea or to reason or to feeling . those who either now or after i be dead shall be lamps unto themselves rely upon themselves only and not rely upon any external help but hold fast to the truth a their lamp and seek their salvation in the truth alone and shall not look for assistance to any one besides themselves it be they nanda among my bhikkhus who shall reach the very topmost height ! but they must be anxious to learn . xciv . the buddha announce his death . say the tath gata to nanda in former year nanda m ra the evil one approach the holy buddha three time to tempt him . and now nanda m ra the evil one come again today to the place where i be and stand beside me address me in the same word a he do when i be rest under the shepherd 's nigrodha tree on the bank of the nera jar river 'be greeted thou holy one . thou hast attain the high bliss and it be time for thee to enter into the final nirv na . ' and when m ra have thus speak nanda i answer him and say 'make thyself happy o wicked one the final extinction of the tath gata shall take place before long . ' and the venerable nanda address the bless one and say vouchsafe lord to remain with u o bless one ! for the good and the happiness of the great multitude out of pity for the world for the good and the gain of mankind ! say the bless one enough now nanda beseech not the tath gata ! and again a second time the venerable nanda beseech the blessed one in the same word . and he receive from the bless one the same reply . and again the third time the venerable nanda beseech the blessed one to live long and the blessed one say hast thou faith nanda ? say nanda i have my lord ! and the blessed one see the quiver eyelid of nanda read the deep grief in the heart of his beloved disciple and he ask again hast thou indeed faith nanda ? and nanda say i have faith my lord . than the blessed one continue if thou hast faith nanda in the wisdom of the tath gata why then nanda dost thou trouble the tath gata even until the third time ? have i not formerly declare to you that it be in the very nature of all compound thing that they must be dissolve again . we must separate ourselves from all thing near and dear to u and must leave them . how then nanda can it be possible for me to remain since everything that be bear or bring into be and organize contains within itself the inherent necessity of dissolution ? how then can it be possible that this body of mine should not be dissolve ? no such condition can exist ! and this mortal existence o nanda have be relinquish cast away renounce reject and abandon by the tath gata . and the blessed one say to nanda go now nanda and assemble in the service hall such of the brother a reside in the neighborhood of f l . then the bless one proceed to the service hall and sit down there on the mat spread out for him . and when he be seat the blessed one address the brother and say o brother ye to whom the truth have be make know have thoroughly make yourselves master of it practise it meditate upon it and spread it abroad in order that pure religion may last long and be perpetuate in order that it may continue for the good and happiness of the great multitude out of pity for the world and to the good and gain of all living being ! star gazing and astrology forecasting lucky or unfortunate event by sign prognosticate good or evil all these be thing forbidden . he who let his heart go loose without restraint shall not attain nirv na therefore must we hold the heart in check and retire from worldly excitement and seek tranquillity of mind . eat your food to satisfy your hunger and drink to satisfy you thirst . satisfy the necessity of life like the butterfly that sip the flower without destroy it fragrance or it texture . it be through not understanding and grasp the four truth o brethren that we have go astray so long and wander in this weary path of transmigration both you and i until we have find the truth . practise the earnest meditation i have teach you . continue in the great struggle against sin . walk steadily in the road of saintship . be strong in moral power . let the organ of your spiritual sense be quick . when the seven kind of wisdom enlighten your mind you will find the noble eightfold path that lead to nirv na . behold o brother the final extinction of the tath gata will take place before long . i now exhort you say 'all component thing must grow old and be dissolve again . seek ye for that which be permanent and work out your salvation with diligence . ' . chunda the smith . and the bless one go to p v . when chunda the worker in metal hear that the blessed one have come to p v and be stay in his mango grove he come to the buddha and respectfully invite him and the brother to take their meal at his house . and chunda prepared rice cake and a dish of dried boar 's meat . when the bless one have eat the food prepare by chunda the worker in metal there fell upon him a dire sickness and sharp pain come upon him even unto death . but the blessed one mindful and self possess bore it without complaint . and the blessed one address the venerable nanda and say come nanda let u go on to kusin r . on his way the bless one grow tired and he go aside from the road to rest at the foot of a tree and say fold the robe i pray thee nanda and spread it out for me . i be weary nanda and must rest awhile ! be it so lord ! say the venerable nanda and he spread out the robe fold fourfold . the blessed one seat himself and when he be seat he address the venerable nanda and say fetch me some water i pray thee nanda . i be thirsty nanda and would drink . when he have thus speak the venerable nanda say to the bless one but just now lord five hundred cart have go across the brook and have stir the water but a river o lord be not far off . it water be clear and pleasant cool and transparent and it be easy to get down to it . there the blessed one may both drink water and cool his limb . a second time the bless one address the venerable nanda say fetch me some water i pray thee nanda i be thirsty nanda and would drink . and a second time the venerable nanda say let u go to the river . then the third time the bless one address the venerable nanda and say fetch me some water i pray thee nanda i be thirsty nanda and would drink . be it so lord ! say the venerable nanda in assent to the bless one and take a bowl he go down to the streamlet . and lo ! the streamlet which stir up by wheel have become muddy when the venerable nanda come up to it flow clear and bright and free from all turbidity . and he think how wonderful how marvelous be the great might and power of the tath gata ! nanda bring the water in the bowl to the lord say let the blessed one take the bowl . let the happy one drink the water . let the teacher of men and god quench his thirst . then the bless one drank of the water . now at that time a man of low caste name pukkusa a young malla a disciple of al ra k l ma be pass along the high road from kusin r to p v . and pukkusa the young malla saw the blessed one seat at the foot of a tree . on see him he go up to the place where the blessed one be and when he have come there he salute the bless one and take his seat respectfully on one side . then the bless one instruct edified and gladden pukkusa the young malla with religious discourse . arouse and gladden by the word of the blessed one pukkusa the young malla address a certain man who happen to pass by and say fetch me i pray thee my good man two robe of cloth of gold burnish and ready for wear . be it so sir ! say that man in assent to pukkusa the young malla and he bring two robe of cloth of gold burnish and ready for wear . and the malla pukkusa present the two robe of cloth of gold burnish and ready for wear to the bless one say lord these two robe of burnished cloth of gold be ready for wear . may the blessed one show me favor and accept them at my hand ! the blessed one say pukkusa robe me in one and nanda in the other . and the tath gata 's body appear shin like a flame and he be beautiful above all expression . and the venerable nanda say to the bless one how wonderful a thing be it lord and how marvellous that the color of the skin of the blessed one should be so clear so exceedingly bright ! when i place this robe of burnished cloth of gold on the body of the blessed one lo ! it seem a if it have lose it splendor ! the blessed one say there be two occasion on which a tath gata 's appearance become clear and exceed bright . in the night nanda in which a tath gata attains to the supreme and perfect insight and in the night in which he pass finally away in that utter pass away which leave nothing whatever of his earthly existence to remain . and the blessed one address the venerable nanda and say now it may happen nanda that some one should stir up remorse in chunda the smith by say 'it be evil to thee chunda and loss to thee that the tath gata die have eat his last meal from thy provision . ' any such remorse nanda in chunda the smith should be check by say 'it be good to thee chunda and gain to thee that the tath gata die have eat his last meal from thy provision . from the very mouth of the blessed one o chunda have i hear from his own mouth have i receive this say these two offering of food be of equal fruit and of much great profit than any other the offering of food which a tath gata accepts when he have attain perfect enlightenment and when he pass away by the utter pass away in which nothing whatever of his earthly existence remain behind these two offering of food be of equal fruit and of equal profit and of much great fruit and much great profit than any other . there have be lay up by chunda the smith a karma redound to length of life redound to good birth redound to good fortune redound to good fame redound to the inheritance of heaven and of great power . in this way nanda should be check any remorse in chunda the smith . then the bless one perceive that death be near uttered these word he who give away shall have real gain . he who subdue himself shall be free he shall cease to be a slave of passion . the righteous man cast off evil and by root out lust bitterness and illusion do we reach nirv na . xcvi . metteyya . the blessed one proceed with a great company of the brother to the s la grove of the mallas the upavattana of kusin r on the further side of the river hira avat and when he have arrive he address the venerable nanda and say make ready for me i pray you nanda the couch with it head to the north between the twin s la tree . i be weary nanda and wish to be down . be it so lord ! say the venerable nanda and he spread a couch with it head to the north between the twin s la tree . and the blessed one laid himself down and he be mindful and self possess . now at that time the twin s la tree be full of bloom with flower out of season and heavenly song come waft from the sky out of reverence for the successor of the buddha of old . and nanda be fill with wonder that the blessed one be thus honor . but the blessed one say not by such event nanda be the tath gata rightly honor hold sacred or revere . but the brother or the sister the devout man or the devout woman who continually fulfil all the great and the less duty walk accord to the precept it be they who rightly honor hold sacred and revere the tath gata with the worthy homage . therefore o nanda be ye constant in the fulfilment of the great and of the less duty and walk accord to the precept thus nanda will ye honor the master . then the venerable nanda go into the vih ra and stand lean against the doorpost weeping at the thought ala ! i remain still but a learner one who have yet to work out his own perfection . and the master be about to pass away from me he who be so kind ! now the bless one call the brother and say where o brother be nanda ? and one of the brother go and call nanda . and nanda come and say to the bless one deep darkness reign for want of wisdom the world of sentient creature be grope for want of light then the tath gata light up the lamp of wisdom and now it will be extinguish again ere he have bring it out . and the blessed one say to the venerable nanda a he sit there by his side enough nanda ! let not thy self be trouble do not weep ! have i not already on former occasion tell you that it be in the very nature of all thing most near and dear unto u that we must separate from them and leave them ? the foolish man conceive the idea of 'self ' the wise man see there be no ground on which to build the idea of 'self ' thus he have a right conception of the world and well concludes that all compound amass by sorrow will be dissolve again but the truth will remain . why should i preserve this body of flesh when the body of the excellent law will endure ? i be resolve have accomplish my purpose and attend to the work set me i look for rest ! for a long time nanda thou hast be very near to me by thought and act of such love a never varies and be beyond all measure . thou hast do well nanda ! be earnest in effort and thou too shalt soon be free from the great evil from sensuality from selfishness from delusion and from ignorance ! and nanda suppress his tear say to the bless one who shall teach u when thou art go ? and the blessed one reply i be not the first buddha who come upon earth nor shall i be the last . in due time another buddha will arise in the world a holy one a supremely enlightened one endow with wisdom in conduct auspicious know the universe an incomparable leader of men a master of angel and mortal . he will reveal to you the same eternal truth which i have teach you . he will preach his religion glorious in it origin glorious at the climax and glorious at the goal in the spirit and in the letter . he will proclaim a religious life wholly perfect and pure such a i now proclaim . nanda say how shall we know him ? the blessed one say he will be know a metteyya which mean 'he whose name be kindness . ' xcvii . the buddha 's final entering into nirv na . then the mallas with their young men and maiden and their wife be grieve and sad and afflict at heart go to the upavattana the s la grove of the mallas and want to see the blessed one in order to partake of the bliss that devolve upon those who be in the presence of the holy one . and the blessed one address them and say seek the way ye must exert yourselves and strive with diligence . it be not enough to have see me ! walk a i have command you free yourselves from the tangled net of sorrow . walk in the path with steadfast aim . a sick man may be cure by the heal power of medicine and will be rid of all his ailment without behold the physician . he who do not do what i command see me in vain . this bring no profit . whilst he who live far off from where i be and yet walk righteously be ever near me . a man may dwell beside me and yet be disobedient be far away from me . yet he who obey the dharma will always enjoy the bliss of the tath gata 's presence . then the mendicant subhadda go to the s la grove of the mallas and say to the venerable nanda i have hear from fellow mendicant of mine who be deep stricken in year and teacher of great experience 'sometimes and full seldom to tath gatas appear in the world the holy buddha . ' now it be say that to day in the last watch of the night the final passing away of the samana gotama will take place . my mind be full of uncertainty yet have i faith in the samana gotama and trust he will be able so to present the truth that i may become rid of my doubt . o that i might be allow to see the samana gotama ! when he have thus speak the venerable nanda say to the mendicant subhadda enough ! friend subhadda . trouble not the tath gata . the blessed one be weary . now the bless one overheard this conversation of the venerable nanda with the mendicant subhadda . and the bless one call the venerable nanda and say nanda ! do not keep out subhadda . subhadda may be allow to see the tath gata . whatever subhadda will ask of me he will ask from a desire for knowledge and not to annoy me and whatever i may say in answer to his question that he will quickly understand . then the venerable nanda say to subhadda the mendicant step in friend subhadda for the blessed one give thee leave . when the bless one have instruct subhadda and arouse and gladden him with word of wisdom and comfort subhadda say to the bless one glorious lord glorious lord ! most excellent be the word of thy mouth most excellent ! they set up that which have be overturn they reveal that which have be hide . they point out the right road to the wanderer who have go astray . they bring a lamp into the darkness so that those who have eye to see can see . thus lord the truth have be make know to me by the blessed one and i take my refuge in the blessed one in the truth and in the order . may the blessed one accept me a a disciple and true believer from this day forth as long a life endures . and subhadda the mendicant say to the venerable nanda great be thy gain friend nanda great be thy good fortune that for so many year thou hast be sprinkle with the sprinkling of discipleship in this brotherhood at the hand of the master himself ! now the bless one address the venerable nanda and say it may be nanda that in some of you the thought may arise 'the word of the master be end we have no teacher more ! ' but it be not thus nanda that you should regard it . it be true that no more shall i receive a body for all future sorrow have now forever pass away . but though this body will be dissolve the tath gata remain . the truth and the rule of the order which i have set forth and lay down for you all let them after i be go be a teacher unto you . when i be go nanda let the order if it should so wish abolish all the less and minor precept . then the bless one address the brother and say there may be some doubt or misgiving in the mind of a brother a to the buddha or the truth or the path . do not have to reproach yourselves afterwards with the thought 'we do not inquire of the bless one when we be face to face with him . ' therefore inquire now o brother inquire freely . and the brother remain silent . then the venerable nanda say to the bless one verily i believe that in this whole assembly of the brother there be not one brother who have any doubt or misgiving a to the buddha or the truth or the path ! say the bless one it be out of the fullness of faith that thou hast spoken nanda ! but nanda the tath gata know for certain that in this whole assembly of the brother there be not one brother who have any doubt or misgiving a to the buddha or the truth or the path ! for even the most backward nanda of all these brother have become convert and be assure of final salvation . then the bless one address the brother and say if ye now know the dharma the cause of all suffering and the path of salvation o disciple will ye then say 'we respect the master and out of reverence for the master do we thus speak ? ' the brother reply that we shall not o lord . and the holy one continued of those being who live in ignorance shut up and confine a it be in an egg i have first break the eggshell of ignorance and alone in the universe obtain the most exalted universal buddhahood . thus o disciple i be the eldest the noble of being . but what ye speak o disciple be it not even that which ye have yourselves know yourselves see yourselves realise ? nanda and the brother say it be o lord . once more the blessed one begin to speak behold now brother say he i exhort you say 'decay be inherent in all component thing but the truth will remain forever ! ' work out your salvation with diligence ! this be the last word of the tath gata . then the tath gata fell into a deep meditation and have pass through the four jh na enter nirv na . when the bless one enter nirv na there arise at his pass out of existence a mighty earthquake terrible and awe inspiring and the thunder of heaven burst forth and of those of the brother who be not yet free from passion some stretch out their arm and wept and some fell headlong on the ground in anguish at the thought too soon have the bless one die ! too soon have the happy one pass away from existence ! too soon have the light of the world go out ! then the venerable anuruddha exhort the brother and say enough my brother ! weep not neither lament ! have not the blessed one formerly declare this to u that it be in the very nature of all thing near and dear unto u that we must separate from them and leave them since everything that be bear brought into be and organize contains within itself the inherent necessity of dissolution ? how then can it be possible that the body of the tath gata should not be dissolve ? no such condition can exist ! those who be free from passion will bear the loss calm and self possess mindful of the truth he have teach u . and the venerable anuruddha and the venerable nanda spend the rest of the night in religious discourse . then the venerable anuruddha say to the venerable nanda go now brother nanda and inform the mallas of kusin r say 'the bless one have pass away do then whatsoever seemeth to you fit ! ' and when the mallas have hear this say they be grieve and sad and afflict at heart . then the mallas of kusin r give order to their attendant say gather together perfume and garland and all the music in kusin r ! and the mallas of kusin r take the perfume and garland and all the musical instrument and five hundred garment and go to the s la grove where the body of the blessed one lay . there they pass the day in pay honor and reverence to the remains of the blessed one with hymn and music and with garland and perfume and in make canopy of their garment and prepare decorative wreath to hang thereon . and they burn the remains of the blessed one a they would do to the body of a king of king . when the funeral pyre be light the sun and moon withdraw their shin the peaceful stream on every side be torrent swell the earth quake and the sturdy forest shake like aspen leaf whilst flower and leaf fell untimely to the ground like scattered rain so that all kusin r become strewn knee deep with mand ra flower rain down from heaven . when the burning ceremony be over devaputta say to the multitude that be assemble round the pyre behold o brother the earthly remains of the bless one have be dissolve but the truth which he have teach u live in our mind and clean u from all error . let u then go out into the world a compassionate and merciful a our great master and preach to all living being the four noble truth and the eightfold path of righteousness so that all mankind may attain to a final salvation take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha . and when the bless one have enter into nirv na and the mallas have burn the body with such ceremony a would indicate that he be the great king of king ambassador come from all the empire that at the time have embrace his doctrine to claim a share of the relic and the relic be divide into eight part and eight d gobas be erect for their preservation . one d goba be erect by the mallas and seven others by the seven king of those country whose people have take refuge in the buddha . conclusion . xcviii . the three personality of the buddha . when the bless one have pass away into nirv na the disciple come together and consult what to do in order to keep the dharma pure and uncorrupted by heresy . and up li rise say our great master use to say to the brother ' o bhikkhus ! after my final entrance into nirv na you must reverence and obey the law . regard the law a your master . the law be like unto a light that shin in the darkness point out the way it be also like unto a precious jewel to gain which you must shun no trouble and be ready to bring any sacrifice even should it be need your own five . obey the dharma which i have reveal to you follow it carefully and regard it in no way different from myself . ' such be the word of the blessed one . the law accordingly which the buddha have leave u a a precious inheritance have now become the visible body of the tath gata . let u therefore revere it and keep it sacred . for what be the use of erect d gobas for relic if we neglect the spirit of the master 's teaching ? and anuruddha arose and say let u bear in mind o brother that gotama siddhattha have reveal the truth to u . he be the holy one and the perfect one and the bless one because the eternal truth have take abode in him . the tath gata teach u that the truth exist before he be bear into this world and will exist after he have enter into the bliss of nirv na . the tath gata say 'the truth be omnipresent and eternal endow with excellency innumerable above all human nature and ineffable in it holiness . ' now let u bear in mind that not this or that law which be reveal to u in the dharma be the buddha but the entire truth the truth which be eternal omnipresent immutable and most excellent . many regulation of the sangha be temporary they be prescribe because they suit the occasion and be need for some transient emergency . the truth however be not temporary . the truth be not arbitrary nor a matter of opinion but can be investigate and he who earnestly search for the truth will find it . the truth be hide to the blind but he who have the mental eye see the truth . the truth be buddha 's essence and the truth will remain the ultimate standard by which we can discern false and true doctrine . let u then revere the truth let u inquire into the truth and state it and let u obey the truth . for the truth be buddha our master our teacher our lord . and kassapa rise and say truly thou hast speak well o brother anuruddha . neither be there any conflict of opinion on the meaning of our religion . for the blessed one possess three personality and every one of them be of equal importance to u . there be the dharma k ya . there be the nirm na k ya . there be the sambhoga k ya . buddha be the all excellent truth eternal omnipresent and immutable . this be the sambhoga k ya which be in a state of perfect bliss . buddha be the all love teacher assume the shape of the being whom he teach . this be the nirm na k ya his apparitional body . buddha be the all bless dispensation of religion . he be the spirit of the sangha and the meaning of the command which he have leave u in his sacred word the dharma . this be the dharma k ya the body of the most excellent law . if buddha have not appear to u a gotama sakyamuni how could we have the sacred tradition of his doctrine ? and if the generation to come do not have the sacred tradition preserve in the sangha how could they know anything of the great sakyamuni ? and neither we nor others would know anything about the most excellent truth which be eternal omnipresent and immutable . let u then keep sacred and revere the tradition let u keep sacred the memory of gotama sakyamuni so that people may find the truth for he whose spiritual eye be open will discover it and it be the same to every one who possess the comprehension of a buddha to recognize it and to expound it . then the brother decide to convene a synod in r jagaha in order to lay down the pure doctrine of the blessed one to collect and collate the sacred writing and to establish a canon which should serve a a source of instruction for future generation . xcix . the purpose of be . eternal verity dominate the formation of world and constitute the cosmic order of natural law . but when through the conflict motion of mass the universe be illumine with blaze fire there be no eye to see the light no ear to listen to reason 's teaching no mind to perceive the significance of be and in the immeasurable space of existence no place be find where the truth could abide in all it glory . in the due course of evolution sentiency appear and sense perception arose . there be a new realm of be the realm of soul life full of yearn with powerful passion and of unconquerable energy . and the world split in twain there be pleasure and pain self and notself friend and foe hatred and love . the truth vibrate through the world of sentiency but in all it infinite potentialities no place could be find where the truth could abide in all it glory . and reason come forth in the struggle for life . reason begin to guide the instinct of self and reason take the sceptre of the creation and overcome the strength of the brute and the power of the element . yet reason seem to add new fuel to the flame of hatred increase the turmoil of conflict passion and brother slew their brother for the sake of satisfy the lust of a fleeting moment . and the truth repair to the domain of reason but in all it recess no place be find where the truth could abide in all it glory . now reason a the helpmate of self implicate all living being more and more in the mesh of lust hatred and envy and from lust hatred and envy the evil of wrongdoing originate . men break down under the burden of life until the saviour appear the great buddha the holy teacher of men and god . and the buddha teach men the right use of sentiency and the right application of reason and he teach men to see thing a they be without illusion and they learn to act accord to truth . he teach righteousness and thus change rational creature into humane being just kind hearted and faithful . and now at last a place be find where the truth might abide in all it glory and this place be the heart of mankind . buddha o bless one o holy one o perfect one thou hast reveal the truth and the truth have appear upon earth and the kingdom of truth have be found . there be not room for truth in space infinite though it be . there be not room for truth in sentiency neither in it pleasure nor in it pain sentiency be the first footstep of truth but there be not room in it for the truth though sentiency may beam with the blaze glow of beauty and life . neither be there any room for truth in rationality . rationality be a two edge sword and serve the purpose of love equally as well a the purpose of hatred . rationality be the platform on which the truth standeth . no truth be attainable without reason . nevertheless in mere rationality there be no room for truth though it be the instrument that master the thing of the world . the throne of truth be righteousness and love and justice and good will be it ornament . righteousness be the place in which truth dwells and here in the heart of mankind aspiring after the realization of righteousness there be ample space for a rich and ever rich revelation of the truth . this be the gospel of the blessed one . this be the revelation of the enlightened one . this be the bequest of the holy one . those who accept the truth and have faith in the truth take refuge in the buddha the dharma and the sangha . receive u o buddha a thy disciple from this day hence so long a our life last . comfort o holy teacher compassionate and all love the afflict and the sorrow laden illumine those who go astray and let u all gain more and more in comprehension and in holiness . the truth be the end and aim of all existence and the world originate so that the truth may come and dwell therein . those who fail to aspire for the truth have miss the purpose of life . bless be he who rest in the truth for all thing will pass away but the truth abideth forever . the world be build for the truth but false combination of thought misrepresent the true state of thing and bring forth error . error can be fashion a it please those who cherish them therefore they be pleasant to look upon but they be unstable and contain the seed of dissolution . truth can not be fashion . truth be one and the same it be immutable . truth be above the power of death it be omnipresent eternal and most glorious . illusion error and lie be the daughter of m ra and great power be give unto them to seduce the mind of men and lead them astray upon the path of evil . the nature of delusion error and lie be death and wrong do be the way to perdition . delusion error and lie be like huge gaudy vessel the rafter of which be rotten and wormeaten and those who embark in them be fat to be shipwreck . there be many who say come error be thou my guide and when they be catch in the mesh of selfishness lust and evil desire misery be beget . yet do all life yearn for the truth and the truth only can cure our disease and give peace to our unrest . truth be the essence of life for truth endureth beyond the death of the body . truth be eternal and will still remain even though heaven and earth shall pass away . there be not different truth in the world for truth be one and the same at all time and in every place . truth teach u the noble eightfold path of righteousness and it be a straight path easily find by the truth loving . happy be those who walk in it . . the praise of all the buddha . all the buddha be wonderful and glorious . there be not their equal upon earth . they reveal to u the path of life . and we hail their appearance with pious reverence . all the buddha teach the same truth . they point out the path to those who go astray . the truth be our hope and comfort . we gratefully accept it illimitable light . ah the buddha be one in essence which be omnipresent in all mode of be sanctify the bond that tie all souls together and we rest in it bliss a our final refuge .