sura xcvi . thick blood or clot of blood i. mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful recite thou in the name of thy lord who create create man from clot of blood recite thou ! for thy lord be the most beneficent who hath teach the use of the pen hath taught man that which he knoweth not . nay verily man be insolent because he seeth himself possess of rich . verily to thy lord be the return of all . what thinkest thou of him that holdeth back a servant of god when he prayeth ? what thinkest thou ? hath he follow the true guidance or enjoin piety ? what thinkest thou ? hath he treat the truth a a lie and turn his back ? what ! doth he not know how that god seeth ? nay verily if he desist not we shall seize him by the forelock the lie sinful forelock ! then let him summon his associate we too will summon the guard of hell nay ! obey him not but adore and draw nigh to god . the word sura occur nine time in the koran viz . sur . ix . xxiv . xlvii . twice ii . x. but it be not easy to determine whether it mean a whole chapter or part only of a chapter or be use in the sense of revelation . see weil 's mohammed der prophet pp . . it be understand by the muhammadan commentator to have a primary reference to the succession of subject or part like the row of brick in a wall . the title of the sura be generally take from some word occur in each which be print in large type throughout where practicable . this formula bismillahi 'rrahmani 'rrahim be of jewish origin . it be in the first instance taught to the koreisch by omayah of taief the poet who be a contemporary with but somewhat old than muhammad and who during his mercantile journey into arabia petr a and syria have make himself acquaint with the sacred book and doctrine of jew and christian . kitab al agh ni . delhi . muhammad adopt and constantly use it and it be prefix to each sura except the ninth . the former of the two epithet imply that the mercy of god be exercise a occasion arise towards all his creature the latter that the quality of mercy be inherent in god and permanent so that there be only a shade of difference between the two word . maracci well render in nomine dei miseratoris misericordis . the rendering i have adopt be that of mr. lane in his extract from the koran . see also freytag 's lex . ii . p. . perhaps in the name of allah the god of mercy the merciful would more fully express the original arabic . the first five verse of this sura be in the opinion of nearly all commentator ancient and modern the early revelation make to muhammad in the th year of his life and the start point of el islam . see the authority quote in detail in n ldeke 's geschichte des qor ns p. n. the usual rendering be read . but the word qaraa which be the root of the word koran analogous to the rabbinic mikra rather mean to address recite and with regard to it etymology and use in the kindred dialect to call cry aloud proclaim . compare isai . lviii . king xviii . and gesen . thesaur . on the hebrew root . i understand this passage to mean preach to thy fellow men what thou believest to be true of thy lord who have create man from the mean material and can in like manner prosper the truth which thou proclaimest . he have teach man the art of write recently introduce at mecca and in this thou wilt find a powerful help for propagate the knowledge of the divine unity . the speaker in this a in all the sura be gabriel of whom muhammad have a he believe a vision on the mountain hir near mecca . see note on the next page . the detail of the vision be quite unhistorical . this and the following verse may have be add at a late period though previous to the flight and with special reference if we be to believe the commentator beidhawi etc . to the opposition which muhammad experience at the hand of his opponent abu jahl who have threaten to set his foot on the prophet 's neck when prostrate in prayer . but the whole passage admits of application to mankind in general . that be muhammad . n ldeke however propose to render a slave . and it be certain that the doctrine of islam be in the first instance embrace by slave many of whom have be carry away from christian home or bear of christian parent at mecca . men of this description say dr. sprenger life of mohammad . allahabad . p. no doubt prepare the way for the islam by inculcate purer notion respect god upon their master and their brother . these men saw in mohammad their liberator and be superstitious enough to consider his fit a the consequence of an inspiration they be among the first who acknowledge him a a prophet . many of them suffer torture for their faith in him and two of them die a martyr . the excitement among the slave when mohammad first assume his office be so great that abd allah bin jod'an who have one hundred of these sufferer find it necessary to remove them from makkah l they should all turn convert . see sura xvi . ii . . lit . hast thou see if he be upon the guidance . the principal men of the koreisch who adhere to abu jahl . during a period variously estimate from six month to three year from the revelation of this sura or of it early verse the prophetic inspiration and the revelation of fresh sura be say to have be suspend . this interval be call the fatrah or intermission and the meccan sura deliver at it close show that at or during this period muhammad have gain an increase and more intimate acquaintance with the jewish and christian scripture . the account however say mr. muir vol . ii . be throughout confused if not contradictory and we can only gather with certainty that there be a time during which his mind hung in suspense and doubt the divine mission . the idea of any supernatural influence be of course to be entirely exclude although there be no doubt that muhammad himself have a full belief in the personality and influence of satan and djinn . profound meditation the struggle of an earnest mind anxious to attain to truth the morbid excitability of an epileptic subject vision see in epileptic swoon disgust at meccan idolatry and a desire to teach his countryman the divine unity will sufficiently account for the period of indecision term the fatrah and for the determination which lead muhammad in all sincerity but still self deceive to take upon himself the office and work of a messenger from god . we may perhaps infer from such passage a sura ii . what have ever be the lead idea in muhammad 's mind . sura lxxiv . the enwrapped ii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o thou enwrap in thy mantle ! arise and warn ! thy lord magnify him ! thy raiment purify it ! the abomination flee it ! and bestow not favour that thou mayest receive again with increase and for thy lord wait thou patiently . for when there shall be a trump on the trumpet that shall be a distressful day a day to the infidel devoid of ease . leave me alone to deal with him whom i have create and on whom i have bestow vast rich and son dwell before him and for whom i have smooth all thing smoothly down yet desireth he that i should add more ! but no ! because to our sign he be a foe i will lay grievous woe upon him . for he plot and he plan ! may he be curse ! how he plan ! again may he be curse ! how he plan ! then look he around him then frown and scowl then turn his back and swell with disdain and say this be merely magic that will be wrought it be merely the word of a mortal . we will surely cast him into hell fire . and who shall teach thee what hell fire be ? it leaveth nought it spareth nought blacken the skin . over it be nineteen angel . none but angel have we make guardian of the fire nor have we make this to be their number but to perplex the unbeliever and that they who possess the scripture may be certain of the truth of the koran and that they who believe may increase their faith and that they to whom the scripture have be give and the believer may not doubt and that the infirm of heart and the unbeliever may say what meaneth god by this parable ? thus god misleadeth whom he will and whom he will doth he guide aright and none knoweth the army of thy lord but himself and this be no other than a warning to mankind . nay by the moon ! by the night when it retreateth ! by the morn when it brighteneth ! hell be one of the most grievous woe fraught with warn to man to him among you who desireth to press forward or to remain behind . for it own work lieth every soul in pledge . but they of god s right hand in their garden shall ask of the wicked what hath cast you into hell fire ? they will say we be not of those who pray and we be not of those who feed the poor and we plunge into vain dispute with vain disputers and we reject a a lie the day of reckon till the certainty come upon u and intercession of the interceders shall not avail them . then what hath come to them that they turn aside from the warning a if they be affright ass flee from a lion ? and every one of them would fain have open page give to him out of heaven . it shall not be . they fear not the life to come . it shall not be . for this koran be warn enough . and whoso will it warneth him . but not unless god please shall they be warn . meet be he to be fear . meet be forgiveness in him . this sura be place by muir in the second stage of meccan sura and twenty first in chronological order in the third or fourth year of the prophet s career . accord however to the chronological list of sura give by weil leben . p. from ancient tradition as well a from the consentient voice of tradionists and commentary v. n ld . geschichte p. sprenger s life of mohammad p. it be the next revealed after the fatrah and the designation to the prophetic office . the main feature of the tradition be that muhammad while wander about in the hill near mecca distract by doubt and by anxiety after truth have a vision of the angel gabriel seat on a throne between heaven and earth that he run to his wife chadijah in the great alarm and desire her perhaps from superstitious motif and believe that if cover with clothes he should be shield from the glance of evil spirit comp . stanley on i cor . xi . to envelope him in his mantle that then gabriel come down and address him a in v. i. this vision like that which precede sura xcvi . may actually have occur during the hallucination of one of the epileptic fit from which muhammad from early youth appear to have suffer . hence muhammad in sura lxxxi . appeal to it a a matter of fact and such he doubtless believe it to be . it may here be observe that however absurd the muslim tradition may be in many of their detail it will generally be find that where there be an ancient and tolerably universal consent there will be find at the bottom a residuum of fact and historical truth . at the same time there can be no doubt but that the detail of the tradition be too commonly found upon the attempt to explain or to throw light upon a dark passage of the koran and be pure invention of a late age . the arabic word be not those use in later sura to express the same idea . say to be walid b. mogheira a person of note among the unbelieving meccans . this portion of the sura seem to be of a different date from the first seven verse though very ancient and the change of subject be similar to that at v. of the previous sura . this and the three follow verse wear the appearance of have be insert at a late period to meet objection respect the number of the angel who guard hell raise by the jew perhaps at medina a the four class of person specify be those whom muhammad have to deal with in that city viz . the jew believers the hypocrite or undecided and idolater . these be constantly mention together in the medina sura . that be who believe and do not believe . a the word sakar disturb the rhyme it may have be insert by a mistake of the copyist for the usual word which suit it . that be death . beidh . comp . sura xv . . sura lxxiii . the enfolded iii . mecca . verse . in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o thou enfold in thy mantle stand up all night except a small portion of it for prayer half or curtail the half a little or add to it and with measure tone intone the koran for we shall devolve on thee weighty word . verily at the oncoming of night be devout impression strong and word be most collected but in the day time thou hast continual employ and commemorate the name of thy lord and devote thyself to him with entire devotion . lord of the east and of the west ! no god be there but he ! take him for thy protector and endure what they say with patience and depart from them with a decorous departure . and let me alone with the gainsayers rich in the pleasure of this life and bear thou with them yet a little while for with u be strong fetter and a flaming fire and food that choketh and a sore torment . the day cometh when the earth and the mountain shall be shake and the mountain shall become a loose sand heap . verily we have send you an apostle to witness against you even a we send an apostle to pharaoh but pharaoh rebel against the apostle and we therefore laid hold on him with a severe chastisement . and how if ye believe not will you screen yourselves from the day that shall turn child greyheaded ? the very heaven shall be reave asunder by it this threat shall be carry into effect . lo ! this be a warning . let him then who will take the way to his lord . of a truth thy lord knoweth that thou prayest almost two third or half or a third of the night a do a part of thy follower . but god measureth the night and the day he knoweth that ye can not count it hour aright and therefore turneth to you mercifully . recite then so much of the koran a may be easy to you . he knoweth that there will be some among you sick while others travel through the earth in quest of the bounty of god and others do battle in his cause . recite therefore so much of it a may be easy . and observe the prayer and pay the legal alms and lend god a liberal loan for whatever good work ye send on before for your own behoof ye shall find with god . this will be best and richest in the recompense . and seek the forgiveness of god verily god be forgive merciful . from the first line of this sura and it expression concern the koran prayer and future punishment from the similarity of the tradition with regard to it have be precede by a vision of gabriel beidh . etc . it seem to belong to or at least to describe a period perhaps immediately succeed the fatrah during which the hour of night be spend by muhammad in devotion and in the labour of work up his material in rhythmical and rhyme sura and in preparation for the public assumption of the prophetic office . comp . especially verse at the end with of the precede sura . singe den koran laut . h.v.p . psalle alcoranum psallendo . mar . singe den koran mit singender und lauter stimme ab . ullm . lit . most firm perhaps distinct . this verse accord to a tradition of ayesha be reveal one year later than the previous part of the sura . n ldeke say it be offenbar ein medinischer . the reader will not be surprise to find in the very outset of muhammad 's career a frequent mention of alms prayer heaven hell judgment apostle etc . in their usual sense when he remember that judaism be extensively naturalise in arabia and christianity also although to a small extent . the word and phrase of these religion be doubtless familiar to the meccans especially to that numerous body who be anxiously search after some good religion than the idolatry of their father v. on sura iii . and provide muhammad with a copious fund from which to draw . sura xciii . the brightness iv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the noon day brightness and by the night when it darkeneth ! thy lord hath not forsake thee neither hath he be displease . and surely the future shall be good for thee than the past and in the end shall thy lord be bounteous to thee and thou be satisfy . do he not find thee an orphan and give thee a home ? and find thee err and guide thee and find thee needy and enrich thee . a to the orphan therefore wrong him not and a to him that asketh of thee chide him not away and a for the favour of thy lord tell them abroad . this and the six follow sura be expression of a state of deep mental anxiety and depression in which muhammad seek to reassure himself by call to mind the past favour of god and by fix his mind steadfastly on the divine unity . they belong to a period either before the public commencement of his ministry or when his success be very dubious and his future career by no mean clearly mark out . the charge of the orphan muhammad be undertake by abd al mutalib his grandfather a. . . hishami p. kitab al wakidi p. have preserve tradition of the fondness with which the old man of fourscore year treat the child spread a rug for him under the shadow of the kaaba protect him from the rudeness of his own son etc . up to his th year muhammad follow the religion of his countryman . waq . tabari say that when he first enter on his office of prophet even his wife chadijah have read the scripture and be acquaint with the history of the prophet . spreng . p. . but his conformity can only have be partial . sura xciv . the opening . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful have we not open thine heart for thee ? and take off from thee thy burden which gall thy back ? and have we not raise thy name for thee ? then verily along with trouble cometh ease . verily along with trouble cometh ease . but when thou art set at liberty then prosecute thy toil . and seek thy lord with fervour . sura cxiii . the daybreak vi . mecca or medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful say i betake me for refuge to the lord of the day break against the mischief of his creation and against the mischief of the night when it overtaketh me and against the mischief of weird woman and against the mischief of the envier when he envieth . lit . who blow on knot . accord to some commentator an allusion to a specie of charm . comp . virg.ec . vi . but the reference more probably be to woman in general who disconcert scheme a thread be disentangle by blow upon it . suras cxiii . be call the el mouwwidhetani or preservative chapter be engrave on amulet etc . sura cxiv . men vii . mecca or medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful say i betake me for refuge to the lord of men the king of men the god of men against the mischief of the stealthily withdraw whisperer who whispereth in man 's breast against djinn and men . satan . sura i. viii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise be to god lord of the world ! the compassionate the merciful ! king on the day of reckon ! thee only do we worship and to thee do we cry for help . guide thou u on the straight path the path of those to whom thou hast be gracious with whom thou art not angry and who go not astray . this sura which n ldeke place last and muir sixth in the early class of meccan sura must at least have be compose prior to sura xxxvii . where it be quote and to sura xv . which refer to it . and it can scarcely be an accidental circumstance that the word of the first second and fifth verse do not occur in any other sura of the first meccan period a give by n ldeke but frequently in those of the second which it therefore in n ldeke opinion immediately precede . but this may be account for by it have be recast for the purpose of private and public devotion by muhammad himself which be the meaning probably of the muhammadan tradition that it be reveal twice . it should also be observe that include the auspicatory formula there be the same number of petition in this sura a in the lord 's prayer . it be recite several time in each of the five daily prayer and on many other occassions a in conclude a bargain etc . it be term the opening of the book the completion the sufficing sura the sura of praise thanks and prayer the healer the remedy the basis the treasure the mother of the book the seven verse of repetition . the muhammadan always say amen after this prayer muhammad have be instruct say the sonna to do so by the angel gabriel . islam the following transfer of this sura from the arabic into the corresponding english character may give some idea of the rhyme prose in which the koran be write bismillahi 'rahhmani 'rrahheem . el hamdoo lillahi rabi 'lalameen . arrahhmani raheem . maliki yowmi d deen . eyaka naboodoo wa yaka nest aeen . ihdina 'ssirat almostakeem . sirat alezeena anhamta aleihim gheiri ' l mughdoobi aleihim wala dsaleen . ameen . sura cix . unbeliever ix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful say o ye unbeliever ! i worship not that which ye worship and ye do not worship that which i worship i shall never worship that which ye worship neither will ye worship that which i worship . to you be your religion to me my religion . this sura be say to have be reveal when wal d urge muhammad to consent that his god should be worship at the same time with the old meccan deity or alternately every year . hish mi p. tabari p. . it be a distinct renunciation of meccan idolatry a the following sura be a distinct recognition of the divine unity . sura cxii . the unity . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful say he be god alone god the eternal ! he begetteth not and he be not begotten and there be none like unto him . sura cxi . abu lahab xi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful let the hand of abu lahab perish and let himself perish ! his wealth and his gain shall avail him not . burn shall he be at the fiery flame and his wife laden with fire wood on her neck a rope of palm fibre . undoubtedly one of the early sura and refers to the rejection of muhammad 's claim to the prophetic office by his uncle abu lahab at the instigation of his wife omm djemil who be say to have strew the path of muhammad on one occasion with thorn . the following six sura like the two first have special reference to the difficulty which the prophet meet with the outset of his career especially from the rich . in allusion to the meaning of abu lahab father of flame . sura cviii . the abundance xii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful truly we have give thee an abundance pray therefore to the lord and slay the victim . verily whoso hateth thee shall be childless . a reply to those who have taunt muhammad with the death of his son a a mark of the divine displeasure . sura civ . the backbiter xii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful woe to every backbiter defamer ! who amasseth wealth and storeth it against the future ! he thinketh surely that his wealth shall be with him for ever . nay ! for verily he shall be fling into the crushing fire and who shall teach thee what the crushing fire be ? it be god 's kindle fire which shall mount above the heart of the damn it shall verily rise over them like a vault on outstretched column . sura cvii . religion xiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful what thinkest thou of him who treateth our religion a a lie ? he it be who trusteth away the orphan and stirreth not others up to fee the poor . woe to those who pray but in their prayer be careless who make a shew of devotion but refuse help to the needy . sura cii . desire . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the desire of increase rich occupieth you till ye come to the grave . nay ! but in the end ye shall know nay ! once more in the end ye shall know your folly . nay ! would that ye know it with knowledge of certainty ! surely ye shall see hell fire . then shall ye surely see it with the eye of certainty then shall ye on that day be take to task concern pleasure . sura xcii . the night xvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the night when she spread her veil by the day when it brightly shineth by him who make male and female at different end truly do ye aim ! but a to him who giveth alms and feareth god and yieldeth assent to the good to him will we make easy the path to happiness . but a to him who be covetous and bent on rich and calleth the good a lie to him will we make easy the path to misery and what shall his wealth avail him when he goeth down ? truly man s guidance be with u and our s the future and the past . i warn you therefore of the flaming fire none shall be cast to it but the most wretched who hath call the truth a lie and turn his back . but the god fear shall escape it who giveth away his substance that he may become pure and who offereth not favour to any one for the sake of recompense but only a seek the face of his lord the most high . and surely in the end he shall be well content . see pref . p. line i. comp . luke xi . . muhammad perhaps derive this view of the meritorious anture of almsgiving from the jewish oral law . sura lxviii . the pen xvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful nun . by the pen and by what they write thou o prophet by the grace of thy lord art not possess ! and truly a boundless recompense doth await thee for thou art of a noble nature . but thou shalt see and they shall see which of you be the demented . now thy lord ! well knoweth he the man who erreth from his path and well doth he know those who have yield to guidance give not place therefore to those who treat thee a a liar they desire thee to deal smoothly with them then would they be smooth a oil with thee but yield not to the man of oath a despicable person defamer go about with slander hinderer of the good transgressor criminal harsh beside this impure by birth though a man of rich and bless with son . who when our wondrous verse be recite to him saith fable of the ancient . we will brand him on the nostril . verily we have prove them the meccans a we prove the owner of the garden when they swear that at morn they would cut it fruit but add no reserve . wherefore an encircle desolation from thy lord sweep round it while they slumber and in the morning it be like a garden whose fruit have all be cut . then at dawn they call to each other go out early to your field if ye would cut your date . so on they go whisper to each other no poor man shall set foot this day within your garden and they go out at daybreak with this settle purpose . but when they behold it they say truly we have be in fault yes ! we be forbidden our fruit . the most rightminded of them say do i not say to you will ye not give praise to god ? they say glory to our lord ! truly we have do amiss . and they fell to blame one another they say oh woe to u ! we have indeed transgress ! haply our lord will give u in exchange a good garden than this verily we crave it of our lord . such hath be our chastisement but heavy shall be the chastisement of the next world . ah ! do they but know it . verily for the god fearing be garden of delight in the presence of their lord . shall we then deal with those who have surrender themselves to god a with those who offend him ? what hath befallen you that ye thus judge ? have ye a scripture wherein ye can search out that ye shall have the thing ye choose ? or have ye receive oath which shall bind u even until the day of the resurrection that ye shall have what yourselves judge right ? ask them which of them will guarantee this ? or be it that they have join god with god ? let them produce those associate god of theirs if they speak truth . on the day when men 's leg shall be bar and they shall be call upon to bow in adoration they shall not be able their look shall be downcast shame shall cover them because while yet in safety they be invite to bow in worship but would not obey . leave me alone therefore with him who chargeth this revelation with imposture . we will lead them by degree to their ruin by way which they know not yet will i bear long with them for my plan be sure . askest thou any recompense from them ? but they be burden with debt . be the secret thing within their ken ? do they copy them from the book of god ? patiently then await the judgment of thy lord and be not like him who be in the fish when in deep distress he cry to god . have not favour from his lord reach him cast forth would he have be on the naked shore overwhelm with shame but his lord choose him and make him of the just . almost would the infidel strike thee down with their very look when they hear the warning of the koran . and they say he be certainly possess . yet be it nothing less than a warning for all creature . it have be conjecture that a the word nun mean fish there may be a reference to the fish which swallow jonas v. . the fact however be that the meaning of this and of the similar symbol throughout the koran be unknown to the muhammadan themselves even in the first century . possibly the letter ha mim which be prefix to numerous successive sura be private mark or initial letter attach by their proprietor to the copy furnish to say when effect his recension of the text under othman . in the same way the letter prefix to other sura may be monogram or abbreviation or initial letter of the name of the person to whom the copy of the respective sura belong . addenda the symbol nun may possibly refer to this letter a form the rhyme in most of the verse of this sura . this sura have be suppose by ancient muslim authority to be if not the old the second revelation and to have follow sura xcvi . but this opinion probably originate from the expression in v. compare with sura xcvi . . verse read like a late addition and this passage as well a verse have be class with the medina revelation . in the absence of any reliable criterion for fix the date i have place this sura with those which detail the opposition encounter by the prophet at mecca . by djinn . comp . sur . xxxiv . . in bear the taunt of the unbeliever with patience . they do not add the restriction if god will . an expression imply a grievous calamity borrow probably from the action of strip previous to wrestle swim etc . lit . the companion of the fish . comp . on jonah sura xxxvii . and sura xxi . . sura . the soil xviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful i need not to swear by this soil this soil on which thou dost dwell or by sire and offspring ! surely in trouble have we create man . what ! thinketh he that no one hath power over him ? i have waste saith he enormous rich ! what ! thinketh he that no one regardeth him ? what ! have we not make him eye and tongue and lip and guide him to the two highway ? yet he attempt not the steep . and who shall teach thee what the steep be ? it be to ransom the captive or to fee in the day of famine the orphan who be near of kin or the poor that lieth in the dust beside this to be of those who believe and enjoin stedfastness on each other and enjoin compassion on each other . these shall be the people of the right hand while they who disbelieve our sign shall be the people of the left . around them the fire shall close . lit . and begetter and what he hath begotten of good and evil . thus we read in hilchoth matt'noth aniim c. the ransoming of captive take precedence of the feeding and clothing of the poor and there be no commandment so great a this . sura . the elephant xix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful hast thou not see how thy lord dealt with the army of the elephant ? do he not cause their stratagem to miscarry ? and he send against them bird in flock ababils claystone do they hurl down upon them and he make them like stubble eat down ! this sura be probably muhammad 's appeal to the meccans intend at the same time for his own encouragement on the ground of their deliverance from the army of abraha the christian king of abyssinia and arabia felix say to have be lose in the year of muhammad 's birth in an expedition against mecca for the purpose of destroy the caaba . this army be cut off by small pox wakidi hishami and there be no doubt a the arabic word for small pox also mean small stone in reference to the hard gravelly feel of the pustule what be the true interpretation of the fourth line of this sura which like many other poetical passage in the koran have form the start point for the most puerile and extravagant legend . vide gibbon 's decline and fall c. . the small pox first shew itself in arabia at the time of the invasion by abraha . . de hammer gemaldesaal i. . reiske opusc . med . arabum . hal p. . sura cvi . the koreisch . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful for the union of the koreisch their union in equip caravan winter and summer . and let them worship the lord of this house who hath provide them with food against hunger and secure them against alarm . in allusion to the ancient inviolability of the haram or precinct round mecca . see sura xcv . n. p. . this sura therefore like the preceding be a brief appeal to the meccans on the ground of their peculiar privilege . sura xcvii . power xxi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful verily we have cause it to descend on the night of power . and who shall teach thee what the night of power be ? the night of power excelleth a thousand month therein descend the angel and the spirit by permission of their lord for every matter and all be peace till the breaking of the morn . the koran which be now press on the meccans with increased prominence a will be see in many succeed sura of this period . the night of al kadr be one of the last ten night of ramadhan and a be commonly believe the seventh of those night reckon backward . see sura xliv . . three book be open on the new year 's day one of the perfectly righteous one of the perfectly wicked one of the intermediate . the perfectly righteous be inscribe and seal for life etc . bab . talm . rosh . hash . i. sura lxxxvi . the night comer xxii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the heaven and by the night comer ! but who shall teach thee what the night comer be ? 't be the star of pierce radiance . over every soul be set a guardian . let man then reflect out of what he be create . he be create of the poured forth germ which issue from the loin and breastbone well able then be god to restore him to life on the day when all secret shall be search out and he shall have no other might or helper . i swear by the heaven which accomplisheth it cycle and by the earth which openeth her bosom that this koran be a discriminate discourse and that it be not frivolous . they plot a plot against thee and i will plot a plot against them . deal calmly therefore with the infidel leave them awhile alone . sura xci . the sun xxiii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the sun and his noonday brightness ! by the moon when she followeth him ! by the day when it revealeth his glory ! by the night when it enshroudeth him ! by the heaven and him who build it ! by the earth and him who spread it forth ! by a soul and him who balance it and breathe into it it wickedness and it piety bless now be he who hath keep it pure and undone be he who hath corrupt it ! themoud in his impiety reject the message of the lord when the great wretch among them rush up say the apostle of god to them the camel of god ! let her drink . but they treat him a an impostor and hamstrung her . so their lord destroy them for their crime and visit all alike nor fear he the issue . see sura vii . for the story of themoud . sura . he frown xxiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful he frown and he turn his back because the blind man come to him ! but what assure thee that he would not be cleanse by the faith or be warn and the warning profit him ? a to him who be wealthy to him thou wast all attention yet be it not thy concern if he be not cleanse but a to him who cometh to thee in earnest and full of fear him dost thou neglect . nay ! but it the koran be a warning and whoso be willing beareth it in mind write on honoured page exalt purify by the hand of scribe honour righteous . curse be man ! what hath make him unbelieving ? of what thing do god create him ? out of moist germ . he create him and fashion him then make him an easy passage from the womb then causeth him to die and burieth him then when he pleaseth will raise him again to life . aye ! but man hath not yet fulfil the bidding of his lord . let man look at his food it be we who rain down the copious rain then cleave the earth with cleft and cause the upgrowth of the grain and grape and heal herb and the olive and the palm and enclose garden thick with tree and fruit and herbage for the service of yourselves and of your cattle . but when the stunning trumpet blast shall arrive on that day shall a man fly from his brother and his mother and his father and his wife and his child for every man of them on that day his own concern shall be enough . there shall be face on that day radiant laughing and joyous and face on that day with dust upon them blackness shall cover them ! these be the infidel the impure . we be tell in the tradition etc . that when engage in converse with walid a chief man among the koreisch muhammad be interrupt by the blind abdallah ibn omm makt m who ask to hear the koran . the prophet speak very roughly to him at the time but afterwards repent and treat him ever after with the great respect . so much so that he twice make him governor of medina . that be if he do not embrace islam and so become pure from sin thou wilt not be to blame thou art simply charge with the delivery of a message of warn . ex spermate . description of the day of judgment now become very frequent . see sura lxxxv . p. and almost every sura to the lv . after which they become gradually more historical . sura lxxxvii . the most high . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise the name of thy lord the most high who hath create and balance all thing who hath fix their destiny and guideth them who bringeth forth the pasture and reduceth it to dusky stubble . we will teach thee to recite the koran nor aught shalt thou forget save what god pleaseth for he knoweth alike thing manifest and hidden and we will make easy to thee our easy way . warn therefore for the warning be profitable he that feareth god will receive the warning and the most reprobate only will turn aside from it who shall be expose to the terrible fire in which he shall not die and shall not live . happy he who be purify by islam and who remembereth the name of his lord and prayeth . but ye prefer this present life though the life to come be good and more enduring . this truly be in the book of old the book of abraham and moses . thus the rabbins attribute the book jezirah to abraham . see fabr . cod . apoc . . t. p. . sura . the fig xxvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful i swear by the fig and by the olive by mount sinai and by this inviolate soil ! that of goodly fabric we create man then bring him down to be the low of the low save who believe and do the thing that be right for theirs shall be a reward that faileth not . then who after this shall make thee treat the judgment a a lie ? what ! be not god the most just of judge ? in allusion to the sacredness of the territory of mecca . this valley in about the fourth century of our ra be a kind of sacred forest of mile in circumference and call haram a name apply to it as early a the time of pliny vi . . it have the privilege of asylum but it be not lawful to inhabit it or to carry on commerce within it limit and it religious ceremony be a bond of union to several of the bedouin tribe of the hejaz . the koreisch have monopolise most of the office and advantage of the haram in the time of muhammad . see sprenger 's life of mohammad pp . . sura ciii . the afternoon xxvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful i swear by the decline day ! verily man 's lot be cast amid destruction save those who believe and do the thing which be right and enjoin truth and enjoin stedfastness on each other . say to have be recite in the mosque shortly before his death by muhammad . see weil p. . sura . the starry xxviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the star bespangle heaven ! by the promised day ! by the witness and the witnessed ! curse the master of the trench of the fuel fed fire when they sit around it witness of what they inflict on the believer ! nor do they torment them but for their faith in god the mighty the praiseworthy his the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth and god be the witness of everything . verily those who vex the believer men and woman and repent not doth the torment of hell and the torment of the burning await . but for those who shall have believe and do the thing that be right be the garden beneath whose shade the river flow . this the immense bliss ! verily right terrible will be thy lord 's vengeance ! he it be who produceth all thing and causeth them to return and be he the indulgent the loving possessor of the glorious throne worker of that he willeth . hath not the story reach thee of the host of pharaoh and themoud ? nay ! the infield be all for denial but god surroundeth them from behind . yet it be a glorious koran write on the preserve table . lit . by the heaven furnish with tower where the angel keep watch also the sign of the zodiac this be the usual interpretation . see sura xv . . that be by muhammad and by islam or angel and men . see however v. . prepare by dhu nowas king of yemen a. . for the christian . see gibbon 's decline and fall chap . xii . towards the end . pocock sp . hist . ar . p. . and thus the comm . generally . but geiger p. and n ldeke p. n. understand the passage of dan . iii . but it should be bear in mind that the sura of this early period contain very little allusion to jewish or christian legend . verse wear the appearance of a late insertion on account of their length which be a characteristic of the more advanced period . observe also the change in the rhyme . sura ci . the blow xxix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the blow ! what be the blow ? who shall teach thee what the blow be ? the day when men shall be like scattered moth and the mountain shall be like flock of carded wool then a to him whose balance be heavy his shall be a life that shall please him well and a to him whose balance be light his dwell place shall be the pit . and who shall teach thee what the pit el hawiya be ? a rag fire ! lit . mother . sura xcix . the earthquake . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the earth with her quake shall quake and the earth shall cast forth her burden and man shall say what aileth her ? on that day shall she tell out her tidings because thy lord shall have inspire her . on that day shall men come forward in throng to behold their work and whosoever shall have work an atom 's weight of good shall behold it and whosoever shall have work an atom 's weight of evil shall behold it . sura lxxxii . the cleave xxxi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the heaven shall cleave asunder and when the star shall disperse and when the sea shall be commingle and when the graf shall be turn upside down each soul shall recognise it early and it late action . o man ! what hath mislead thee against thy generous lord who hath create thee and mould thee and shape thee aright ? in the form which please him hath he fashion thee . even so but ye treat the judgment a a lie . yet truly there be guardian over you illustrious recorder cognisant of your action . surely amid delight shall the righteous dwell but verily the impure in hell fire they shall be burn at it on the day of doom and they shall not be able to hide themselves from it . who shall teach thee what the day of doom be ? once more . who shall teach thee what the day of doom be ? it be a day when one soul shall be powerless for another soul all sovereignty on that day shall be with god . salt water and fresh water . sura lxxxi . the fold up xxxii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the sun shall be fold up and when the star shall fall and when the mountain shall be set in motion and when the she camels shall be abandon and when the wild beast shall be gather together and when the sea shall boil and when souls shall be pair with their body and when the female child that have be bury alive shall be ask for what crime she be put to death and when the leaf of the book shall be unroll and when the heaven shall be strip away and when hell shall be make to blaze and when paradise shall be bring near every soul shall know what it hath produce . it need not that i swear by the star of retrograde motion which move swiftly and hide themselves away and by the night when it cometh darken on and by the dawn when it brighteneth that this be the word of an illustrious messenger endue with power have influence with the lord of the throne obey there by angel faithful to his trust and your compatriot be not one possess by djinn for he saw him in the clear horizon nor doth he grapple with heaven 's secret nor doth he teach the doctrine of a cursed satan . whither then be ye go ? verily this be no other than a warning to all creature to him among you who willeth to walk in a straight path but will it ye shall not unless a god willeth it the lord of the world . involutus fuerit tenebris . mar . or throw down . thus bab . talm . erchin . in the day to come i.e . of judgment all the beast will assemble and come etc . see sura xvi . xvii . . like a skin from an animal when flay . the idea be perhaps borrow from the sept. . of psalm civ . . vulg . sicut pellem . mercury venus jupiter mar saturn . gabriel of the meaning of whose name the next verse be probably a paraphrase . sura iii . . like a mere kahin or soothsayer . lit . stone . sura iii . . this vision or hallucination be one of the few clearly state miracle to which muhammad appeal in the koran . accord to the tradition of ibn abbas in waquidi he be preserve by it from commit suicide by throw himself down from mount hira and that after it god cheer him and strengthen his heart and one revelation speedily follow another . comp . the doctrine of predestination in sura xxvi . v. to end . sura lxxxiv . the split asunder xxxiii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the heaven shall have split asunder and duteously obey it lord and when earth shall have be stretch out a a plain and shall have cast forth what be in her and become empty and duteously obey it lord then verily o man who desirest to reach thy lord shalt thou meet him . and he into whose right hand his book shall be give shall be reckon with in an easy reckoning and shall turn rejoice to his kindred . but he whose book shall be give him behind his back shall invoke destruction but in the fire shall he burn for that he live joyously among his kindred without a thought that he should return to god . yea but his lord beheld him . it need not therefore that i swear by the sunset redness and by the night and it gathering and by the moon when at her full that from state to state shall ye be surely carry onward . what then hath come to them that they believe not ? and that when the koran be recite to them they adore not ? yea the unbeliever treat it a a lie . but god knoweth their secret hatred let their only tidings be those of painful punishment save to those who believe and do the thing that be right . an unfailing recompense shall be theirs . lit . and obey it lord and shall be worthy or capable i.e . of obedience . that be into his left hand . the muhammadan believe that the right hand of the damn will be chain to the neck the left chain behind the back . from life to death from the grave to resurrection thence to paradise . the expression be ironical . see freyt . on the word . lit . tell them glad tidings . sura . the charger xxxiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the snort charger ! and those that dash off spark of fire ! and those that scour to the attack at morn ! and stir therein the dust aloft and cleave therein their midway through a host ! truly man be to his lord ungrateful . and of this he be himself a witness and truly he be vehement in the love of this world 's good . ah ! knoweth he not that when that which be in the graf shall be lay bare and that which be in men 's breast shall be bring forth verily their lord shall on that day be inform concern them ? sura lxxix . those who drag forth . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by those angel who drag forth soul with violence and by those who with joyous release release them by those who swim swimmingly along by those who be foremost with foremost speed by those who conduct the affair of the universe ! one day the disturb trumpet blast shall disturb it which the second blast shall follow men 's heart on that day shall quake their look be downcast . the infidel will say shall we indeed be restore a at first ? what ! when we have become rotten bone ? this then say they will be a return to loss . verily it will be but a single blast and lo ! they be on the surface of the earth . hath the story of moses reach thee ? when his lord call to him in towa 's holy vale go to pharaoh for he hath burst all bound and say wouldest thou become just ? then i will guide thee to thy lord that thou mayest fear him . and he show him a great miracle but he treat him a an impostor and rebel then turn he his back all hastily and gather an assembly and proclaimed and say i be your lord supreme . so god visit on him the punishment of this life and of the other . verily herein be a lesson for him who hath the fear of god . be ye the harder to create or the heaven which he hath build ? he rear it height and fashion it and give darkness to it night and bring out it light and afterwards stretch forth the earth he bring forth from it it water and it pasture and set the mountain firm for you and your cattle to enjoy . but when the grand overthrow shall come the day when a man shall reflect on the pain that he hath take and hell shall be in full view of all who be look on then a for him who hath transgress and hath chosen this present life verily hell that shall be his dwell place but a to him who shall have fear the majesty of his lord and shall have refrain his soul from lust verily paradise that shall be his dwell place . they will ask thee of the hour when will be it fixed time ? but what knowledge hast thou of it ? it period be know only to thy lord and thou art only charge with the warning of those who fear it . on the day when they shall see it it shall seem to them a though they have not tarry in the tomb long than it evening or it morn . this sura obviously consist of three portion verse of which the third be the late in point of style and the second more detailed than be usual in the sura of the early period which allude to jewish and other legend only in brief and vague term . it may therefore be consider a one of the short and early sura . or by those angel which precede i.e . the soul of the pious into paradise . or be beforehand with the satan and djinn in learn the decree of god . sura lxxvii . the sent xxxvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the train of the sent one and the swift in their swiftness by the scatterers who scatter and the distinguishers who distinguish and by those that give forth the word to excuse or warn verily that which ye be promise be imminent . when the star therefore shall be blot out and when the heaven shall be cleave and when the mountain shall be scatter in dust and when the apostle shall have a time assign them until what day shall that time be defer ? to the day of sever ! and who shall teach thee what the day of sever be ? woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! have we not destroy them of old ? we will next cause those of later time to follow them . thus deal we with the evil doer . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! have we not create you of a sorry germ which we lay up in a secure place till the term decreed for birth ? such be our power ! and how powerful be we ! woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! have we not make the earth to hold the living and the dead ? and place on it the tall firm mountain and give you to drink of sweet water . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! begone to that hell which ye call a lie begone to the shadow that lie in triple mass but not against the flame shall they shade or help you the spark which it casteth out be like tower like tawny camel . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! on that day they shall not speak nor shall it be permit them to allege excuse . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! this be the day of sever when we will assemble you and your ancestor . if now ye have any craft try your craft on me . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! but the god fear shall be place amid shade and fountain and fruit whatsoever they shall desire eat and drink with health a the meed of your toil . thus recompense we the good . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! eat ye and enjoy yourselves a little while . verily ye be doer of evil . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture ! for when it be say to them bend the knee they bend it not . woe on that day to those who charge with imposture in what other revelation after this will they believe ? lit . by the sent fem . one after another . per missas . mar . either angels following in a continued series or wind which disperse rain over the earth or the successive verse of the koran which disperse truth and distinguish truth from error . sura xliv . . maimonides say that the majority of the jew hope that messiah shall come and raise the dead and they shall be gather into paradise and there shall eat and drink and be in good health to all eternity . sanhedrin fol . col. i. sura lxxviii . the news xxxvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful of what ask they of one another ? of the great news . the theme of their dispute . nay ! they shall certainly know it truth ! again . nay ! they shall certainly know it . have we not make the earth a couch ? and the mountain it tent stake ? we have create you of two sex and ordain your sleep for rest and ordain the night a a mantle and ordain the day for gain livelihood and build above you seven solid heaven and place therein a burning lamp and we send down water in abundance from the rain cloud that we may bring forth by it corn and herb and garden thick with tree . lo ! the day of severance be fix the day when there shall be a blast on the trumpet and ye shall come in crowd and the heaven shall be open and be full of portal and the mountain shall be set in motion and melt into thin vapour . hell truly shall be a place of snare the home of transgressor to abide therein age no coolness shall they taste therein nor any drink save boil water and run sore meet recompense ! for they look not forward to their account and they give the lie to our sign charge them with falsehood but we note and write down all taste this then and we will give you increase of nought but torment . but for the god fearing be a blissful abode enclose garden and vineyard and damsel with swell breast their peer in age and a full cup there shall they hear no vain discourse nor any falsehood a recompense from thy lord suffice gift ! lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that between them lieth the god of mercy ! but not a word shall they obtain from him . on the day whereon the spirit and the angel shall be range in order they shall not speak save he whom the god of mercy shall permit and who shall say that which be right . this be the sure day . whoso then will let him take the path of return to his lord . verily we warn you of a chastisement close at hand the day on which a man shall see the deed which his hand have send before him and when the unbeliever shall say oh ! would i be dust ! of the resurrection . with regard to the date of this sura we can only be guide i by the general style of the early portion to verse which be analogous to that of the early meccan sura by verse which pre supposes lxxvii . by the obviously late style of verse to the end . see sura ii . . this be the title give by the talmudists to the fifth of the seven heaven . this phrase be of constant recurrence in the talmud . maimonides yad hach . i. make it one of the positive command of the rabbins to believe that there exist a first be . . . and that all thing exist heaven and earth and whatever be between them exist only through the truth of his existence . gabriel . sura lxxxviii . the overshadow xxxviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful hath the tidings of the day that shall overshadow reach thee ? downcast on that day shall be the countenance of some travailing and worn burnt at the scorch fire make to drink from a fountain fiercely boil . no food shall they have but the fruit of darih which shall not fatten nor appease their hunger . joyous too on that day the countenance of others well pleased with their labour past in a lofty garden no vain discourse shalt thou hear therein therein shall be a gushing fountain therein shall be raise couch and goblet ready place and cushion lay in order and carpet spread forth . can they not look up to the cloud how they be create and to the heaven how it be upraised and to the mountain how they be root and to the earth how it be outspread ? warn thou then for thou art a warner only thou hast no authority over them but whoever shall turn back and disbelieve god shall punish him with the great punishment . verily to u shall they return then shall it be our 's to reckon with them . the name of a bitter thorny shrub . sura lxxxix . the daybreak xxxix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the daybreak and ten night . by that which be double and that which be single by the night when it pursue it course ! be there not in this an oath become a man of sense ? hast thou not see how thy lord dealt with ad at irem adorn with pillar whose like have not be rear in these land ! and with themoud who hew out the rock in the valley and with pharaoh the impaler who all committed excess in the land and multiply wickedness therein . wherefore thy lord let loose on them the scourge of chastisement for thy lord standeth on a watch tower . a to man when his lord trieth him and honoureth him and be bounteous to him then saith he my lord honoureth me but when he proveth him and limiteth his gift to him he saith my lord despiseth me . aye . but ye honour not the orphan nor urge ye one another to fee the poor and ye devour heritage devour greedily and ye love rich with exceed love . aye . but when the earth shall be crush with crush crush and thy lord shall come and the angel rank on rank and hell on that day shall be move up man shall on that day remember himself . but how shall remembrance help him ? he shall say oh ! would that i have prepare for this my life ! on that day none shall punish a god punisheth and none shall bind with such bond a he . oh thou soul which art at rest return to thy lord pleased and please him enter thou among my servant and enter thou my paradise . of the sacred month dhu'lhajja . or pour on them the mixed cup of chastisement . the orthodox muhammadan take this passage literally . djelal say that hell will be drag up by chain each pull by angel a if it be an enormous animal or locomotive engine . sura . the resurrection . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful it needeth not that i swear by the day of the resurrection or that i swear by the self accuse soul . thinketh man that we shall not re unite his bone ? aye ! his very finger tip be we able evenly to replace . but man chooseth to deny what be before him he asketh when this day of resurrection ? but when the eye shall be dazzle and when the moon shall be darken and the sun and the moon shall be together on that day man shall cry where be there a place to flee to ? but in vain there be no refuge with thy lord on that day shall be the sole asylum . on that day shall man be tell of all that he hath do first and last yea a man shall be the eye witness against himself and even if he put forth his plea . . . . move not thy tongue in haste to follow and master this revelation for we will see to the collecting and the recital of it but when we have recite it then follow thou the recital and verily afterwards it shall be ours to make it clear to thee . aye but ye love the transitory and ye neglect the life to come . on that day shall face beam with light outlooking towards their lord and face on that day shall be dismal a if they think that some great calamity would befal them . aye when the soul shall come up into the throat and there shall be a cry who hath a charm that can restore him ? and the man feeleth that the time of his departure be come and when one leg shall be lay over the other to thy lord on that day shall he be drive on for he believe not and he do not pray but he call the truth a lie and turn his back then walk with haughty men rejoin his people . that hour be near to thee and nearer it be ever near to thee and near still . thinketh man that he shall be leave supreme ? be he not a mere embryo ? then he become thick blood of which god form him and fashion him and make him twain male and female . be not he powerful enough to quicken the dead ? lit . shall be unite . in the loss of light or in the rising in the west . beidh . supply it shall not be accept . verse be parenthetic and either an address to muhammad by gabriel desire him i not to be overcome by any fear of be unable to follow and retain the revelation of this particular sura or not to interrupt him but to await the completion of the entire revelation before he should proceed to it public recital . in either case we be lead to the conclusion that from the first muhammad have form the plan of promulging a write book . comp . sura xx . . in the death struggle . or therefore woe to thee woe ! and again woe to thee woe . thus sale ullm . beidhawi who also give the rendering in the text which be that of maracci . nonne fuit humor ex spermate quod spermatizatur . sura lxxxiii . those who stint xli . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful woe to those who stint the measure who when they take by measure from others exact the full but when they mete to them or weigh to them minish what ! have they no think that they shall be raise again for the great day ? the day when mankind shall stand before the lord of the world . yes ! the register of the wicked be in sidjin . and who shall make thee understand what sidjin be ? it be a book distinctly write . woe on that day to those who treat our sign a lie who treat the day of judgment a a lie ! none treat it a a lie save the transgressor the criminal who when our sign be rehearse to him saith tale of the ancient ! yes but their own work have get the mastery over their heart . yes they shall be shut out a by a veil from their lord on that day then shall they be burn in hell fire then shall it be say to them this be what ye deem a lie . even so . but the register of the righteous be in illiyoun . and who shall make thee understand what illiyoun be ? a book distinctly write the angel who draw nigh unto god attest it . surely among delight shall the righteous dwell ! seat on bridal couch they will gaze around thou shalt mark in their face the brightness of delight choice seal wine shall be give them to quaff the seal of musk . for this let those pant who pant for bliss mingle therewith shall be the water of tasnim fount whereof they who draw nigh to god shall drink . the sinner indeed laugh the faithful to scorn and when they pass by them they wink at one another and when they return to their own people they return jest and when they see them they say these be the err one . and yet they have no mission to be their guardian . therefore on that day the faithful shall laugh the infidel to scorn a recline on bridal couch they behold them . shall not the infidel be recompense accord to their work ? sidjin be a prison in hell which give it name to the register of action there keep a illiyoun a name of the lofty apartment of paradise be transfer to the register of the righteous . derive from the root sanima to be high this water be convey to the high apartment in the pavilion of paradise . sura lxix . the inevitable xlii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the inevitable ! and who shall make thee comprehend what the inevitable be ? themoud and ad treat the day of terror a a lie . so a to themoud they be destroy by crash thunder bolt and a to ad they be destroy by a roaring and furious blast . it do the bidding of god against them seven night and eight day together during which thou mightest have see the people lay low a though they have be the trunk of hollow palm and couldst thou have see one of them survive ? pharaoh also and those who flourish before him and the overthrown city commit sin and disobey the sent one of their lord therefore do he chastise them with an accumulated chastisement . when the flood rise high we bare you in the ark that we might make that event a warning to you and that the retain ear might retain it . but when one blast shall be blow on the trumpet and the earth and the mountain shall be upheaved and shall both be crush into dust at a single crushing on that day the woe that must come suddenly shall suddenly come and the heaven shall cleave asunder for on that day it shall be fragile and the angel shall be on it side and over them on that day eight shall bear up the throne of thy lord . on that day ye shall be bring before him none of your hidden deed shall remain hidden and he who shall have his book give to him in his right hand will say to his friend take ye it read ye my book i ever think that to this my reckoning i should come . and his shall be a life that shall please him well in a lofty garden whose cluster shall be near at hand eat ye and drink with healthy relish a the meed of what ye send on beforehand in the day which be past . but he who shall have his book give into his left hand will say o that my book have never be give me ! and that i have never know my reckoning ! o that death have make an end of me ! my wealth hath not profit me ! my power hath perish from me ! lay ye hold on him and chain him then at the hell fire burn him then into a chain whose length be seventy cubit thrust him for he believe not in god the great and be not careful to fee the poor no friend therefore shall he have here this day nor food but corrupt sore which none shall eat but the sinner . it need not that i swear by what ye see and by that which ye see not that this verily be the word of an apostle worthy of all honour ! and that it be not the word of a poet how little do ye believe ! neither be it the word of a soothsayer kahin how little do ye receive warning ! it be a missive from the lord of the world . but if muhammad have fabricate concern u any saying we have surely seize him by the right hand and have cut through the vein of his neck . nor would we have withhold any one of you from him . but verily it the koran be a warning for the god fearing and we well know that there be of you who treat it a a falsehood . but it shall be the despair of infidel for it be the very truth of sure knowledge . praise then the name of thy lord the great . thus beidh . sale etc . but with reference to another sense of the root karaa it may be render the day of decision the day on which man 's lot shall be decide . on ad and themoud . see sura vii . . lit . god subject it to himself avail himself of it against them . el wakia the sudden event the calamity the woe that must break in upon heaven and earth . the same word be use sura lvi . and ci . for the resurrection and day of judgment . in allusion to the mode of execute criminal in many eastern country . sura li . the scatter xliii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the cloud which scatter with scattering and those which bear their load and by those which speed lightly along and those which apportion by command ! true indeed be that with which ye be threaten and lo ! the judgment will surely come . by the star track heaven ! ye be discordant in what ye say but whose turneth him from the truth be turn from it by a divine decree . perish the liar who be bewilder in the depth of ignorance ! they ask when this day of judgment ? on that day they shall be torment at the fire . taste ye of this your torment whose speedy come ye challenge . but the god fear shall dwell amid garden and fountain enjoy what their lord hath give them because aforetime they be well doer but little of the night be it that they sleep and at dawn they pray for pardon and give due share of their wealth to the suppliant and the outcast . on earth be sign for men of firm belief and also in your own self will ye not then behold them ? the heaven hath sustenance for you and it containeth that which you be promise . by the lord then of the heaven and of the earth i swear that this be the truth even a ye speak yourselves . hath the story reach thee of abraham 's honoured guest ? when they go in unto him and say peace ! he reply peace they be stranger . and he go apart to his family and bring a fat calf and set it before them . he say eat ye not ? and he conceive a fear of them . they say to him fear not and announce to him a wise son . his wife come up with outcry she smite her face and say what i old and barren ! they say thus saith thy lord . he truly be the wise the knowing . say he and what o messenger be your errand ? they say to a wicked people be we send to hurl upon them stone of clay destine by thy lord for men guilty of excess . and we bring forth the believer who be in the city but we find not in it but one family of muslim . and sign we leave in it for those who dread the afflictive chastisement and in moses when we send him to pharaoh with manifest power but rely on his force he turn his back and say sorcerer or possess . so we seize him and his host and cast them into the sea for of all blame be he worthy . and in ad when we send against them the desolate blast it touch not aught over which it come but it turn it to dust . and in themoud when it be say to them enjoy yourselves for yet a while . but they rebel against their lord 's command so the tempest take them a they watch it come . they be not able to stand upright and could not help themselves . and we destroy the people of noah before them for an impious people be they . and the heaven with our hand have we build it up and give it it expanse and the earth we have stretch it out like a carpet and how smoothly have we spread it forth ! and of everything have we create pair that haply ye may reflect . fly then to god i come to you from him a plain warner . and set not up another god with god i come to you from him a plain warner . even thus come there no apostle to those who flourish before them but they exclaim sorcerer or possess . have they make a legacy to one another of this scoff ? yes they be a rebel people . turn away then from them and thou shalt not incur reproach yet warn them for in truth warning will profit the believer . i have not create djinn and men but that they should worship me i require not sustenance from them neither require i that they fee me verily god be the sole sustainer possess of might the unshaken ! therefore to those who injure thee shall be a fate like the fate of their fellow of old . let them not challenge me to hasten it . woe then to the infidel because of their threatened day . lit . i swear by those which scatter i.e . the rain with a scattering and by those which carry a burden and by those which run lightly and by those which divide a matter or by command . the participle be all in the feminine hence some interpret verse of wind verse of clouds verse of ship verse of angel . comp . note at sura lvi . p. . that be this oath be for the confirmation of the truth a ye be wont to confirm thing one among another by an oath . comp . sura xi . and xv . . from the want of connection with what precedes it be highly probable that the whole passage from verse do not originally form a part of this sura but be add at a late period perhaps in the recension of the text under othman . lit . mark with the name of the individual to be slay say the commentator . or with his noble . for ad and themoud see sura xi . that be in broad daylight . thus beidh . comp . sura xlvi . . sura lii . the mountain xliv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the mountain and by the book write on an outspread roll and by the frequent fane and by the lofty vault and by the swollen sea verily a chastisement from thy lord be imminent and none shall put it back . reel on that day the heaven shall reel and stir shall the mountain stir . and woe on that day to those who call the apostle liar who plunge for pastime into vain dispute on that day shall they be thrust with thrust to the fire of hell this be the fire which ye treat a a lie . what ! be this magic then ? or do ye not see it ? burn ye therein bear it patiently or impatiently 'twill be the same to you for ye shall assuredly receive the reward of your doings . but mid garden and delight shall they dwell who have fear god rejoicing in what their lord hath give them and that from the pain of hell fire hath their lord preserve them . eat and drink with healthy enjoyment in recompense for your deed . on couch range in row shall they recline and to the damsel with large dark eye will we wed them . and to those who have believe whose offspring have follow them in the faith will we again unite their offspring nor of the meed of their work will we in the least defraud them . pledge to god be every man for his action and their desert . and fruit in abundance will we give them and flesh a they shall desire therein shall they pass to one another the cup which shall engender no light discourse no motive to sin and youths shall go round among them beautiful a imbedded pearl and shall accost one another and ask mutual question . a time indeed there be will they say when we be full of care a to the future lot of our family but kind hath god be to u and from the pestilential torment hath he preserve u for heretofore we call upon him and he be the beneficent the merciful . warn thou then . for thou by the favour of thy lord art neither soothsayer nor possess . will they say a poet ! let u await some adverse turn of his fortune ? say wait ye and in sooth i too will wait with you . be it their dream which inspire them with this ? or be it that they be a perverse people ? will they say he hath forge it the koran himself ? nay rather it be that they believe not . let them then produce a discourse like it if they speak the truth . be they create by nothing ? or be they the creator of themselves ? create they the heaven and earth ? nay rather they have no faith . hold they thy lord 's treasure ? bear they the rule supreme ? have they a ladder for hear the angel ? let any one who hath hear them bring a clear proof of it . hath god daughter and ye son ? asketh thou pay of them ? they be themselves weigh down with debt . have they such a knowledge of the secret thing that they can write them down ? desire they to lay snare for thee ? but the snared one shall be they who do not believe . have they any god beside god ? glory be to god above what they join with him . and should they see a fragment of the heaven fall down they would say it be only a dense cloud . leave them then until they come face to face with the day when they shall swoon away a day in which their snare shall not at all avail them neither shall they be help . and verily beside this be there a punishment for the evildoer but most of them know it not . wait thou patiently the judgment of thy lord for thou art in our eye and celebrate the praise of thy lord when thou risest up and in the night season praise him when the star be set . of the caaba . comp . psalm lxviii . . the more prosaic style of this verse indicate a later origin than the context . muir place the whole sura in what he term the fourth stage of meccan sura . sura lvi . the inevitable . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the day that must come shall have come suddenly none shall treat that sudden come a a lie day that shall abase ! day that shall exalt ! when the earth shall be shake with a shock and the mountain shall be crumble with a crumbling and shall become scattered dust and into three band shall ye be divide then the people of the right hand oh ! how happy shall be the people of the right hand ! and the people of the left hand oh ! how wretched shall be the people of the left hand ! and they who be foremost on earth the foremost still . these be they who shall be bring nigh to god in garden of delight a crowd of the former and few of the latter generation on inwrought couch recline on them face to face aye bloom youth go round about to them with goblet and ewer and a cup of flow wine their brow ache not from it nor fail the sense and with such fruit a shall please them best and with flesh of such bird a they shall long for and theirs shall be the houri with large dark eye like pearl hide in their shell in recompense of their labour past . no vain discourse shall they hear therein nor charge of sin but only the cry peace ! peace ! and the people of the right hand oh ! how happy shall be the people of the right hand ! amid thornless sidrahs and talh tree clothe with fruit and in extend shade and by flow water and with abundant fruit unfailing unforbidden and on lofty couch . of a rare creation have we create the houri and we have make them ever virgins dear to their spouse of equal age with them for the people of the right hand a crowd of the former and a crowd of the latter generation . but the people of the left hand oh ! how wretched shall be the people of the left hand ! amid pestilential wind and in scalding water and in the shadow of a black smoke not cool and horrid to behold . for they truly ere this be bless with worldly good but persist in heinous sin and be wont to say what ! after we have die and become dust and bone shall we be raise ? and our father the men of yore ? say aye the former and the latter gather shall they all be for the time of a known day . then ye o ye the err the gainsay shall surely eat of the tree ez zakkoum and fill your belly with it and thereupon shall ye drink boiling water and ye shall drink a the thirsty camel drinketh . this shall be their repast in the day of reckon ! we create you will ye not credit u ? what think ye ? the germ of life be it ye who create them ? or be we their creator ? it be we who have decree that death should be among you yet be we not thereby hinder from replace you with others your like or from produce you again in a form which ye know not ! ye have know the first creation will ye not then reflect ? what think ye ? that which ye sow be it ye who cause it upgrowth or do we cause it to spring forth ? if we please we could so make your harvest dry and brittle that ye would ever marvel and say truly we have be at cost yet be we forbidden harvest . what think ye of the water ye drink ? be it ye who send it down from the cloud or send we it down ? brackish could we make it if we please will ye not then be thankful ? what think ye ? the fire which ye obtain by friction be it ye who rear it tree or do we rear it ? it be we who have make it for a memorial and a benefit to the wayfarer of the desert praise therefore the name of thy lord the great . it need not that i swear by the setting of the star and it be a great oath if ye know it that this be the honourable koran write in the preserved book let none touch it but the purified it be a revelation from the lord of the world . such tidings a these will ye disdain ? will ye make it your daily bread to gainsay them ? why at the moment when the soul of a die man shall come up into his throat and when ye be gaze at him though we be near to him than ye although ye see u not why do ye not if ye be to escape the judgment cause that soul to return ? tell me if ye speak the truth . but a to him who shall enjoy near access to god his shall be repose and pleasure and a garden of delight . yea for him who shall be of the people of the right hand shall be the greeting from the people of the right hand peace be to thee . but for him who shall be of those who treat the prophet a deceiver and of the err his entertainment shall be of scalding water and the broiling of hell fire . verily this be a certain truth praise therefore the name of thy lord the great . the rendering of mar . cum inciderit casura or a in sur . lxix ingruerit ingruens nearly express the peculiar force of the arabic verb and of the noun form from it i.e . a calamity that fall suddenly and surely . weil render ween der auferstehung 's tag eintritt p. . lane when the calamity shall have happen . comp . tr . rosch haschanah fol . . lit . the companion of the right hand what shall be the companion of the right hand ! and thus in verse . lit . the preceders the preceders . see sura liii . p. . probably the banana accord to others the acacia gummifera . a muslim of some learning profess to me that he consider the description of paradise in the koran to be in a great measure figurative 'like those ' say he 'in the book of the revelation of st. john ' and he assure me that many learn muslim be of the same opinion . lane 's modern egyptian i. p. note . like them grow not old . this seem a direct contradiction to verse unless we suppose with beidhawi that an inferior and more numerous class of believer be here speak of . or scorch . lit . not noble agreeable in appearance . a to the resurrection . lit . semen quod emittitis . lit . forestall anticipated . lit have incur debt . that be the prototype of the koran write down in the book kept by god himself . this passage imply the existence of copy of portion at least of the koran in common use . it be quote by the sister of omar when at his conversion be desire to take her copy of sura xx . into his hand . sura liii . the star xlvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the star when it setteth your compatriot erreth not nor be he lead astray neither speaketh he from mere impulse . the koran be no other than a revelation reveal to him one terrible in power taught it him endue with wisdom . with even balance stand he in the high part of the horizon then come he nearer and approach and be at the distance of two bow or even closer and he reveal to his servant what he reveal . his heart falsify not what he saw . what ! will ye then dispute with him a to what he saw ? he have see him also another time near the sidrah tree which mark the boundary . near which be the garden of repose . when the sidrah tree be cover with what cover it his eye turn not aside nor do it wander for he saw the great of the sign of his lord . do you see al lat and al ozza and manat the third idol besides ? what ? shall ye have male progeny and god female ? this be indeed an unfair partition ! these be mere name ye and your father name them thus god hath not send down any warranty in their regard . a mere conceit and their own impulse do they follow . yet hath the guidance from their lord come to them . shall man have whatever he wisheth ? the future and the present be in the hand of god and many a be the angel in the heaven their intercession shall be of no avail until god hath permit it to whom he shall please and will accept . verily it be they who believe not in the life to come who name the angel with name of female but herein they have no knowledge they follow a mere conceit and mere conceit can never take the place of truth . withdraw then from him who turneth his back on our warning and desireth only this present life . this be the sum of their knowledge . truly thy lord best knoweth him who erreth from his way and he best knoweth him who hath receive guidance . and whatever be in the heaven and in the earth be god 's that he may reward those who do evil accord to their deed and those who do good will he reward with good thing . to those who avoid great crime and scandal but commit only light fault verily thy lord will be diffuse of mercy . he well know you when he produce you out of the earth and when ye be embryos in your mother 's womb . assert not then your own purity . he best knoweth who feareth him . hast thou consider him who turn his back ? who giveth little and be covetous ? be it that he hath the knowledge and vision of the secret thing ? hath he not be tell of what be in the page of moses ? and of abraham faithful to his pledge ? that no burdened soul shall bear the burden of another and that nothing shall be reckon to a man but that for which he hath make effort and that his effort shall at last be see in their true light that then he shall be recompense with a most exact recompense and that unto thy lord be the term of all thing and that it be he who causeth to laugh and to weep and that he causeth to die and maketh alive and that he hath create the sex male and female from the diffused germ of life and that with him be the second creation and that he enricheth and causeth to possess and that he be the lord of sirius and that it be he who destroy the ancient adites and the people of themoud and leave not one survivor and before them the people of noah who be most wicked and most perverse . and it be he who destroy the city that be overthrow . so that that which cover them cover them . which then of thy lord 's benefit wilt thou make a matter of doubt ? he who warneth you be one of the warner of old . the day that must draw nigh draweth nigh already and yet none but god can reveal it time . be it at these saying that ye marvel ? and that ye laugh and weep not ? and that ye be trifler ? prostrate yourselves then to god and worship . this sura be reveal at about the time of the first emigration of muhammad 's follower to abyssinia a. . the manner in which the prophet cancel the objectionable verse be the strong proof of his sincerity a also be the opening of sura xxx . at this period . have he not do so nothing would have be easy for him than to have effect a reconciliation with the powerful party in mecca who have recently compel his follower to emigrate . the angel gabriel to the meaning of whose name a the strong one of god these word probably allude . that be beyond which neither men nor angel can pass djelal . the original word be also render the lote tree of the extremity or of the lofty spot in paradise in the seventh heaven on the right hand of the throne of god . it leaf be fabled to be as numerous a the member of the whole human family and each leaf to bear the name of an individual . this tree be shake on the night of the th of ramadan every year a little after sunset when the leaf on which be inscribe the name of those who be to die in the ensue year fall either wholly wither or with more or less green remain accord to the month or week the person have yet to live . the sidrah be a prickly plum which be call ber in india the zizyphus jujuba of linn u . a decoction of the leaf be use in india to wash the dead on account of the sacredness of the tree . host of adore angel by which the tree be mask . al lat or el lat probably the alilat of herodotus iii . be an idol at nakhlah a place east of the present site of mecca . al ozza be an idol of the kinanah tribe but it hereditary priest be the banu solaym who be station along the mercantile road to syria in the neighbourhood of chaibar . when at the first recital of this sura the prophet have reach this verse he continue these be the exalted female or sublime swan i.e . mount nearer and nearer to god and truly their intercession may be expect . these word however which be receive by the idolater with great exultation be disown by muhammad in the course of a few day a a satanic suggestion and replace by the text a it now stand . the probability be that the difficulty of his position lead him to attempt a compromise of which he speedily repent . in the suras subsequent to this period the denunciation of idolatry become much sterner and clearer . the authority be give by weil sprenger and muir . see sura lxvii . xvii . . verse be probably later than the previous part of the sura but insert with reference to it . some a omar b. muhammad and tq . consider verse or a itq . verse or a omar b. muhammad the whole sura to have originate at medina . ex spermate cum seminatum fuerit . the dog star worship by the arabian . compare the refrain in sura lv . p. . sura . the step or ascent xlvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful a suitor sue for punishment to light suddenly on the infidel none can hinder god from inflict it the master of those ascent by which the angel and the spirit ascend to him in a day whose length be fifty thousand year . be thou patient therefore with become patience they forsooth regard that day a distant but we see it nigh the day when the heaven shall become a molten brass and the mountain shall become like flock of wool and friend shall not question of friend though they look at one another . fain would the wicked redeem himself from punishment on that day at the price of his child of his spouse and his brother and of his kindred who shew affection for him and of all who be on the earth that then it might deliver him . but no . for the fire dragging by the scalp shall claim him who turn his back and go away and amassed and hoard . man truly be by creation hasty when evil befalleth him impatient but when good falleth to his lot tenacious . not so the prayerful who be ever constant at their prayer and of whose substance there be a due and stated portion for him who asketh and for him who be ashamed to beg and who own the judgment day a truth and who thrill with dread at the chastisement of their lord for there be none safe from the chastisement of their lord and who control their desire save with their wife or the slave whom their right hand have win for there they shall be blameless but whoever indulge their desire beyond this be transgressor and who be true to their trust and their engagement and who witness uprightly and who keep strictly the hour of prayer these shall dwell laden with honour amid garden . but what hath come to the unbeliever that they run at full stretch around thee on the right hand and on the left in band ? be it that every man of them would fain enter that garden of delight ? not at all . we have create them they know of what . it need not that i swear by the lord of the east and of the west that we have power . to replace them with good than themselves neither be we to be hinder . wherefore let them flounder on and disport them till they come face to face with their threaten day the day on which they shall flock up out of their graf in haste like men who rally to a standard their eye downcast disgrace shall cover them . such their threatened day . lit . ask one ask probably some unbeliever with reference to the opening of sura lvi . p. or like statement in some previous sura . the expression be hyperbolical and a such identical with sura lxx . xxxii . . compare also sura xcvii . p. . where the descent be say to take place in a single night . lit . forbidden or prevent by shame . see next sura . v. . sura . the merciful xlviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the god of mercy hath teach the koran hath create man hath teach him articulate speech the sun and the moon have each their time and the plant and the tree bend in adoration . and the heaven he hath rear it on high and hath appoint the balance that in the balance ye should not transgress . weigh therefore with fairness and scant not the balance . and the earth he hath prepare it for the living tribe therein be fruit and the palm with sheathed cluster and the grain with it husk and the fragrant plant . which then of the bounty of your lord will ye twain deny ? he create man of clay like that of the potter . and he create the djinn of pure fire which then of the bounty etc . he be the lord of the east he be the lord of the west which etc . he hath let loose the two sea which meet each other yet between them be a barrier which they overpass not which etc . from each he bringeth up pearl both great and small which etc . and his be the ship tower up at sea like mountain which etc . all on the earth shall pass away but the face of thy lord shall abide resplendent with majesty and glory which etc . to him maketh suit all that be in the heaven and the earth . every day doth some new work employ him which etc . we will find leisure to judge you o ye men and djinn which etc . o company of djinn and men if ye can overpass the bound of the heaven and the earth then overpass them . but by our leave only shall ye overpass them which etc . a bright flash of fire shall be hurl at you both and melt brass and ye shall not defend yourselves from it which etc . when the heaven shall be cleave asunder and become rise red like stain leather which etc . on that day shall neither man nor djinn be ask of his sin which etc . by their token shall the sinner be know and they shall be seize by their forelock and their foot which etc . this be hell which sinner treat a a lie . to and fro shall they pass between it and the boiling water which etc . but for those who dread the majesty of their lord shall be two garden which etc . with o'erbranching tree in each which etc . in each two kind of every fruit which etc . on couch with lining of brocade shall they recline and the fruit of the two garden shall be within easy reach which etc . therein shall be the damsel with retire glance whom nor man nor djinn hath touch before them which etc . like jacynths and pearl which etc . shall the reward of good be aught but good ? which etc . and beside these shall be two other garden which etc . of a dark green which etc . with gushing fountain in each which etc . in each fruit and the palm and the pomegranate which etc . in each the fair the beauteous one which etc . with large dark eyeball keep close in their pavilion which etc . whom man hath never touch nor any djinn which etc . their spouse on soft green cushion and on beautiful carpet shall recline which etc . bless be the name of thy lord full of majesty and glory . men and djinn . the verb be in the dual . lit . of the two east of the two west i.e . of all that lie between the extreme point at which the sun rise and set at the winter and summer solstice . lit . he hath set at large poured forth over the earth the mass of fresh and salt water which be in contact at the mouth of river etc . see sura lxviii . xxvii . lxxxvi . xxxv . . lit . o ye two weight hence treasure and generally any collective body of men or thing . one for men the other for the genius or two for each man and genius or both be for the inferior class of muslim . beidh . it should be remark that these promise of the houri of paradise be almost exclusively to be find in suras write at a time when muhammad have only a single wife of year of age and that in all the ten year subsequent to the hejira woman be only twice mention a part of the reward of the faithful . suras ii . and iv . . while in suras xxxvi . xliii . xiii . xl . the proper wife of the faithful be speak of a accompany their husband into the garden of bliss . sura liv . the moon xlix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the hour hath approach and the moon hath be cleave but whenever they see a miracle they turn aside and say this be well devise magic . and they have treat the prophet a impostor and follow their own lust but everything be unalterably fix . a message of prohibition have come to them consummate wisdom but warner profit them not . quit them then . on the day when the summoner shall summon to a stern business with downcast eye shall they come forth from their graf a if they be scatter locust hasten to the summoner . this shall the infidel say be the distressful day . before them the people of noah treat the truth a a lie . our servant do they charge with falsehood and say demoniac ! and he be reject . then cry he to his lord verily they prevail against me come thou therefore to my succour . so we open the gate of heaven with water which fell in torrent and we cause the earth to break forth with spring and their water meet by settled decree . and we bare him on a vessel make with plank and nail . under our eye it float on a recompence to him who have be reject with unbelief . and we leave it a sign but be there any one who receive the warning ? and how great be my vengeance and my menace ! easy for warn have we make the koran but be there any one who receive the warning ? the adites call the truth a lie but how great be my vengeance and my menace for we send against them a roar wind in a day of continued distress it tear men away a though they be uprooted palm stump . and how great be my vengeance and my menace ! easy for warn have we make the koran but be there any one who receive the warning ? the tribe of themoud treat the threatenings a lie and they say shall we follow a single man from among ourselves ? then verily should we be in error and in folly . to him alone among u be the office of warn entrust ? no ! he be an impostor an insolent person . to morrow shall they learn who be the impostor the insolent . for we will send the she camel to prove them do thou mark them well o saleh and be patient and foretell them that their water shall be divide between themselves and her and that every draught shall come by turn to them . but they call to their comrade and he take a knife and ham strung her . and how great be my vengeance and my menance ! we send against them a single shout and they become like the dry stick of the fold builder . easy have we make the koran for warn but be there any one who receive the warning ? the people of lot treat his warning a a lie but we send a stone charge wind against them all except the family of lot whom at daybreak we deliver by our special grace for thus we reward the thankful . he indeed have warn them of our severity but of that warn they doubt . even this guess do they demand therefore we deprive them of sight and say taste ye my vengeance and my menace and in the morning a relentless punishment overtake them . easy have we make the koran for warn but be there any one who receive the warning ? to the people of pharaoh also come the threatenings all our miracle do they treat a imposture . therefore seize we them a he only can seize who be the mighty the strong . be your infidel o meccans well men than these ? be there an exemption for you in the sacred book ? will they say we be a host that lend one another aid ? the host shall be rout and they shall turn them back . but that hour be their threatened time and that hour shall be most severe and bitter . verily the wicked be sink in bewilderment and folly . on that day they shall be drag into the fire on their face . taste ye the touch of hell . all thing have we create after a fixed decree our command be but one word swift a the twinkling of an eye . of old too have we destroy the like of you yet be any one warn ? and everything that they do be in the book each action both small and great be write down . verily amid garden and river shall the pious dwell . in the seat of truth in the presence of the potent king . see sura lvi . xxvi . also sura lxxxvii . vii . . keep by the guardian angel . the talmudic description of the garden for the late jew believe in more than one paradise and of the river and tree therein will be find in schr der talm . rabb . judenthum pp . . sura xxxvii . the rank . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful by the angel range in order for song of praise and by those who repel demon and by those who recite the koran for warn truly your god be but one lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them and lord of the east . we have adorn the low heaven with the adornment of the star . they serve also a a guard against every rebellious satan that they overhear not what passeth in the assembly on high for they be dart at from every side drive off and consign to a lasting torment while if one steal a word by stealth a glistening flame pursueth him . ask the meccans then be they or the angel whom we have make the strong creation ? aye of coarse clay have we create them . but while thou marvellest they mock when they be warn no warn do they take and when they see a sign they fall to mock and say this be no other than clear sorcery what ! when dead and turn to dust and bone shall we indeed be raise ? our sire also of olden time ? say yes and ye shall be cover with disgrace . for one blast only and lo ! they shall gaze around them and shall say oh ! woe to u ! this be the day of reckon this be the day of decision which ye gainsay a an untruth . gather together those who have act unjustly and their consort and the god whom they adore beside god and guide them to the road for hell . set them forth they shall be question . how now that ye help not one another ? but on this day they shall submit themselves to god and shall address one another with mutual reproach . they shall say in sooth ye come to u in well omened sort but they will answer nay it be ye who would not believe and we have no power whatever over you . nay ye be people give to transgress just therefore be the doom which our lord hath pass upon u . we shall surely taste it we make you err for we have err ourselves . partner therefore shall they be in punishment on that day . truly thus will we deal with the wicked because when it be say to them there be no god but god they swell with pride and say shall we then abandon our god for a crazed poet ? nay he cometh with truth and confirmeth the sent one of old . ye shall surely taste the painful punishment and ye shall not be reward but a ye have work save the sincere servant of god ! a stated banquet shall they have of fruit and honour shall they be in the garden of delight upon couch face to face . a cup shall be borne round among them from a fountain limpid delicious to those who drink it shall not oppress the sense nor shall they therewith be drunken . and with them be the large eyed one with modest refrain glance fair like the sheltered egg . and they shall address one another with mutual question . saith one of them i truly have a bosom friend who say 'art thou of those who credit it ? what ! when we shall have die and become dust and bone shall we indeed be judge ? ' he shall say to those around him will ye look ? and he shall look and see him in the midst of hell . and he shall say to him by god thou hadst almost cause me to perish and but for the favour of my lord i have surely be of those who have be bring with thee into torment . but do we not die say the bless any other than our first death ? and have we escape the torment ? this truly be the great felicity ! for the like of this should the travailers travail ! be this the good repast or the tree ez zakkoum ? verily we have make it for a subject of discord to the wicked . it be a tree which cometh up from the bottom of hell it fruit be a it be the head of satan and lo ! the damned shall surely eat of it and fill their belly with it then shall they have thereon a mixture of boil water then shall they return to hell . they find their father err and they hasten on in their footstep . also before them the great number of the ancient have err . though we have send warner among them . but see what be the end of these warn one except of god 's true servant . noah call on u of old and right prompt be we to hear him and we save him and his family out of the great distress and we make his offspring the survivor and we leave for him with posterity peace be on noah throughout the world ! thus do we reward the well doer for he be one of our believing servant and the rest we drown . and truly of his faith be abraham when he bring to his lord a perfect heart when he say to his father and to his people what be this ye worship ? prefer ye with falsehood god to god ? and what deem ye of the lord of the world ? so gaze he gaze towards the star and say in sooth i be ill and they turn their back on him and depart . he go aside to their god and say do ye not eat ? what aileth you that ye do not speak ? he break out upon them with the right hand strike when his tribesman come back to him with hasty step he say worship ye what ye carve when god hath create you and that ye make ? they say build up a pyre for him and cast him into the glowing flame . fain would they plot against him but we bring them low . and he say verily i repair to my lord who will guide me o lord give me a son of the righteous . we announce to him a youth of meekness . and when he become a full grown youth his father say to him my son i have see in a dream that i should sacrifice thee therefore consider what thou seest right . he say my father do what thou art bidden of the patient if god please shalt thou find me . and when they have surrender them to the will of god he lay him down upon his forehead we cry unto him o abraham ! now hast thou satisfy the vision . see how we recompense the righteous . this be indeed a decisive test . and we ransom his son with a costly victim and we leave this for him among posterity peace be on abraham ! thus do we reward the well doer for he be of our believing servant . and we announce isaac to him a righteous prophet and on him and on isaac we bestow our blessing . and among their offspring be well doer and others to their own hurt undoubted sinner . and of old to moses and to aaron shew we favour and both of them and their people we rescue from the great distress and we succour them and they become the conqueror and we give them moses and aaron each the lucid book and we guide them each into the right way and we leave this for each among posterity peace be on moses and aaron . thus do we reward the well doer for they be two of our believing servant . and elias truly be of our sent one when he say to his people fear ye not god ? invoke ye baal and forsake ye the most skilful creator ? god be your lord and the lord of your sire of old ? but they treat him a a liar and shall therefore be consign to punishment except god 's faithful servant . and we leave this for him among posterity peace be on eliasin ! thus do we reward the well doer for he be one of our believing servant . and lot truly be of our sent one when we rescue him and all his family save an aged woman among those who tarry . afterward we destroy the others . and ye indeed pas by their ruined dwelling at morn and night will ye not then reflect ? jonas too be one of the apostle when he flee unto the laden ship and lot be cast and he be doom and the fish swallow him for he be blameworthy . but have he not be of those who praise u in it belly have he surely remain till the day of resurrection . and we cast him on the bare shore and he be sick and we cause a gourd plant to grow up over him and we send him to a hundred thousand person or even more and because they believe we continue their enjoyment for a season . inquire then of the meccans whether thy lord hath daughter and they son ? have we create the angel female ? and do they witness it ? be it not a falsehood of their own devising when they say god hath beget ? they be indeed liar . would he have prefer daughter to son ? what reason have ye for thus judge ? will ye not then receive this warning ? have ye a clear proof for them ? produce your book if ye speak truth . and they make him to be of kin with the djinn but the djinn have long know that these idolater shall be bring up before god . far be the glory of god from what they impute to him . his faithful servant do not thus . moreover ye and what ye worship shall not stir up any against god save him who shall burn in hell . and verily each one of u hath his appointed place and we range ourselves in order and we celebrate his praise . and if those infidel say have we a revelation transmit to u from those of old we have surely be god 's faithful servant . yet they believe not the koran . but they shall know it truth at last . our word come of old to our servant the apostle that they should surely be the succoured and that our army should procure the victory for them . turn aside therefore from them for a time and behold them for they too shall in the end behold their doom . would they then hasten our vengeance ? but when it shall come down into their court an evil morning shall it be to those who have have their warning . turn aside from them therefore for a time . and behold for they too shall in the end behold their doom . far be the glory of thy lord the lord of all greatness from what they impute to him and peace be on his apostle ! and praise be to god the lord of the world . i have give in the text the sense of these first two verse accord to the muhammadan commentator . the original literally translate viz . by the rank which rank themselves and by the repellers who repel would not convey an intelligible idea to the english reader . mar . render per ordinantes ordinando et agitantes agitando . ar . east . errat in pluralitate mundorum . mar . but the allusion probably be to the different point of the horizon at which the sun rise and set in the course of the year . see sura lvii . xv . . or comrade i.e . the demon . lit . on the right hand the side of good omen i.e . with semblance of truth . see sura lx . xxxvi . . the ostrich egg carefully protect from dust . lit . and be we not among the punish ? lit . et sane euge auditores . mar . and therefore unable to assist at your sacrifice . lit . cum igitur pervenisset cum eo ad tatem cui competit operandi studium . mar . beidh . when he have attain to the age when he could work with him . lane . bring say rabbi jehoshua from paradise by an angel . midr . fol . this salutation . the arabic particle which be here and elsewhere render of old also already certainly serve to mark the position of a past act or event a prior to the time present and in all such passage merely give a fulness and intensity to our perfect or pluperfect tense . the form of this word be alter in the original for the sake of the rhyme . lit . he cast lot with the sailor . nequequam vos ad illud colendum estis seducturi . mar . this verse and the six preceding be the word of the angel . compare verse . sura lxxi . noah li . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful we send noah to his people and say to him warn thou thy people ere there come on them an afflictive punishment . he say o my people ! i come to you a plain spoken warner serve god and fear him and obey me your sin will he forgive you and respite you till the fixed time for when god 's fixed time hath come it shall not be put back . would that ye know this ! he say lord i have cry to my people night and day and my cry doth but make them flee from me the more . so oft a i cry to them that thou mayest forgive them they thrust their finger into their ear and wrap themselves in their garment and persist in their error and be disdainfully disdainful . then i cry aloud to them then again spake i with plainness and in private do i secretly address them and i say beg forgiveness of your lord for he be ready to forgive . he will send down the very heaven upon you in plenteous rain and will increase you in wealth and child and will give you garden and will give you watercourses what hath come to you that ye hope not for goodness from the hand of god ? for he it be who hath form you by successive step . see ye not how god hath create the seven heaven one over the other ? and he hath place therein the moon a a light and hath place there the sun a a torch and god hath cause you to spring forth from the earth like a plant hereafter will he turn you back into it again and will bring you forth anew and god hath spread the earth for you like a carpet that ye may walk therein along spacious path . ' say noah o my lord ! they rebel against me and they follow those whose rich and child do but aggravate their ruin . and they plot a great plot and they say forsake not your god forsake not wadd nor sowah nor yaghuth and yahuk and nesr and they cause many to err and thou too o muhammad ! shalt be the mean of increase only error in the wicked because of their sin they be drown and make to go into the fire and they find that they have no helper save god . and noah say lord leave not one single family of infidel on the earth for if thou leave them they will beguile thy servant and will beget only sinner infidel . o my lord forgive me and my parent and every one who be a believer shall enter my house and believer men and woman and add to the wicked nought but perdition . see sura xxii . . or the idol have seduce many . thus ka . beidh . give both interpp . see on these idol freytag 's einleitung p. . sura lxxvi . man lii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful doth not a long time pas over man during which he be a thing unremembered ? we have create man from the union of the sex that we might prove him and hear see have we make him in a right way have we guide him be he thankful or ungrateful . for the infidel we have get ready chain and collar and flame fire . but a wine cup temper at the camphor fountain the just shall quaff fount whence the servant of god shall drink and guide by channel from place to place they who fulfil their vow and fear the day whose woe will spread far and wide who though longing for it themselves bestow their food on the poor and the orphan and the captive we fee you for the sake of god we seek from you neither recompense nor thanks a stern and calamitous day dread we from our lord . from the evil therefore of that day hath god deliver them and cast on them brightness of face and joy and hath reward their constancy with paradise and silken robe recline therein on bridal couch nought shall they know of sun or pierce cold it shade shall be close over them and low shall it fruit hang down and vessel of silver and goblet like flagon shall be borne round among them flagon of silver whose measure themselves shall mete . and there shall they be give to drink of the cup temper with zendjebil ginger from the fount therein whose name be selsebil the softly flow . aye bloom youth go round among them . when thou lookest at them thou wouldest deem them scatter pearl and when thou seest this thou wilt see delight and a vast kingdom their clothing green silk robe and rich brocade with silver bracelet shall they be adorn and drink of a pure beverage shall their lord give them . this shall be your recompense . your effort shall meet with thanks . we ourselves have send down to thee the koran a a missive from on high . await then with patience the judgment of thy lord and obey not the wicked among them and the unbelieving and make mention of the name of thy lord at morn at even and at night . adore him and praise him the livelong night . but these men love the fleeting present and leave behind them the heavy day of doom . ourselves have we create them and strengthen their joint and when we please with others like unto themselves will we replace them . this truly be a warning and whoso willeth taketh the way to his lord but will it ye shall not unless god will it for god be know wise . he causeth whom he will to enter into his mercy . but for the evil doer he hath make ready an afflictive chastisement . when in the womb . with the water of kafoor . lane . desire no recompense from you . sura xliv . smoke liii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . by this clear book ! see ! on a bless night have we send it down for we would warn mankind on the night wherein all thing be dispose in wisdom by virtue of our behest . lo ! we have ever send forth apostles a mercy from thy lord he truly heareth and knoweth all thing lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them if ye be firm in faith there be no god but he ! he maketh alive and killeth ! your lord and the lord of your sire of old ! yet with doubt do they disport them . but mark them on the day when the heaven shall give out a palpable smoke which shall enshroud mankind this will be an afflictive torment . they will cry our lord ! relieve u from this torment see ! we be believer . but how do warn avail them when an undoubted apostle have come to them and they turn their back on him and say teach by others possess ? be we to relieve you from the plague even a little ye would certainly relapse . on the day when we shall fiercely put forth our great fierceness we will surely take vengeance on them ! of old before their time have we prove the people of pharaoh when a noble apostle present himself to them . send away with me cry he the servant of god for i be an apostle worthy of all credit and exalt not yourselves against god for i come to you with undoubted power and i take refuge with him who be my lord and your lord that ye stone me not and if ye believe me not at least separate yourselves from me . and he cry to his lord that these be a wicked people . march forth then say god with my servant by night for ye will be pursue . and leave behind you the cleft sea they be a drowned host . how many a garden and fountain do they quit ! and corn field and noble dwelling ! and pleasure in which they rejoice them ! so be it and we give them a a heritage to another people . nor heaven nor earth wept for them nor be their sentence respite and we rescue the child of israel from a degrade affliction from pharaoh for he be haughty give to excess . and we choose them in our prescience above all people and we shew them miracle wherein be their clear trial . yet these infidel say there be but our first death neither shall we be raise again bring back our sire if ye be men of truth . be they good than the people of tobba and those who flourish before them whom we destroy for their evil deed ? we have not create the heaven and the earth and whatever be between them in sport we have not create them but for a serious end but the great part of them understand it not . verily the day of sever shall be the appointed time of all a day when the master shall not at all be aid by the servant neither shall they be help save those on whom god shall have mercy for he be the mighty the merciful . verily the tree of ez zakkoum shall be the sinner 's food like dreg of oil shall it boil up in their belly like the boiling of scald water . seize ye him and drag him into the mid fire then pour on his head of the torment boiling water . 'taste this ' for thou forsooth art the mighty the honourable ! lo ! this be that of which ye doubt . but the pious shall be in a secure place amid garden and fountain clothe in silk and richest robe face one another thus shall it be and we will wed them to the virgin with large dark eye therein shall they call secure for every kind of fruit therein their first death pass shall they taste death no more and he shall keep them from the pain of hell 't be the gracious bounty of thy lord ! this be the great felicity . we have make this koran easy for thee in thine own tongue that they may take the warning . therefore wait thou for they be wait . see sura lxviii . i p. . of the rd and th of ramadhan in which accord to the muslim creed all the event of the year subsequent be arrange . see sura xcvii . n. p. . lit . we settle each wise affair call wise because proceed direct from the will of him who be absolute wisdom . beidh and others suppose this verse to have be reveal at medina . this opinion however be base upon the supposition that it refer to the famine with which mecca be visit after the hejira . comp . ex . xx . deut . viii . . tobba i.e . chalif or successor be the title of the king of yemen or of hadramont saba and hamyar . see pocock spec . hist . ar . p. . lit . in truth . that be of the good from the bad . see sura xxxvii . p. . the commentator suppose this sinner to be abu jahl one of the chief of the koreisch and the bitter enemy of muhammad . to see the turn which event may take . sura . kaf liv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful . kaf . by the glorious koran they marvel forsooth that one of themselves hath come to them charge with warning . this say the infidel be a marvellous thing what ! when dead and turn to dust shall we . . . . ? far off be such a return a this ? now know we what the earth consumeth of them and with u be a book in which account be keep . but they have treat the truth which hath come to them a falsehood perplexed therefore be their state . will they not look up to the heaven above them and consider how we have rear it and deck it forth and that there be no flaw therein ? and a to the earth we have spread it out and have throw the mountain upon it and have cause an upgrowth in it of all beauteous kind of plant for insight and admonition to every servant who loveth to turn to god and we send down the rain from heaven with it blessing by which we cause garden to spring forth and the grain of harvest and the tall palm tree with date bearing branch one above the other for man 's nourishment and life give we thereby to a dead country . so also shall be the resurrection . ere the day of these meccans the people of noah and the men of ras and themoud treat their prophet a impostor and ad and pharaoh and the brother of lot and the dweller in the forest and the people of tobba all give the lie to their prophet justly therefore be the menace inflict . be we weary out with the first creation ? yet be they in doubt with regard to a new creation ! we create man and we know what his soul whispereth to him and we be closer to him than his neck vein . when the two angel charge with take account shall take it one sit on the right hand the other on the left not a word doth he utter but there be a watcher with him ready to note it down and the stupor of certain death cometh upon him this be what thou wouldst have shun and there shall be a blast on the trumpet it be the threatened day ! and every soul shall come an angel with it urge it along and an angel to witness against it saith he of this day didst thou live in heedlessness but we have take off thy veil from thee and thy sight be become sharp this day . and he who be at this side shall say this be what i be prepared with against thee . and god will say cast into hell ye twain every infidel every harden one the hinderer of the good the transgressor the doubter who set up other god with god . cast ye him into the fierce torment . he who be at his side shall say o our lord ! i lead him not astray yet be he in an error wide of truth . he shall say wrangle not in my presence . i have ply you beforehand with menace my doom changeth not and i be not unjust to man . on that day will we cry to hell art thou full ? and it shall say be there more ? and not far from thence shall paradise be bring near unto the pious this be what ye have be promise to every one who hath turn in penitence to god and keep his law who hath fear the god of mercy in secret and come to him with a contrite heart enter it in peace this be the day of eternity . there shall they have all that they can desire and our 's will it be to augment their bliss and how many generation have we destroy ere the day of these meccans mighty than they in strength ! search ye then the land . be there any escape ? lo ! herein be warn for him who hath a heart or giveth ear and be himself an eye witness . we create the heaven and the earth and all that be between them in six day and no weariness touch u . wherefore put up with what they say and celebrate the praise of thy lord before sunrise and before sunset and praise him in the night and perform the two final prostration . and list for the day whereon the crier shall cry from a place near to every one alike the day on which men shall in truth hear that shout will be the day of their coming forth from the grave . verily we cause to live and we cause to die . to u shall all return . on the day when the earth shall swiftly cleave asunder over the dead will this gathering be easy to u . we know best what the infidel say and thou art not to compel them . warn then by the koran those who fear my menace . see sura lxviii . i p. . see lxvi . xxv . . see xliv . p. . the resurrection . lit . a driver and a witness . the satan who be chain to him . sura lxxi . xli . . lit . be there any addition ? which some explain a if hell enquire whether be already full any addition could be make to it size . comp . prov . xxx . and othioth derabbi akiba that the prince of hell saith daily give me food enough be clear from what be say be . v. . therefore shaol hath enlarge herself and open her mouth without measure etc . that be of the ruin of the destroyed city etc . this verse be say by omar b. muhammad itq . djelal eddin ap . maracc . and beidh . to have be reveal in answer to the jew who tell the prophet that if god rest on the sabbath it be because he be weary . but a connection with verse seem more natural . sura . ta . ha . . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ta . ha . not to sadden thee have we send down this koran to thee but a a warning for him who feareth it be a missive from him who hath make the earth and the lofty heaven ! the god of mercy sitteth on his throne his whatsoever be in the heaven and whatsoever be in the earth and whatsoever be between them both and whatsoever be beneath the humid soil ! thou needest not raise thy voice for he knoweth the secret whisper and the yet more hidden . god ! there be no god but he ! most excellent his title ! hath the history of moses reach thee ? when he saw a fire and say to his family tarry ye here for i perceive a fire haply i may bring you a brand from it or find at the fire a guide . and when he come to it he be call to o moses ! verily i be thy lord . therefore pull off thy shoe for thou art in the holy valley of towa . and i have choose thee hearken then to what shall be reveal . verily i be god there be no god but me therefore worship me and observe prayer for a remembrance of me . verily the hour be come i all but manifest it that every soul may be recompense for it labour . nor let him who believeth not therein and followeth his lust turn thee aside from this truth and thou perish . now what be that in thy right hand o moses ? say he it be my staff on which i lean and with which i beast down leaf for my sheep and i have other us for it . he say cast it down o moses ! so he cast it down and lo ! it become a serpent that run along . he say lay hold on it and fear not to it former state will we restore it . now place thy right hand to thy arm pit it shall come forth white but unhurt another sign ! that we may shew thee the great of our sign . go to pharaoh for he hath burst all bound . he say o my lord ! enlarge my breast for me and make my work easy for me and loose the knot of my tongue that they may understand my speech . and give me a counsellor from among my family aaron my brother by him gird up my loin and make him a colleague in my work that we may praise thee oft and oft remember thee for thou regardest u . he say o moses thou hast obtain thy suit already at another time have we show thee favour when we spake unto thy mother what be speak 'cast him into the ark then cast him on the sea the river and the sea shall throw him on the shore and an enemy to me and an enemy to him shall take him up . ' and i myself have make thee an object of love that thou mightest be rear in mine eye . when thy sister go and say 'shall i shew you one who will nurse him ? ' then we return thee to thy mother that her eye might be cheer and that she might not grieve . and when thou slewest a person we deliver thee from trouble and we try thee with other trial . for year didst thou stay among the people of midian then camest thou hither by my decree o moses and i have choose thee for myself . go thou and thy brother with my sign and be not slack to remember me . go ye to pharaoh for he hath burst all bound but speak ye to him with gentle speech haply he will reflect or fear . they say o our lord ! truly we fear lest he break forth against u or act with exceeding injustice . he say fear ye not for i be with you both . i will hearken and i will behold . go ye then to him and say 'verily we be sent one of thy lord send therefore the child of israel with u and vex them not now be we come to thee with sign from thy lord and peace shall be on him who followeth the right guidance . for now hath it be reveal to u that chastisement shall be on him who chargeth with falsehood and turneth him away . ' and he say who be your lord o moses ? he say our lord be he who hath give to everything it form and then guideth it aright . but what say he be the state of generation past ? he say the knowledge thereof be with my lord in the book of his decree . my lord erreth not nor forgetteth . he hath spread the earth a a bed and hath trace out path for you therein and hath send down rain from heaven and by it we bring forth the kind of various herb 'eat ye and fee your cattle . ' of a truth in this be sign unto men endue with understand . from it have we create you and into it will we return you and out of it will we bring you forth a second time . and we shew him all our sign but he treat them a falsehood and refuse to believe . he say hast thou come o moses to drive u from our land by thine enchantment ? therefore will we assuredly confront thee with like enchantment so appoint a meeting between u and you we will not fail it we and do not thou in a place alike for both . he say on the feast day be your meeting and in broad daylight let the people be assemble . and pharaoh turn away and collect his craftsman and come . say moses to them woe to you ! devise not a lie against god for then will he destroy you by a punishment . they who have lie have ever perish . and the magician discuss their plan and spake apart in secret they say these two be surely sorcerer fain would they drive you from your land by their sorcery and lead away in their path your chief men so muster your craft then come in order well this day shall it be for him who shall gain the upper hand . they say o moses wilt thou first cast down thy rod or shall we be the first who cast ? he say yes cast ye down first . and lo ! by their enchantment their cord and rod seem to him a if they run . and moses conceive a secret fear within him . we say fear not for thou shalt be the uppermost cast forth then what be in thy right hand it shall swallow up what they have produce they have only produce the deceit of an enchanter and come where he may ill shall an enchanter fare . and the magician fell down and worship . they say we believe in the lord of aaron and of moses . say pharaoh believe ye on him ere i give you leave ? he in sooth be your master who hath taught you magic . i will therefore cut off your hand and your foot on opposite side and i will crucify you on trunk of the palm and assuredly shall ye learn which of u be severest in punishing and who be the more abiding . they say we will not have more regard to thee than to the clear token which have come to u or than to him who hath make u doom the doom thou wilt thou canst only doom a to this present life of a truth we have believe on our lord that he may pardon u our sin and the sorcery to which thou hast forced u for god be good and more abide than thou . a for him who shall come before his lord laden with crime for him verily be hell he shall not die in it and he shall not live . but he who shall come before him a believer with righteous work these ! the lofty grade await them garden of eden beneath whose tree the river flow therein shall they abide for ever . this the reward of him who hath be pure . then reveal we to moses go forth by night with my servant and cleave for them a dry path in the sea fear not thou to be overtake neither be thou afraid . and pharaoh follow them with his host and the whelming billow of the sea overwhelm them for pharaoh mislead his people and do not guide them . o child of israel ! we rescue you from your foe and we appoint a meeting with you on the right side of the mountain and we cause the manna and the quail to descend upon you eat say we of the good thing with which we have supply you but without excess l my wrath fall upon you for on whom my wrath doth fall he perisheth outright . surely however will i forgive him who turneth to god and believeth and worketh righteousness and then yieldeth to guidance . but what hath hasten thee on apart from thy people o moses ? he say they be hard on my footstep but to thee o lord have i hasten that thou mightest be well pleased with me . he say of a truth now have we prove thy people since thou didst leave them and samiri have lead them astray . and moses return to his people anger sorrowful . he say o my people ! do not your lord promise you a good promise ? be the time of my absence long to you ? or desire ye that wrath from your lord should light upon you that ye fail in your promise to me ? they say not of our own accord have we fail in the promise to thee but we be make to bring load of the people 's trinket and we throw them into the fire and samiri likewise cast them in and bring forth to them a corporeal low calf and they say this be your god and the god of moses whom he hath forgotten . ' what ! saw they not that it return them no answer and could neither hurt nor help them ? and aaron have before say to them o my people ! by this calf be ye only prove surely your lord be the god of mercy follow me therefore and obey my bidding . they say we will not cease devotion to it till moses come back to u . he say o aaron ! when thou sawest that they have go astray what hinder thee from follow me ? hast thou then disobey my command ? he say o son of my mother ! seize me not by my beard nor by my head indeed i fear l thou shouldst say thou hast rent the child of isreal asunder and hast not observed my order . ' he say and what be thy motive o samiri ? he say i saw what they saw not so i take a handful of dust from the track of the messenger of god and fling it into the calf for so my soul prompt me . he say begone then verily thy doom even in this life shall be to say 'touch me not . ' and there be a threat against thee which thou shalt not escape hereafter . now look at thy god to which thou hast continue so devote we will surely burn it and reduce it to ash which we will cast into the sea . your god be god beside whom there be no god in his knowledge he embraceth all thing . thus do we recite to thee history of what pass of old and from ourself have we give thee admonition . whoso shall turn aside from it shall verily carry a burden on the day of resurrection under it shall they remain and grievous in the day of resurrection shall it be to them to bear . on that day there shall be a blast on the trumpet and we will gather the wicked together on that day with leaden eye they shall say in a low voice one to another ye tarry but ten day on earth . we be most knowing with respect to that which they will say when the most veracious of them will say . ye have not tarry above a day . and they will ask thee of the mountain say scatter my lord will scatter them in dust and he will leave them a level plain thou shalt see in it no hollow or jut hill . on that day shall men follow their summoner he marcheth straight on and low shall be their voice before the god of mercy nor shalt thou hear aught but the light footfall . no intercession shall avail on that day save his whom the god of mercy shall allow to intercede and whose word he shall approve . he knoweth their future and their past but in their own knowledge they comprehend it not and humble shall be their face before him that liveth the self subsisting and undone he who shall bear the burden of iniquity but he who shall have do the thing that be right and be a believer shall fear neither wrong nor loss . thus have we send down to thee an arabic koran and have set forth menace therein diversely that haply they may fear god or that it may give birth to reflection in them . exalt then be god the king the truth ! be not hasty in it recital while the revelation of it to thee be incomplete . say rather o my lord increase knowledge unto me . and of old we make a covenant with adam but he forgat it and we find no firmness of purpose in him . and when we say to the angel fall down and worship adam they worship all save eblis who refuse and we say o adam ! this truly be a foe to thee and to thy wife . let him not therefore drive you out of the garden and ye become wretched for to thee be it grant that thou shalt not hunger therein neither shalt thou be naked but satan whisper him say he o adam ! shall i shew thee the tree of eternity and the kingdom that faileth not ? and they both eat thereof and their nakedness appear to them and they begin to sew of the leaf of the garden to cover them and adam disobey his lord and go astray . afterwards his lord choose him for himself and be turn towards him and guide him . and god say get ye all down hence the one of you a foe unto the other . hereafter shall guidance come unto you from me and whoso followeth my guidance shall not err and shall not be wretched but whoso turneth away from my monition his truly shall be a life of misery and we will assemble him with others on the day of resurrection blind . he will say o my lord ! why hast thou assemble me with others blind ? whereas i be endow with sight . he will answer thus be it because our sign come unto thee and thou didst forget them and thus shalt thou be forget this day . even thus will we recompense him who hath transgress and hath not believe in the sign of his lord and assuredly the chastisement of the next world will be more severe and more lasting . be not they who walk the very place where they dwell aware how many generation we have destroy before them ? verily in this be sign to men of insight . and have not a decree of respite from thy lord first go forth their chastisement have at once ensue . yet the time be fix . put up then with what they say and celebrate the praise of thy lord before the sunrise and before it setting and some time in the night do thou praise him and in the extreme of the day that thou haply mayest please him . and strain not thine eye after what we have bestow on diver of them the bravery of this world that we may thereby prove them . the portion which thy lord will give be good and more lasting . enjoin prayer on thy family and persevere therein . we ask not of thee to find thine own provision we will provide for thee and a happy issue shall there be to piety . but they say if he come not to u with a sign from his lord . . . ! but have not clear proof for the koran come to them in what be in the book of old ? and have we destroy them by a chastisement before it time they would surely have say o our lord ! how could we believe if thou didst not send unto u an apostle that we might follow thy sign ere that we be humble and disgrace . say each one of u awaiteth the end . wait ye then and ye shall know which of u have be follower of the even way and who hath be the rightly guide . the first or verse of this sura be say to have induce omar to embrace islam his . . ibn s d i. and v. comp . weil p. . causs . i. ff . in the sixth year before the hejira . freytag suppose these letter to mean hush ! but see sura lxviii . p. . lit . if thou raise thy voice . lit . guidance . moses have lose his way say the commentator when journey to egypt to visit his mother . the muhammadan commentator tell how moses when a child burnt his tongue with a live coal . the same story be find in midr . jalkut on ex . c. and in shalsheleth hakabalah p. b. ed . amsterd . lit vizir . or strengthen my back . the form of the word in the original be not the pure hebraic but the late rabbinic form . see sura lxxix . xxviii . . what be their condition after their death a to happiness or misery . beidh . whom sale follow . but the word state which mar . render mens refers rather to their creed . how enquires pharaoh do you explain the fact that the generation of men have always practise a different worship ? lit . pair . the midrasch tanchumah on ex . vii . give a very similar dialogue between pharaoh and moses . lit . the day of ornament . in punish . beidh . to recompense . beidh . a the garden be say in sura lxxxviii . to be lofty in point of situation this frequently recur phrase may mean that river run at it base . the commentator however generally understand it to imply that the river flow beneath it shade or pavilion . lit . and there overwhelm them of the sea that which overwhelm them . the elder who be to have accompany him . that be the samaritan . this render which be probably the true explanation of the word samiri involve a grievous ignorance of history on the part of muhammad . selden de diis syr . syn . i. ch . suppose that samiri be aaron himself the shomeer or keeper of israel during the absence of moses . many arabian identify him with the micha of judge xvii . who be say to have assist in make the calf raschi sanhedr . hottinger hist . orient . p. . geiger suggest that samiri may be a corruption of samael . see next note . but it be probable that the name and it application in the present instance be to be trace to the old national feud between the jew and samaritan . see de sacy chrestom . i. p. who quote abu rihan muhammad a state that the samaritan be call al limsahsit the people who say touch me not v. below and juynboll chron . sam . leid . p. . sale also mention a similar circumstance of a tribe of samaritan jew dwell on one of the island in the red sea . the calf come forth ex . xxxii . lowing and the israelite behold it . r. jehuda saith samuel enter into it and low in order to mislead israel . pirke r. eliezer . from the track of gabriel 's horse or of gabriel himself . lit . no touch . i have adopt the word leaden a expressive of the idea imply in the original word viz . grey or greyish blue hence dull dim . the arabian have a great aversion to blue and grey eye a characteristic of their enemy the greek . the word however may also mean blind . comp . v. . lit . the most excellent or just of them in his way dignitate mar . but kam . in freyt . iii . justissimus eorum simillimus veracibus . the sense of the last clause be yes have not tarry even so much a ten day such now that we look back upon it be the brevity of life . see sura lxiv . xxiii . . the angel israfil . compare sura lxxv . p. . it should be observe that here and in sura vii . muhammad seem unaware of the distinction between the tree of knowledge and the tree of life a give in gen. ii . and iii . . from the intensity of the light mention sura xxx . xxxix . . in order to reconcile this passage with the prescribed hour some understand the extreme to mean the mid day when the day be a it be divide . supply we will not believe . sura xxvi . the poet lvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ta . sin . mim . these be the sign of the lucid book . haply thou wearest thyself away with grief because they will not believe . be it our will we could send down to them a sign from heaven before which they would humbly bow . but from each fresh warning that cometh to them from the god of mercy they have only turn aside and treat it a a lie but tidings shall reach them which they shall not laugh to scorn . have they not behold the earth how we have cause every kind of noble plant to spring up therein ? verily in this be a sign but most of them believe not . and assuredly thy lord ! he be the mighty the merciful . and remember when thy lord call to moses go to the wicked people the people of pharaoh . what ! will they not fear me ? he say my lord in sooth i fear l they treat me a a liar and my breast be straiten and i be slow of speech send therefore to aaron to be my helpmate . for they have a charge against me and i fear l they put me to death . he say surely not . go ye therefore with our sign we will be with you and will hearken . and go to pharaoh and say 'verily we be the messenger of the lord of the world send forth with u the child of israel . ' he say do we not rear thee among u when a child ? and hast thou not pass year of thy life among u ? and yet what a deed be that which thou hast do ! thou art one of the ungrateful . he say i do it indeed and i be one of those who err and i flee from you because i fear you but my lord hath give me wisdom and hath make me one of his apostle . and be this the favour thou hast confer on me that thou hast enslave the child of israel ? say pharaoh who then be the lord of the world ? he say the lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them if only ye believe it . say pharaoh to those around him hear ye this ? your lord say moses and the lord of your sire of old . in sooth your apostle whom he hath sent to you say pharaoh be certainly possess . he say lord be he of the east and of the west and of all that be between them if ye can understand . he say if ye take any god beside me i will surely put thee in ward . say moses what ! if i shew thee that which shall be a proof of my mission ? he say forth with it then if thou speakest truth . then throw he down his staff and lo ! an undoubted serpent and he draw out his hand and lo ! it be white to the beholder . he say to his noble around him . this truly be a right cunning sorcerer fain would he drive you out of your land by his sorcery . but what do ye suggest ? they say put him and his brother off awhile and send summoners to all the city who shall bring to thee every cunning magician . so the magician be muster at a set time on a solemn day and it be say to the people be ye all assemble ? yes ! and we will follow the magician if they gain the day . and when the magician be arrive they say to pharaoh shall we have a reward if we gain the day ? he say yes . and verily in that case ye shall be of those who be near my person . moses say to them throw down what ye have to throw . so they cast down their rope and rod and say by pharaoh 's might we shall surely win . then moses throw down his rod and lo ! it swallow up their cheating wonder . then the magician throw themselves down in worship they say we believe on the lord of the world the lord of moses and of aaron . say pharaoh have ye then believe on him ere i give you leave ? he truly be your master who hath taught you magic . but bye and bye ye shall surely know my power . i will cut off your hand and foot on opposite side and i will have you all crucify . they say it can not harm u for to our lord shall we return assuredly we trust that our lord will forgive u our sin since we be of the first who believe . then reveal we this order to moses go forth by night with my servant for ye will be pursue . and pharaoh sent summoners through the city these israelite say they be a scanty band yet be they enrage against u but we truly be numerous wary . thus we cause them to quit garden and fountain and treasure and splendid dwelling so be it and we give them to the child of israel for an heritage . then at sunrise the egyptian follow them and when the host come in view of one another the comrade of moses say we be surely overtaken . he say by no mean for my lord be with me he will guide me . and we reveal this order to moses strike the sea with thy rod . and it clave asunder and each part become like a huge mountain . then make we the others to draw on and we save moses and those who be with him all but we drown the others . truly in this be a sign but most of them do not believe . but verily thy lord he be the mighty the merciful ! and recite to them the story of abraham when he say to his father and to his people what worship ye ? they say we worship idol and constant be our devotion to them . he say can they hear you when ye cry to them ? or help you or do you harm ? they say but we find our father do the like . he say how think ye ? they whom ye worship ye and your father of early day be my foe but not so the lord of the world who hath create me and guideth me who giveth me food and drink and when i be sick he healeth me and who will cause me to die and again quicken me and who i hope will forgive me my sin in the day of reckon . my lord ! bestow on me wisdom and join me to the just and give me a good name among posterity and make me one of the heir of the garden of delight and forgive my father for he be one of the erring and put me not to shame on the day when mankind shall be raise up the day when neither wealth nor child shall avail save to him who shall come to god with a sound heart when paradise shall be bring near the pious and hell shall lay open for those who have go astray . and it shall be say to them 'where be they whom ye worship beside god ? can they harm you or help themselves ? ' and they shall be cast into it the seducer and the seduce and all the host of eblis . they shall say a they wrangle therein together 'by god we be in a plain error when we equal you with the lord of the world and none mislead u but the wicked and we have none to plead for u nor friend who careth for u . could we but return we would be of the believer . ' verily in this be a sign but most of them believe not . and truly thy lord ! he be the mighty the merciful ! the people of noah gainsay the apostle when their brother noah say to them will ye not fear god ? of a truth be i your faithful apostle fear god then and obey me . i ask of you no reward for this for my reward be of the lord of the world alone fear god then and obey me . they say shall we believe on thee when the mean only be thy follower ? he say but i have no knowledge of that they do to my lord only must their account be give would that ye understand this ! and i will not thrust away those who believe for i be only one charge with plain warning . they say now unless thou desist o noah one of the stoned shalt thou surely be . he say lord ! my people treat me a a liar decide thou therefore a decision between me and them and rescue me and the faithful who be with me . so we save him and those who be with him in the fully laden ark and afterwards we drown the rest . herein truly be a sign but most of them believe not . but thy lord ! he be the mighty the merciful . the adites treat their apostle a liar when their brother houd say to them will ye not fear god ? i be your apostle worthy of all credit fear god then and obey me i ask for no reward for this for my reward be of the lord of the world alone . what ! build ye landmark on all height in mere pastime ? and raise ye structure to be your last abode ? and when ye put forth your power do ye put it forth with harshness ? fear ye god then and obey me and fear ye him who hath plenteously betowed on you ye well know what plenteously bestow on you flock and child and garden and fountain indeed i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day . they say it be the same to u whether thou warn or warn u not . this be but a tale of the ancient and we be not they who shall be punish . and they charge him with imposture and we destroy them . in this be a sign but most of them believe not . but thy lord ! he be the mighty the merciful ! the themoudites also treat their apostle a liar when their brother saleh say to them will ye not fear god ? i be your apostle worthy of all credit fear god then and obey me . i ask of you no reward for this my reward be of the lord of the world alone . shall ye be leave secure amid these thing here ? amid garden and fountain and corn field and palm tree with flower sheathe branch ? and insolent that ye be will ye hew out your dwelling in the mountain ? but fear god and obey me and obey not the bidding of those who commit excess who act disorderly on the earth and reform it not . they say certainly thou art a person bewitch thou art only a man like u produce now a sign if thou art a man of truth . he say this she camel then drink shall there be for her and drink shall there be for you on a several day for each . but harm her not lest the punishment of a tremendous day overtake you . but they ham string her and repent of it on the morrow for the punishment overtake them . in this truly be a sign but most of them believe not . but thy lord ! he be the powerful the merciful ! the people of lot treat their apostle a liar when their brother lot say to them will ye not fear god ? i be your apostle worthy of all credit fear god then and obey me . for this i ask you no reward my reward be of the lord of the world alone . what ! with men of all creature will ye have commerce ? and leave ye your wife whom your lord hath create for you ? ah ! ye be an erring people ! they say o lot if thou desist not one of the banished shalt thou surely be . he say i utterly abhor your doings my lord ! deliver me and my family from what they do . so we deliver him and his whole family save an aged one among those who tarry then we destroy the rest and we rain a rain upon them and fatal be the rain to those whom we have warn . in this truly be a sign but most of them do not believe . but thy lord ! he be the powerful the merciful ! the dweller in the forest of madian treat the apostle a liar . when shoaib their brother say to them will ye not fear god ? i truly be your trustworthy apostle . fear god then and obey me no reward ask i of you for this my reward be of the lord of the world alone . fill the measure and be not of those who minish weigh with exact balance and defraud not men in their substance and do no wrong on the earth by deed of licence and fear him who make you and the race of old . they say certainly thou art a person bewitch . thou art but a man like u and we deem thee liar make now a part of the heaven to fall down upon u if thou art a man of truth . he say my lord best knoweth your doings . and when they treat him a a liar the chastisement of the day of cloud overtake them . this truly be the chastisement of a dreadful day ! in this be a sign but most of them believe not . but thy lord ! he be the mighty the merciful ! verily from the lord of the world hath this book come down the faithful spirit hath come down with it upon thy heart that thou mightest become a warner in the clear arabic tongue and truly it be foretell in the scripture of them of yore . be it not a sign to them that the learn among the child of israel recognise it ? if we have send it down unto any foreigner and he have recite it to them they have not believe . in such sort have we influence the heart of the wicked one that they will not believe it till they see the grievous chastisement ? and it shall come upon them on a sudden when they look not for it and they will say can we be respite ? what ! will they seek to hasten on our chastisement ? how thinkest thou ? if after we have give them their fill for year that with which they be menace come upon them at last of what avail will their enjoyment be to them ? we never destroy a city which have not first it warner with admonition nor do we deal unjustly . the satan be not send down with this koran it beseem them not and they have not the power for they be far remove from hear it . call not thou on any other god but god l thou be of those consign to torment but warn thy relative of nearer kin and kindly low thy wing over the faithful who follow thee . and if they disobey thee then say i will not be answerable for your doings and put thy trust in him that be the mighty the merciful who seeth thee when thou standest in prayer and thy demeanour amongst those who worship for he heareth knoweth all . shall i tell you on whom satan descend ? they descend on every lying wicked person they impart what they have hear but most of them be liar . it be the poet whom the err follow seest thou not how they rove distraught in every valley ? and that they say that which they do not ? save those who believe and do good work and oft remember god and who defend themselves when unjustly treat . but they who treat them unjustly shall find out what a lot awaiteth them . this sura belongs to about the seventh year of muhammad 's prophetic life . see sura xviii . i p. . lit . to which their neck would humble themselves . lit . my tongue be not free . this verse appear to be a studied simplification of ex . iv . . the murder of the egyptian . see geiger . lit . and thou hast do thy deed which thou hast do . see xxviii . . thus pirke r. elieser . he place his hand in his bosom and draw it forth white a snow with leprosy . the pharaoh who live in the day of moses be a great magician . mid . jalkut c. . comp . sura xxviii . where in accordance with the rabbinic tradition pharaoh claim to be a god . see ii . and midr . jalkut on ex . xii . c. . lit . except . lit . a tongue of truth i.e . high repute . or grant that my word may be believe among posterity . see lviii . xix . . of their motif in embrace islam . the adites be mention in vii . and xi . this be to be understood of the small fort erect by the nomades of the hejaz along the route of the caravan to guarantee their safety . comp . gen. xi . and sura lxxxix . p. . the madian and the el aika of other sura be unquestionably one and the same place a they have the same prophet shoaib or sho'eyb the jethro of scripture a name perhaps alter from hobab numb . x. and because the same sin be lay to the charge of both . see winer 's realw rterbuch on jethro . the midr . rabbah on ex . ii . i par . i make jethro renounce idolatry and his office of priest and undergo banishment from the midianites . gabriel . see sura lxxxi . p. . see sura xiii . . this verse be say to have be reveal at medina by itq . . the unbelieving meccans . lit . that the knowing doctor uhlemas know it . lit . have introduce it i.e . infidelity or the koran . beidh . the latter interpretation seem most accordant with the context . comp . sura xxxvii . p. . it be probable that within three or four year from his entry upon the prophetic office muhammad have make about convert . some biographer refer to this passage and not to sura lxiv . i a the first call to preach . but this sura be itself late and bear evidence of the opposition to which the prophet have become exposed and of adherent to his cause now become numerous . the diffuseness and feeblenss of the style clearly point to a late origin . they impart to their votary on earth what they have learn by stealth and partially in heaven . muhammad find it necessary to employ the pen of certain poet to defend himself and his religion from the ridicule and satire of other poet whose production be recite at the great annual fair hold at okatz the olympus of the hejaz . the poem which be judge the best be write up in letter of gold or suspend hence call moallakat in the caaba . these poetical contest be subsequently suppress by muhammad a offering opening for discussion which might prove inconvenient and dangerous to his rise claim . sura . hedjr lvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . ra . these be the sign of the book and of a lucid recital koran . many a time will the infidel wish that they have be muslim . let them feast and enjoy themselves and let hope beguile them but they shall know the truth at last . we never destroy a city whose term be not perfixed no people can forestall or retard it destiny . they say o thou to whom the warning hath be send down thou art surely possess by a djinn wouldst thou not have come to u with the angel if thou wert of those who assert the truth ? we will not send down the angel without due cause . the infidel would not in that case have be respite . verily we have send down the warning and verily we will be it guardian and already have we send apostle before thee among the sect of the ancient but never come apostle to them whom they do not deride . in like manner will we put it into the heart of the sinner of mecca to do the same they will not believe on him though the example of those of old hath go before . even be we to open above them a gate in heaven yet all the while they be mount up to it they would surely say it be only that our eye be drunken nay we be a people enchant . we have set the sign of the zodiac in the heaven and adorn and deck them forth for the beholder and we guard them from every stone satan save such a steal a hearing and him doth a visible flame pursue . and the earth have we spread forth and thrown thereon the mountain and cause everything to spring forth in it in balanced measure and we have provide therein sustenance for you and for the creature which not ye sustain and no one thing be there but with u be it storehouse and we send it not down but in settled measure and we send forth the fertilising wind and cause the rain to come down from the heaven and give you to drink of it and it be not ye who be it storers and we cause to live and we cause to die and we be the heir of all thing we know those of you who flourish first and we know those who come later and truly thy lord will gather them together again for he be wise know . we create man of dried clay of dark loam mould and the djinn have we before create of subtle fire . remember when thy lord say to the angel i create man of dried clay of dark loam mould and when i shall have fashion him and breathe of my spirit into him then fall ye down and worship him . and the angel bow down in worship all of them all together save eblis he refuse to be with those who bow in worship . o eblis say god wherefore art thou not with those who bow down in worship ? he say it beseemeth not me to bow in worship to man whom thou hast created of clay of moulded loam . he say begone then hence thou art a stoned one and the curse shall be on thee till the day of reckon . he say o my lord ! respite me till the day when man shall be raise from the dead . he say one then of the respited shalt thou be till the day of the predestined time . he say o my lord ! because thou hast beguile me i will surely make all fair seem to them on the earth i will surely beguile them all except such of them a shall be thy sincere servant . he say this be the right way with me for over none of my servant shalt thou have power save those beguile one who shall follow thee . and verily hell be the promise for them one and all . it hath seven portal at each portal be a separate band of them but 'mid garden and fountain shall the pious dwell enter ye therein in peace secure and all rancour will we remove from their bosom they shall sit a brethren face to face on couch therein no weariness shall reach them nor forth from it shall they be cast for ever . announce to my servant that i be the gracious the merciful and that my chastisement be the grievous chastisement . and tell them of abraham 's guest . when they enter in unto him and say peace . verily say he we fear you . they say fear not for of a sage son we bring thee tidings . he say bring ye me such tidings now that old age hath come upon me ? what therefore be your tidings really ? they say we announce them to thee in very truth . be not then one of the despairing . and who say he despaireth of the mercy of his lord but they who err ? he say what be your business then o ye send one ? they say we be send unto a people who be sinner except the family of lot whom verily we will rescue all except his wife . we have decree that she shall be of those who linger . and when the sent one come to the family of lot he say yes be person unknown to me . they say yes but we have come to thee for a purpose about which thy people doubt we have come to thee with very truth and we be truthful envoy . lead forth therefore thy family in the dead of the night follow thou on their rear and let no one of you turn round but pass ye on whither ye be bid . and this command we give him because to the last man should these people be cut off at morning . then come the people of the city rejoicing at the news he say these be my guest therefore disgrace me not . and fear god and put me not to shame . they say have we not forbid thee to entertain any one whatever ? he say here be my daughter if ye will thus act . a thou liv o muhammad they be bewilder in the drunkenness of their lust . so a tempest overtook them at their sunrise and we turn the city upside down and we rain stone of baked clay upon them . verily in this be sign for those who scan heedfully and these city lay on the high road . verily in this be sign for the faithful . the inhabitant also of el aika be sinner so we take vengeance on them and they both become a plain example . and the people of hedjr treat god 's messenger a liar . and we bring forth our sign to them but they draw back from them and they hew them out abode in the mountain to secure them but a tempest surprise them at early morn and their labour avail them nothing . we have not create the heaven and the earth and all that between them be but for a worthy end . and verily the hour shall surely come . wherefore do thou muhammad forgive with kindly forgiveness for thy lord ! he be the creator the wise . we have already give thee the seven verse of repetition and the glorious koran . strain not thine eye after the good thing we have bestow on some of the unbeliever afflict not thyself on their account and low thy wing to the faithful . and say i be the only plain spoken warner . we will punish those who foster division who break up the koran into part by thy lord ! we will surely take account from them one and all concerning that which they have do . profess publicly then what thou hast be bidden and withdraw from those who join god to god . verily we will maintain thy cause against those who deride thee who set up god with god and at last shall they know their folly . now know we that thy heart be distress at what they say but do thou celebrate the praise of thy lord and be of those who bow down in worship and serve thy lord till the certainty o'ertake thee . hedjr a valley in the route between medina and syria originally the country of the themoudites . see sura lxviii . p. . lit . which have not a know writing . that be not merely to gratify the curiosity of the doubting but to execute prompt punishment . it might also be render save with justice ar . bourdj gr . greek text tower i.e . sign of the zodiac . see sura xv . and note p. . comp . sura xxxvii . p. . in chagiga the demon schedim be say to learn the secret of the future by listen behind the veil parg d . compare precisely a similar association of subject the rain food god a lord of life and death in tr . taanith fol . a. comp . sura xci . ii . . there be much in this dialogue between eblis and allah which remind of the dialogue between jehovah and satan in the opening of the book of job . that be accurse . accord to the muhammadan tradition abraham drove satan away with stone when he would have hinder him from sacrifice ismael . hence the custom during the pilgrimage of throw a certain number of stone the shafeis the hanafis a if at satan in the valley of mina near mecca . the spot where the apparition of satan to abraham take place be mark by three small pillar at which the stone be now throw . comp . gen. xv . ii . lit . i will embellish prepare . thus in sota david be say to have rescue absalom from the seven dwelling of hell in midr . on p . xi . there be seven house of abode for the wicked in hell and in sohar ii . hell hath seven gate . at the arrival of stranger . comp . midr . rabbah on gen. par . . from arabia to syria . the pronoun in the fem . sing . may refer to the pentapolis a to a single city or to sodom alone . see sura lvi . xxvi . . see sura lxxiii . xvi . . that be the seven verse of sura p. . others understand the seven long sura or the fifteen sura which make a seventh of the whole or this sura hedjr a originally the seventh . mathani be an allusion accord to some to the frequency with which the fatthah be to be repeat or to the frequent repetition of great truths etc . in order to impress them on the memory of the hearer and reader or to the manner in which waid and wa 'd promise and threaten alternate and balance each other in the same or subsequent verse and sura in pair . this verse and sura x. shew that a part at least of the koran be know under that name and exist a a whole in the time of muhammad . geiger 's interpretation at pp . and in the note seem very force . comp . sura lvi . xxvi . i.e . demean thyself gently . lit . a we send down upon the divider i.e . the jew and christian who receive part of the scripture and reject part . others render obstructor and explain the passage of twelve idolater who in order to intimidate the meccans seize upon the public revenue of mecca during the pilgrimage . in this the fourth year of his mission muhammad be say to have hazard the step of mount the safa a slight eminence in one of the street of mecca and publicly preach to the koreisch . the authority be give in sprenger life of . p. . lit . contract . death . sura xix . mary lviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful kaf . ha . ya . ain . sad . a recital of thy lord 's mercy to his servant zachariah when he call upon his lord with secret call and say o lord verily my bone be weaken and the hoar hairs glisten on my head and never lord have i pray to thee with ill success . but now i have fear for my kindred after me and my wife be barren give me then a successor a thy special gift who shall be my heir and an heir of the family of jacob and make him lord well please to thee . o zachariah ! verily we announce to thee a son his name john that name we have give to none before him . he say o my lord ! how when my wife be barren shall i have a son and when i have now reach old age failing in my power ? he say so shall it be . thy lord hath say easy be this to me for i create thee aforetime when thou wast nothing . he say vouchsafe me o my lord ! a sign . he say thy sign shall be that for three night though sound in health thou speakest not to man . and he come forth from the sanctuary to his people and make sign to them to sing praise morn and even . we say o john ! receive the book with purpose of heart and we bestow on him wisdom while yet a child and mercifulness from ourself and purity and pious be he and duteous to his parent and not proud rebellious . and peace be on him on the day he be bear and the day of his death and shall be on the day when he shall be raise to life ! and make mention in the book of mary when she go apart from her family eastward and take a veil to shroud herself from them and we send our spirit to her and he take before her the form of a perfect man . she say i fly for refuge from thee to the god of mercy ! if thou fearest him begone from me . he say i be only a messenger of thy lord that i may bestow on thee a holy son . she say how shall i have a son when man hath never touch me ? and i be not unchaste . he say so shall it be . thy lord hath say 'easy be this with me ' and we will make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from u . for it be a thing decreed . and she conceive him and retire with him to a far off place . and the throe come upon her by the trunk of a palm . she say oh would that i have die ere this and be a thing forgotten forget quite ! and one cried to her from below her grieve not thou thy lord hath provide a streamlet at thy foot and shake the trunk of the palm tree toward thee it will drop fresh ripe date upon thee . eat then and drink and be of cheerful eye and shouldst thou see a man say verily i have vow abstinence to the god of mercy . to no one will i speak this day . then come she with the babe to her people bear him . they say o mary ! now hast thou do a strange thing ! o sister of aaron ! thy father be not a man of wickedness nor unchaste thy mother . and she make a sign to them point towards the babe . they say how shall we speak with him who be in the cradle an infant ? it say verily i be the servant of god he hath give me the book and he hath make me a prophet and he hath make me blessed wherever i may be and hath enjoin me prayer and almsgiving so long a i shall live and to be duteous to her that bare me and he hath not make me proud deprave . and the peace of god be on me the day i be bear and will be the day i shall die and the day i shall be raise to life . this be jesus the son of mary this be a statement of the truth concern which they doubt . it beseemeth not god to beget a son . glory be to him ! when he decreeth a thing he only saith to it be and it be . and verily god be my lord and your lord adore him then . this be the right way . but the sect have fall to variance among themselves about jesus but woe because of the assembly of a great day to those who believe not ! make them hear make them behold the day when they shall come before u ! but the offender this day be in a manifest error . warn them of the day of sigh when the decree shall be accomplish while they be sink in heedlessness and while they believe not . verily we will inherit the earth and all who be upon it . to u shall they be bring back . make mention also in the book of abraham for he be a man of truth a prophet . when he say to his father o my father ! why dost thou worship that which neither seeth nor heareth nor profiteth thee aught ? o my father ! verily now hath knowledge come to me which hath not come to thee . follow me therefore i will guide thee into an even path . o my father ! worship not satan for satan be a rebel against the god of mercy . o my father ! indeed i fear l a chastisement from the god of mercy light upon thee and thou become satan 's vassal . he say castest thou off my god o abraham ? if thou forbear not i will surely stone thee . begone from me for a length of time . he say peace be on thee ! i will pray my lord for thy forgiveness for he be gracious to me but i will separate myself from you and the god ye call on beside god and on my lord will i call . haply my prayer to my lord will not be with ill success . and when he have separate himself from them and that which they worship beside god we bestow on him isaac and jacob and each of them we make a prophet and we bestow gift on them in our mercy and give them the lofty tongue of truth . and commemorate moses in the book for he be a man of purity moreover he be an apostle a prophet from the right side of the mountain we call to him and cause him to draw nigh to u for secret converse and we bestow on him in our mercy his brother aaron a prophet . and commemorate ismael in the book for he be true to his promise and be an apostle a prophet and he enjoin prayer and almsgiving on his people and be well please to his lord . and commemorate edris in the book for he be a man of truth a prophet and we uplift him to a place on high . these be they among the prophet of the posterity of adam and among those whom we bare with noah and among the posterity of abraham and israel and among those whom we have guide and choose to whom god hath shew favour . when the sign of the god of mercy be rehearse to them they bow them down worship and weep . but others have come in their place after them they have make an end of prayer and have go after their own lust and in the end they shall meet with evil save those who turn and believe and do that which be right these shall enter the garden and in nought shall they be wrong the garden of eden which the god of mercy hath promise to his servant though yet unseen for his promise shall come to pass no vain discourse shall they hear therein but only peace and their food shall be give them at morn and even this be the paradise which we will make the heritage of those our servant who fear u . we come not down from heaven but by thy lord 's command . his whatever be before u and whatever be behind u and whatever be between the two ! and thy lord be not forgetful lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them ! worship him then and abide thou steadfast in his worship . knowest thou any other of the same name ? man saith what ! after i be dead shall i in the end be bring forth alive ? doth not man bear in mind that we make him at first when he be nought ? and i swear by thy lord we will surely gather together them and the satan then will we set them on their knee round hell then will we take forth from each band those of them who have be stoutest in rebellion against the god of mercy then shall we know right well to whom it burning be most due no one be there of you who shall not go down unto it this be a settled decree with thy lord then will we deliver those who have the fear of god and the wicked will we leave in it on their knee . and when our clear sign be rehearse to them the infidel say to those who believe which of the two party be in the best plight ? and which be the most goodly company ? but how many generation have we bring to ruin before them who surpass them in rich and in splendour ! say a to those who be in error the god of mercy will lengthen out to them a length of day until they see that with which they be threaten whether it be some present chastisement or whether it be the hour and they shall then know which be in the bad state and which the more weak in force but god will increase the guidance of the already guide . and good work which abide be in thy lord 's sight well in respect of guerdon and well in the issue than all worldly good . hast thou mark him who believeth not in our sign and saith i shall surely have rich and child bestow upon me ? hath he mount up into the secret of god ? hath he make a compact with the god of mercy ? no ! we will certainly write down what he saith and will lengthen the length of his chastisement and we will inherit what he spake of and he shall come before u all alone . they have take other god beside god to be their help . but it shall not be . those god will disavow their worship and will become their enemy . seest thou not that we send the satan against the infidel to urge them into sin ? wherefore be not thou in haste with them for a small number of day do we number to them . one day we will gather the god fear before the god of mercy with honour due but the sinner will we drive unto hell like flock drive to the watering . none shall have power to intercede save he who hath receive permission at the hand of the god of mercy . they say the god of mercy hath gotten offspring . now have ye do a monstrous thing ! almost might the very heavens be rent thereat and the earth cleave asunder and the mountain fall down in fragment that they ascribe a son to the god of mercy when it beseemeth not the god of mercy to beget a son ! verily there be none in the heaven and in the earth but shall approach the god of mercy a a servant . he hath take note of them and number them with exact numbering and each of them shall come to him on the day of resurrection singly but love will the god of mercy vouchsafe to those who believe and do the thing that be right . verily we have make this koran easy and in thine own tongue that thou mayest announce glad tidings by it to the god fearing and that thou mayest warn the contentious by it . how many generation have we destroy before them ! canst thou search out one of them ? or canst thou hear a whisper from them ? comp . the first verse of this sura with sura iii . with reference to the different style adopt by muhammad in the late sura probably for the purpose of avoid the imputation of his be merely a poet a sorcerer or person possess . sura lii . xxi . lxviii . . this sura be one of the full and early koranic gospel history and be recite to the nagash or king of thiopia in the presence of the ambassador of the koreisch . his . caussin i. sprenger life of . p. . see sura lxviii . i p. . golius conjecture that these letter represent coh ya'as thus he counsel and that they be add by some jewish scribe . sprenger journ . of a . soc . of bengal xx . arrange them a ain sad kaf ha ya and suppose them to be take from the arabic word for aisa jesus of the nazarene king of the jew . but we can hardly imagine that muhammad would ascribe such a title to our lord and the word which dr. sprenger us for jew be not the form peculiar to the koran . l they should desert the worship of the god of israel . ar . yahia . it may be true that the name in this form have never be give . otherwise we have in this passage a misunderstanding of luke i. as well a ignorance of the jewish scripture . comp . king xxv . chron . iii . ezra viii . jerem . xl . . some commentator try to avoid the difficulty by render samiyan deserving of the name . or with firm resolve . see sura xcvii . iii . . the speaker be god . to an eastern chamber in the temple to pray . or it may mean to some place eastward from jerusalem or from the house of her parent . thus the protev . jac . c. say that mary although at a late period greek text but wahl she lay aside her veil . gabriel . see sura lxxxix . vi . . it be quite clear from this passage and from verse that muhammad believe jesus to have be conceive by an act of the divine will . comp . sura xcvii . iii . see also note at sura xci . ii . . or the throe urge her to the trunk of etc . this be either the infant which speak as soon a bear or gabriel . comp . thilo cod . apoc . on this passage . beidhawi explain from behind the palm tree . see thilo cod . apoc . n. t. p. and the hist . nat . mar . c. which connect similar incident with the flight into egypt . thus also latona greek text call . h. in apoll . and greek text h. in delum . or settle calm thine eye refresh thine eye . the birth of a son be still call korrat ol ain . the anachronism be probably only apparent . see sura iii . n. muhammad may have suppose that this aaron or harun be the son of imran and anna . or if aaron the brother of moses be mean mary may be call his sister either because she be of the levitical race or by way of comparison . see sura cxiv . v. . from the change in the rhyme and from the more polemical tone of the following five verse it may be infer that they be add at a somewhat late period . the title nabi prophet be use of abraham isaac and jacob a depositary of the worship of the one true god but with a mission restrict to their own family whereas houd saleh shoaib etc . be designate a resoul apostle and envoy charge with a more extended mission to the tribe of arabia . in moses jesus and muhammad etc . be united the office and gift both of prophet nabi and apostle resoul . make them to be highly praise . beidh . enoch . beidhawi derive the name edris from the ar . darasa to search out with reference to his knowledge of divine mystery . the heb . enoch in like manner mean initiate . comp . gen. v. and the tract derek erez in midr . jalkut c. where enoch be reckon among the nine accord to other talmudists thirteen schroeder 's talm . und rabb . judenthum individual who be exempt from death and take straight to paradise . it should be observe that both here and sura xxi . edris be name after ismael . maracci and beidhawi in absentid . sale a an object of faith . beidhawi ad f. in reward for their secret faith . ullmann f r die verborgene zukunft . this verse be to be understand a an answer on the part of gabriel to muhammad 's complaint of the long interval between the revelation . the idolater call their deity god but a polytheist be unused to the singular allah god . even the pious on their way to paradise be to pass the confines of hell . the koreisch or the muslim . or glory strength . to call down judgment upon them . a ambassador come into the presence of a prince . sale . this be imply in the original . sura xxxviii . sad lix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful sad . by the koran full of warn ! in sooth the infidel be absorb in pride in contention with thee . how many generation have we destroy before them ! and they cry for mercy but no time be it of escape ! and they marvel that a warner from among themselves hath come to them and the infidel say this be a sorcerer a liar maketh he the god to be but one god ? a strange thing forsooth be this ! and their chief take themselves off . go say they and cleave steadfastly to your god . ye see the thing aim at . we hear not of this in the previous creed . it be but an imposture to him alone of u all hath a book of warn be send down ? yes ! they be in doubt a to my warning for they have not yet taste my vengeance . be the treasure of the mercy of thy lord the mighty the bounteous in their hand ? be the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them theirs ? then let them mount up by cord ! any army of the confederate shall here be rout . before them the people of noah and ad and pharaoh the impaler treat their prophet a impostor and themoud and the people of lot and the dweller in the forest these be the confederate . nought do they all but charge the apostle with falsehood just therefore the retribution . and these meccans await but one single trumpet blast there shall be no delay it yet they dare to say o our lord ! hasten our lot to u before the day of reckon . put thou up with what they say and remember our servant david a man strong of hand one who turn him to u in penitence we constrain the mountain to join with him in lauds at even and at sunrise and the bird which flock to him and would all return to him oft and we stablished his kingdom and wisdom and skill to pronounce clear decision do we bestow on him . hath the story of the two pleader reach thee o muhammad when they mount the wall of his closet ? when they enter in upon david and he be frighten at them they say be not afraid we be two oppose party one of u hath wrong the other . judge therefore with truth between u and be not unjust but guide u to the right way . now this my brother have ninety and nine ewe and i have but a single ewe and he say make me her keeper . and he over persuade me in the dispute . he say certainly he hath wrong thee in ask for thine ewe to add her to his own ewe and truly many associate do one another wrong except those who believe and do the thing that be right and few indeed be they ! and david perceive that we have try him so he ask pardon of his lord and fell down and bow himself and repent . so we forgive him that his sin and truly he shall have a high rank with u and an excellent retreat in paradise . o david ! verily we have make thee our vicegerent upon earth . judge therefore between men with truth and follow not thy passion l they cause thee to err from the way of god . for they who err from the way of god shall meet with a grievous chastisement for that they have forget the day of reckon . we have not create the heaven and the earth and what be between them for nought . that be the thought of infidel but woe to the infidel because of the fire ! shall we treat those who believe and do the thing that be right like those who propagate evil on earth ? shall we treat the god fear like the impious ? a bless book have we send down to thee that men may meditate it verse and that those endue with understanding may bear it in mind . and solomon give we unto david . an excellent servant for he love to turn him godward . remember when at eventide the prancing charger be display before him and he say truly i have love the love of earthly good above the remembrance of my lord till the sun hath be hide by the veil of darkness . bring them back to me . and he begin to sever the leg and neck . we also make trial of solomon and place a phantom on his throne whereupon he return to u in penitence . he say o my lord ! pardon me and give me a dominion that may not be to any one beside me for thou art the liberal giver . so we subject the wind to him it run softly at his bidding whithersoever he direct it and the satan every builder and diver and others bind in chain this say we be our gift be bounteous then or withhold thy favour no account shalt thou render . and his rank also be high with u and an excellent retreat . and remember our servant job when he cry to his lord verily satan hath laid on me disease and pain . stamp say we with thy foot . this be to wash with cool and to drink . and we give him back his family and a many more with them in our mercy and for a monition to men of judgment . and we say take in thine hand a rod and strike with it nor break thine oath . verily we find him patient ! how excellent a servant one who turn to u be he ! and remember our servant abraham and isaac and jacob men of might and vision . with this cleanse do we cleanse them the remembrance of the abode of paradise . and verily they be in our sight of the elect and of the good . and remember ishmael and elisha and dhoulkefl for all these be of the just . this be a monition and verily the pious shall have a goodly retreat garden of eden whose portal shall stand open to them therein recline they shall there call for many a fruit and drink and with them shall be virgin of their own age with modest retire glance this be what ye be promise at the day of reckon . yes ! this be our provision it shall never fail . even so . but for the evil doer be a wretched home hell wherein they shall be burn how wretched a bed ! even so . let them then taste it boil water and gore and other thing of kindred sort ! to their leader it shall be say this company shall be throw in headlong with you . no greeting shall await them for they shall be burn in the fire . they shall say but ye too ! there shall be no welcome for you . it be ye who prepare this for u and wretched be the abode ! they will say o our lord ! increase twofold in the fire the punishment of him who hath brought this upon u . and they will say why see we not the men whom we number among the wicked whom we use to treat with scorn ? have they escape our eye ? verily this be truth the wrangle together of the people of the fire . say i be but a warner and there be no god but god the one the almighty ! lord of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them the potent the forgiving ! say this be a weighty message from which ye turn aside ! yet have i no knowledge of what pass among the celestial chief when they dispute verily it hath be reveal to me only because i be a public preacher when thy lord say to the angel i be about to make man of clay and when i have form him and breathe my spirit into him then worship fall down before him . and the angel prostrate themselves all of them with one accord save eblis . he swell with pride and become an unbeliever . o eblis say god what hindereth thee from prostrate thyself before him whom my hand have make ? be it that thou be puff up with pride ? or art thou a be of lofty merit ? he say i be more excellent than he me hast thou create of fire of clay hast thou create him . he say begone then hence thou art accurse and lo ! my ban shall be on thee till the day of the reckoning . he say o my lord ! respite me till the day of resurrection . he say one then of the respited shalt thou be till the day of the time appoint . he say i swear by thy might then that all of them will i seduce save thy sincere servant among them . he say it be truth and the truth i speak . from thee will i surely fill hell and with such of them a shall follow thee one and all . say i ask no wage of you for this nor be i one who intermeddleth . of a truth the koran be no other than a warning to all creature . and after a time shall ye surely know it message . the letter s. see sura lxviii . p. . these verse be say to have be reveal when upon the conversion of omar the koreisch go in a body to abu talib and request him to withdraw his protection from muhammad but be put to silence by the latter depart in great confusion . wah . beidh . that be in the christian religion which teach muhammad ironically imply a plurality of god . this may allude to the so called confederacy of the koreisch against muhammad . this term be also apply to pharaoh sura lxxxix . p. . he be say to have fasten the israelite to stake and then subject them to various torment . addendum this be the usual interpretation . lit . lord of or possessor of stake comp . li . in ar . i.e . force . dr. sprenger ingenuously suggest that muhammad s jewish informant may have describe pharaoh a rich in ne yb i.e . fortress whereas in ar . na yb mean an erection pillar etc . for which muhammad substitute the word for tent stake . vol . i. . pr diti manibus virtute . mar . comp . p . cxlviii . . two angel who pretend to appeal to david in order to convince him of his sin in the matter of uriah 's wife . comp . i sam . xii . the psalm if we suppose with n ldeke p. that david be still address the koran if with sale we refer the passage to muhammad . the commentator say that the word use in the original implies that the mare stand on three foot and touch the ground with the edge of the fourth foot . solomon in his admiration of these horse the result we be tell of david 's or his own conquest forget the hour of even prayer and when aware of his fault commence their slaughter . the tr . sanhedr . fol . mention solomon 's love for horse and that he determine to have a large stud yet not to send the people to egypt deut . xvii . but to have them bring to him out of egypt i king x. . one of the djinn . the absurd fiction may be see in extenso in sale . compare tr . sanhedr . fol . b. and midr . jalkut on i king vi . . thus the second targum on esther i. mention the four different kind of demon which be give into the hand of solomon a legend derive from a misunderstanding of eccl . ii . . the fountain which have spring up . to this history the talmudists have no allusion . thy wife on whom he have swear that he would inflict an hundred blow because she have absent herself from him when in need of her assistance or for her word job ii . . the oath be keep we be tell by his give her one blow with a rod of a hundred stalk . this passage be often quote by the muslim a authorise any similar manner of release from an oath inconsiderately take . lit . men of hand and of sight . lit . or do our eye wander from them . see verse above . it seem to have be one of the peculiarity of muhammad a a person very deficient in imagination to dwell upon and repeat the same idea with an intensity which be at once an evidence of deep personal conviction and consciousness of the simple arabian especially . the connection between the conclude episode and the precede part of the sura do not seem very clear . it probably originate at a different but uncertain period . about the creation of man . comp . sura xci . ii . ff . comp . p . civ . . lit . stone . see sura xv . p. . sura xxxvi . ya . sin . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ya . sin . by the wise koran ! surely of the sent one thou upon a right path ! a revelation of the mighty the merciful that thou shouldest warn a people whose father be not warn and therefore live in heedlessness ! just now be our sentence against most of them therefore they shall not believe . on their neck have we place chain which reach the chin and force up be their head before them have we set a barrier and behind them a barrier and we have shroud them in a veil so that they shall not see . alike be it to them if thou warn them or warn them not they will not believe . him only shalt thou really warn who followeth the monition and feareth the god of mercy in secret him cheer with tidings of pardon and of a noble recompense . verily it be we who will quicken the dead and write down the work which they have send on before them and the trace which they shall have leave behind them and everything have we set down in the clear book of our decree . set forth to them the instance of the people of the city when the sent one come to it . when we send two unto them and they charge them both with imposture therefore with a third we strengthen them and they say verily we be the sent unto you of god . they say ye be only men like u nought hath the god of mercy send down . ye do nothing but lie . they say our lord knoweth that we be surely send unto you to proclaim a clear message be our only duty . they say of a truth we augur ill from you if ye desist not we will surely stone you and a grievous punishment will surely befall you from u . they say your augury of ill be with yourselves . will ye be warn ? nay ye be an erring people . then from the end of the city a man come run he say o my people ! follow the sent one follow those who ask not of you a recompense and who be rightly guide . and why should i not worship him who make me and to whom ye shall be bring back ? shall i take god beside him ? if the god of mercy be please to afflict me their intercession will not avert from me aught nor will they deliver truly then should i be in a manifest error . verily in your lord have i believe therefore hear me . it be say to him enter thou into paradise and he say oh that my people know how gracious god hath be to me and that he hath make me one of his honoured one . but no army sent we down out of heaven after his death nor be we then send down our angel there be but one shout from gabriel and lo ! they be extinct . oh ! the misery that rest upon my servant ! no apostle cometh to them but they laugh him to scorn . see they not how many generation we have destroy before them ? not to false god be it that they shall be bring back but all gather together shall be set before u . moreover the dead earth be a sign to them we quicken it and bring forth the grain from it and they eat thereof and we make in it garden of the date and vine and we cause spring to gush forth in it that they may eat of it fruit and of the labour of their hand . will they not therefore be thankful ? glory be to him who hath create all the sexual pair of such thing a earth produceth and of mankind themselves and of thing beyond their ken ! a sign to them also be the night . we withdraw the day from it and lo ! they be plunge in darkness and the sun hasteneth to her place of rest . this the ordinance of the mighty the knowing ! and a for the moon we have decree station for it till it change like an old and crooked palm branch . to the sun it be not give to overtake the moon nor doth the night outstrip the day but each in it own sphere doth journey on . it be also a sign to them that we bare their posterity in the full laden ark and that we have make for them vessel like it on which they embark and if we please we drown them and there be none to help them and they be not rescue unless through our mercy and that they may enjoy themselves for yet awhile . and when it be say to them fear what be before you and what be behind you that ye may obtain mercy . . . . aye not one sign from among the sign of their lord dost thou bring them but they turn away from it ! and when it be say to them give alms of what god hath bestow on you they who believe not say to the believer shall we fee him whom god can fee if he will ? truly ye be in no other than a plain error . and they say when will this promise be fulfil if what ye say be true ? they await but a single blast a they be wrangle shall it assail them and not a bequest shall they be able to make nor to their family shall they return . and the trumpet shall be blow and lo ! they shall speed out of their sepulchre to their lord they shall say oh ! woe to u ! who hath rouse u from our sleep place ? 't be what the god of mercy promise and the apostle spake the truth . but one blast shall there be and lo ! they shall be assemble before u all together . and on that day shall no soul be wrong in the least neither shall ye be reward but a ye shall have work . but joyous on that day shall be the inmate of paradise in their employ in shade on bridal couch recline they and their spouse therein shall they have fruit and shall have whatever they require peace ! shall be the word on the part of a merciful lord . but be ye separate this day o ye sinner ! do i not enjoin on you o son of adam 'worship not satan for that he be your declared foe ' but 'worship me this be a right path ' ? but now hath he lead a vast host of you astray . do ye not then comprehend ? this be hell with which ye be threaten endure it heat this day for that ye believe not . on that day will we set a seal upon their mouth yet shall their hand speak unto u and their foot shall bear witness of that which they shall have do . and if we please we would surely put out their eye yet even then would they speed on with rivalry in their path but how should they see ? and if we please we would surely transform them a they stand and they would not be able to move onward or to return . him cause we to stoop through age whose day we lengthen . will they not understand ? we have not teach him muhammad poetry nor would it beseem him . this book be no other than a warning and a clear koran to warn whoever liveth and that against the infidel sentence may be justly give . see they not that we have create for them among the thing which our hand have work the animal of which they be master ? and that we have subject them unto them ? and on some they ride and of others they eat and they find in them profitable us and beverage yet have they take other god beside god that they might be helpful to them . no power have they to succour them yet be their votary an army at their service . let not their speech grieve thee we know what they hide and what they bring to light . doth not man perceive that we have create him of the moist germ of life ? yet lo ! be he an open caviller . and he meeteth u with argument and forgetteth his creation who saith he shall give life to bone when they be rotten ? say he shall give life to them who give them be at first for in all creation be he skilled who even out of the green tree hath give you fire and lo ! ye kindle flame from it . what ! must not he who hath create the heaven and the earth be mighty enough to create your like ? yes ! and he be the skilful creator . his command when he willeth aught be but to say to it be and it be . so glory be to him in whose hand be sway over all thing ! and to him shall ye be bring back . this sura be say to have be term by muhammad the heart of the koran . it be recite in all muhammadan country to the die at the tomb of saint etc . on ya . sin see sura lxviii . p. . sura xxxviii . p. . lit . in the clear prototype that be in the preserved table on which all the action of mankind be write down . antioch to which jesus be say to have send two disciple to preach the unity of god and subsequently simon peter . this vague story and that of the seven sleeper in sura xviii . be the only trace to be find in the koran of any knowledge on the part of muhammad of the history of the church subsequent to the day of pentecost or of the spread of the christian religion . comp . sura xxvii . vii . where a in this passage the word augur refers to the mode of divination practise previous to islam by the flight of bird . lit . if ye have be warn will ye still disbelieve ? . habib the carpenter who a imply at verse be martyr and whose tomb at antioch be still an object of veneration to the muhammadan . ullm . follow wahl render al sie die stadtlente darauf ihn sch ndlich behandleten . the verb in the original be thus use in the th conj . n ldeke supposes that word to this effect have be lose from the text . but of this there be no trace in the commentator . or the apostle shall not return to them again . ullm . for instance date tree the female blossom of which be carefully impregnate when requisite by branch of the male plant . see freyt . einl . p. . the chastisement of this world and of the next . on account of this precept itq . and omar b. muhammad suppose the verse to have originate at medina . the muhammadan affirm that a space of forty year will intervene between two blast of the trumpet . maracci suggest that the idea of the two blast be derive from thess . iv . the voice of the archangel and . . . the trump of god . thus chagiga taanith . the very member of a man bear witness against him for thus be it write be . xliii . ye yourselves be my witness saith the lord . see also sura lxxi . xli . . lit . in their place . see sura xxvi . p. iii . lit . he setteth forth to u comparison . the form of the arabic word be rabbinic hebrew . sura xliii . ornament of gold lxi . mecca . verse . in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . by the luminous book ! we have make it an arabic koran that ye may understand and it be a transcript of the archetypal book keep by u it be lofty fill with wisdom shall we then turn aside this warning from you because ye be a people who transgress ? yet how many prophet send we among those of old ! but no prophet come to them whom they make not the object of their scorn wherefore we destroy nation mighty than these meccans in strength and the example of those of old hath go before ! and if thou ask them who create the heaven and the earth they will say the mighty the sage create them both who hath make the earth a a couch for you and hath trace out route therein for your guidance and who sendeth down out of heaven the rain in due degree by which we quicken a dead land thus shall ye be bring forth from the grave and who hath create the sexual couple all of them and hath make for you the ship and beast whereon ye ride that ye may sit balance on their back and remember the goodness of your lord a ye sit so evenly thereon and say glory to him who hath subject these to u ! we could not have attain to it of ourselves and truly unto our lord shall we return . yet do they assign to him some of his own servant for offspring ! verily man be an open ingrate ! hath god adopt daughter from among those whom he hath create and choose son for you ? but when that be announce to any one of them which he affirmeth to be the case with the god of mercy his face settleth into darkness and he be silent sad . what ! make they a be to be the offspring of god who be bring up among trinket and be ever contentious without reason ? and they make the angel who be the servant of god of mercy female . what ! do they witness their creation ? their witness shall be take down and they shall hereafter be enquire at . and they say have the god of mercy so will it we should never have worship them . no knowledge have they in this they only lie . have we ere this give them a book ? and do they possess it still ? but say they verily we find our father of that persuasion and verily by their footstep do we guide ourselves . and thus never before thy time do we send a warner to any city but it wealthy one say verily we find our father with a religion and in their track we tread . say such be our command to that apostle what ! even if i bring you a religion more right than that ye find your father follow ? and they say verily we believe not in your message . wherefore we take vengeance on them and behold what hath be the end of those who treat our messenger a liar ! and bear in mind when abraham say to his father and to his people verily i be clear of what ye worship save him who hath create me for he will vouchsafe me guidance . and this he establish a a doctrine that should abide among his posterity that to god might they be turn . in sooth to these idolatrous arabian and to their father do i allow their full enjoyment till the truth should come to them and an undoubted apostle but now that the truth hath come to them they say 't be sorcery and we believe it not . and they say have but this koran be send down to some great one of the two city . . . ! be they then the distributor of thy lord 's mercy ? it be we who distribute their subsistence among them in this world 's life and we raise some of them by grade above others that the one may take the other to serve him but good be the mercy of thy lord than all their hoard . but for fear that all mankind would have become a single people of unbeliever verily we would certainly have give to those who believe not in the god of mercy roof of silver to their house and silver stair to ascend by and door of silver to their house and couch of silver to recline on and ornament of gold for all these be merely the good thing of the present life but the next life doth thy lord reserve for those who fear him . and whoso shall withdraw from the warning of the god of mercy we will chain a satan to him and he shall be his fast companion for the satan will turn men aside from the way who yet shall deem themselves rightly guide until when man shall come before u he shall say o satan would that between me and thee be the distance of the east and west . and a wretched companion be a satan . but it shall not avail you on that day because ye be unjust partner shall ye be in the torment . what ! canst thou then make the deaf to hear or guide the blind and him who be in palpable error ? whether therefore we take thee off by death surely will we avenge ourselves on them or whether we make thee a witness of the accomplishment of that with which we threaten them we will surely gain the mastery over them . hold thou fast therefore what hath be reveal to thee for thou art on a right path for truly to thee and to thy people it be an admonition and ye shall have an account to render for it at last . and ask our sent one whom we have send before thee appoint we god beside the god of mercy whom they should worship ? of old sent we moses with our sign to pharaoh and his noble and he say i truly be the apostle of the lord of the world . and when he present himself before them with our sign lo ! they laugh at them though we shew them no sign that be not great than it fellow and therefore do we lay hold on them with chastisement to the intent that they might be turn to god . then they say o magician ! call on thy lord on our behalf to do a he hath engage with thee for truly we would fain be guide . but when we relieve them from the chastisement lo ! they break their pledge . and pharaoh make proclamation among his people . say he o my people ! be not the kingdom of egypt mine and these river which flow at my foot ? do ye not behold ? be i not mighty than this despicable fellow and who scarce can speak distinctly ? have bracelet of gold then be put upon him or come there with him a train of angel ? and he inspire his people with levity and they obey him for they be a perverse people and when they have anger u we take vengeance on them and we drown them all . and we make them a precedent and instance of divine judgment to those who come after them . and when the son of mary be set forth a an instance of divine power lo ! thy people cry out for joy thereat and they say be our god or be he the good ? they put this forth to thee only in the spirit of dispute . yea they be a contentious people . jesus be no more than a servant whom we favour and propose a an instance of divine power to the child of israel . and if we please we could from yourselves bring forth angel to succeed you on earth and he shall be a sign of the last hour doubt not then of it and follow ye me this be the right way and let not satan turn you aside from it for he be your manifest foe . and when jesus come with manifest proof he say now be i come to you with wisdom and a part of those thing about which ye be at variance i will clear up to you fear ye god therefore and obey me . verily god be my lord and your lord wherefore worship ye him this be a right way . but the different party fell into dispute among themselves but woe to those who thus transgress because of the punishment of an afflictive day ! for what wait they but for the hour to come suddenly on them while they expect it not ? friend on that day shall become foe to one another except the god fear o my servant ! on this day shall no fear come upon you neither shall ye be put to grief who have believe in our sign and become muslim enter ye and your wife into paradise delight . dish and bowl of gold shall go round unto them there shall they enjoy whatever their soul desire and whatever their eye delight in and therein shall ye abide for ever . this be paradise which ye have receive a your heritage in recompense for your work therein shall ye have fruit in abundance of which ye shall eat . but in the torment of hell shall the wicked remain for ever it shall not be mitigate to them and they shall be mute for despair therein for it be not we who have treat them unjustly but it be they who be unjust to themselves . and they shall cry o malec ! would that thy lord would make an end of u ! he saith here must ye remain . we have come to you with the truth o meccans but most of you abhor the truth . have they draw tight their toil for thee ? we too will tighten ours . think they that we hear not their secret and their private talk ? yes and our angel who be at their side write them down . say if the god of mercy have a son the first would i be to worship him but far be the lord of the heaven and of the earth the lord of the throne from that which they impute to him ! wherefore let them alone to plunge on and sport until they meet the day with which they be menace . he who be god in the heaven be god in earth also and he be the wise the knowing . and bless be he whose be the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them for with him be the knowledge of the hour and to him shall ye be bring back . the god whom they call upon beside him shall not be able to intercede for others they only shall be able who bore witness to the truth and know it . if thou ask them who hath create them they will be sure to say god . how then hold they false opinion ? and one saith o lord ! verily these be people who believe not . turn thou then from them and say peace in the end they shall know their folly . see sura lxviii . i p. . lit . it be in the mother of the book i.e . the original of the koran preserve before god . that be of the birth of a female . lit . which he imputeth to the god of mercy a his likeness . to authorise angel worship . supply mecca and taief we would have receive it . lit . mercy i.e . the gift and office of prophecy . lit . the two east by which some understand the distance between the two solstice . comp . suras xl . xxiii . x. xxix . xxxvii . xiii . . these passage clearly show that muhammad have at this period towards the close of his meccan period full faith in his ultimate success and in the fulfilment of his menace against the unbeliever . lit . ye shall be examine in the end . this verse be say see n ld . p. n. to have be reveal in the temple at jerusalem on the occasion of the night journey thither . see also weil 's muhammed der prophet p. . lit . sister . see sura lxxix . xxviii . n. comp . gen. xli . . this be a captious objection make to muhammad by the idolater of mecca when he condemn their god sura xxi . a if they have say jesus be worship a a god by the christian do he come under your anathema equally with our idol ? we shall be content for our god to be with him . that be a we cause jesus to be bear without a human father . at his return to this earth . some refer this to the koran a reveal the last hour . lit . he or it be for knowledge of the hour . jewish and christian sect . malec be one of the keeper of hell who specially preside over the torment of the damn . lit . if they have twist tight or set firmly the affair i.e . their plot against thee and the truth . or and they the infidel . the commentator say that jesus ezra and the angel will be allow to intercede . muhammad . sura lxxii . djinn lxii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful say it hath be reveal to me that a company of djinn listen and say verily we have hear a marvellous discourse koran it guideth to the truth wherefore we believe in it and we will not henceforth join any be with our lord and he may the majesty of our lord be exalt ! hath take no spouse neither hath he any offspring . but the foolish among u hath speak of god that which be unjust and we verily think that no one amongst men or djinn would have utter a lie against god . there be indeed people among men who have seek for refuge unto people among djinn but they only increase their folly and they think a ye think that god would not raise any from the dead . and the heaven do we essay but find them fill with a mighty garrison and with flaming dart and we sit on some of the seat to listen but whoever listeneth findeth an ambush ready for him of flame dart . and truly we know not whether evil be mean for them that be on earth or whether their lord meaneth guidance for them . and there be among u good and others among u of another kind we be of various sort and verily we think that no one could weaken god on earth neither could we escape from him by flight wherefore as soon a we have hear 'the guidance ' we believe in it and whoever believeth in his lord need not fear either loss or wrong . there be some among u who have resign themselves to god the muslim and there be others of u who have go astray . and whoso resigneth himself to god pursueth the way of truth but they who go astray from it shall be fuel for hell . moreover if they the meccans keep straight on in that way we will surely give them to drink of abundant water that we may prove them thereby but whoso withdraweth from the remembrance of his lord him will he send into a severe torment . it be unto god that the temple be set apart call not then on any other therein with god . when the servant of god stand up to call upon him the djinn almost jostle him by their crowd . say i call only upon my lord and i join no other be with him . say no control have i over what may hurt or benefit you . say verily none can protect me against god neither shall i find any refuge beside him . my sole work be preach from god and his message and for such a shall rebel against god and his apostle be the fire of hell ! they shall remain therein alway for ever ! until they see their threaten vengeance they will be perverse ! but then shall they know which side be the weak in a protector and the few in number . say i know not whether that with which ye be threaten be nigh or whether my lord hath assign it to a distant day he knoweth the secret nor doth he divulge his secret to any except to that apostle who pleaseth him and before him and behind him he maketh a guard to march that he may know if his apostle have verily deliver the message of their lord and he embraceth in his knowledge all their way and taketh count of all that concerneth them . this interview with the djinn take place at nakhla probably the wady mohram of burckhardt midway between mecca and ta ef when muhammad be drive from mecca . a. . . sura lxvii . the kingdom lxiii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful bless be he be whose hand be the kingdom ! and over all thing be he potent who hath create death and life to prove which of you will be most righteous in deed and he be the mighty the forgiving ! who hath create seven heaven one above another no defect canst thou see in the creation of the god of mercy repeat the gaze seest thou a single flaw ? then twice more repeat the gaze thy gaze shall return to thee dulled and weary . moreover we have deck the low heaven with light and have place them there to be hurl at the satan for whom we have prepare the torment of the flaming fire . and for those who believe not in their lord be the torment of hell and horrid the journey thither ! when they shall be throw into it they shall hear it bray and it shall boil almost shall it burst for fury . so oft a a crowd shall be throw into it it keeper shall ask them come not the warner to you ? they shall say yes ! there come to u one charge with warning but we treat him a a liar and say nothing hath god send down ye be in nothing but a vast delusion . and they shall say have we but hearken or understood we have not be among the dweller in the flame and their sin shall they acknowledge but avaunt ye dweller in the flame . but pardon and a great reward for those who fear their lord in secret ! be your converse hidden or open he truly knoweth the inmost recess of your breast ! what ! shall he not know who hath create ? for he be the subtil the cognizant . it be he who hath make the earth level for you traverse then it broad side and eat of what he hath provide . unto him shall be the resurrection . what ! be ye sure that he who be in heaven will not cleave the earth beneath you ? and lo it shall quake . or be ye sure that he who be in heaven will not send against you a stone charge whirlwind ? then shall ye know what my warn meant ! and verily those who flourish before you treat their prophet a liar and how grievous my wrath ! behold they not the bird over their head outstretching and draw in their wing ? none save the god of mercy upholdeth them for he regardeth all thing . who be he that can be a an army to you to succour you except the god of mercy ? truly the infidel be in the mere delusion . or who be he that will furnish you supply if he withhold his supply ? yet do they persist in pride and in flee from him ! be he who goeth along grovel on his face well guide than he who goeth upright on a straight path ? say it be he who hath brought you forth and gift you with hear and sight and heart yet how few be grateful ! say it be he who hath sown you in the earth and to him shall ye be gather . and they say when shall this threat be put in force if ye speak the truth ? say nay truly this knowledge be with god alone and i be only an open warner . but when they shall see it nigh sad shall wax the countenance of the infidel and it shall be say this be what ye have be call for . say what think ye ? whether god destroy me or not and those who follow me or whether he have mercy on u yet who will protect the infidel from a woeful torment ? say he be the god of mercy in him do we believe and in him put we our trust and ye shall know hereafter who be in a manifest error . say what think ye ? if at early morn your water shall have sink away who then will give you clear run water ? thus shakespeare use the word braying of clamour of hell and milton speaks of bray horrible discord . comp . sura xxv . . der alles durchdringt . ullm . perspicax . mar . sagacious . sale . the primary meaning of the arabic root be to draw near hence the above signification in the sense of god 's presence a interpenetrate all thing hence also the other sense of benign a in sura lxxxiii . xlii . . sura xxiii . the believer lxiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful happy now the believer who humble them in their prayer and who keep aloof from vain word and who be doer of alms deed and who restrain their appetite save with their wife or the slave whom their right hand posse for in that case they shall be free from blame but they whose desire reach far than this be transgressor and who tend well their trust and their covenant and who keep them strictly to their prayer these shall be the heritor who shall inherit the paradise to abide therein for ever . now of fine clay have we create man then we place him a moist germ in a safe abode then make we the moist germ a clot of blood then make the clotted blood into a piece of flesh then make the piece of flesh into bone and we clothe the bone with flesh then bring forth man of yet another make bless therefore be god the most excellent of maker then after this ye shall surely die then shall ye be wake up on the day of resurrection . and we have create over you seven heaven and we be not careless of the creation . and we send down water from the heaven in it due degree and we cause it to settle on the earth and we have power for it withdrawal and by it we cause garden of palm tree and vineyard to spring forth for you in which ye have plenteous fruit and whereof ye eat and the tree that groweth up on mount sinai which yieldeth oil and a juice for those who eat . and there be a lesson for you in the cattle we give you to drink of what be in their belly and many advantage do ye derive from them and for food they serve you and on them and on ship be ye borne . we send noah heretofore unto his people and he say o my people ! serve god ye have no other god than he will ye not therefore fear him ? but the chief of the people who believe not say this be but a man like yourselves he fain would raise himself above you but have it pleased god to send he would have send angel we hear not of this with our sire of old verily he be but a man possess leave him alone therefore for a time . he say o my lord ! help me against their charge of imposture . so we reveal unto him make the ark under our eye and a we have teach and when our doom shall come on and the earth 's surface shall boil up carry into it of every kind a pair and thy family save him on whom sentence hath already pass and plead not with me for the wicked for they shall be drown . and when thou and they who shall be with thee shall go up into the ark say 'praise be unto god who hath rescue u from the wicked folk . ' and say ' o my lord ! disembark me with a blessed disembarking for thou art the best to disembark . ' verily in this be sign and verily we make proof of man . we then raise up other generation after them and we send among them an apostle from out themselves with worship ye god ! ye have no other god than he will ye not therefore fear him ? and the chief of his people who believe not and who deem the meeting with u in the life to come to be a lie and whom we have richly supply in this present life say this be but a man like yourselves he eateth of what ye eat and he drinketh of what ye drink and if ye obey a man like yourselves then ye will surely be undone . what ! doth he foretell you that after ye shall be dead and become dust and bone ye shall be bring forth ? away away with his prediction ! there be no life beyond our present life we die and we live and we shall not be quicken again ! this be merely a man who forgeth a lie about god and we will not believe him . he say o my lord ! help me against this charge of imposture . he say yet a little and they will soon repent them ! then do the shout of the destroy angel in justice surprise them we make them like leaf sweep down by a torrent . away then with the wicked people ! then raise we up other generation after them neither too soon nor too late shall a people reach it appointed time then send we our apostle one after another . oft a their apostle present himself to a nation they treat him a a liar and we cause one nation to follow another and we make them the burden of a tale . away then with the people who believe not ! then send we moses and his brother aaron with our sign and manifest power to pharaoh and his prince but they behave them proudly for they be a haughty people . and they say shall we believe on two men like ourselves whose people be our slave ? and they treat them both a impostor wherefore they become of the destroyed . and we give moses the book for israel 's guidance . and we appoint the son of mary and his mother for a sign and we prepare an abode for both in a lofty spot quiet and water with spring . o ye apostle ! eat of thing that be good and do that which be right of your doings i be cognisant . and truly this your religion be the one religion and i be your lord therefore fear me . but men have rent their great concern one among another into sect every party rejoicing in that which be their own wherefore leave them till a certain time in their depth of error . what ! think they that what we largely bestow on them of wealth and child we hasten to them for their good ? nay they have no knowledge . but they who be awe with the dread of their lord and who believe in the sign of their lord and who join no other god with their lord and who give that which they give with heart thrill with dread because they must return unto their lord these hasten after good and be the first to win it . we will not burden a soul beyond it power and with u be a book which speaketh the truth and they shall not be wrong but a to this book their heart be plunge in error and their work be far other than those of muslim and they will work those work until when we lay hold on their affluent one with punishment lo ! they cry for help cry not for help this day for by u ye shall not be succour long since be my sign rehearse to you but ye turn back on your heel puff up with pride discourse foolishly by night . do they not then heed the thing speak whether that hath come to them which come not to their father of old ? or do they not recognise their apostle and therefore disavow him ? or say they a djinn be in him ? nay ! he hath come to them with the truth but the truth do most of them abhor . but if the truth have follow in the train of their desire the heaven and the earth and all that therein be have surely come to ruin ! but we have bring them their warning and from their warning they withdraw . dost thou ask them for remuneration ? but remuneration from thy lord be best and he be the best provider . and thou indeed biddest them to the right path but verily they who believe not in the life to come from that path do surely wander ! and if we have take compassion on them and relieve them from their trouble they would have plunge on in their wickedness wildly wander . we formerly lay hold on them with chastisement yet they do not humble them to their lord nor do they abase them until when we have open upon them the door of a severe punishment lo ! they be in despair at it . it be he who hath implant in you hear and sight and heart how few of you give thanks ! it be he who hath cause you to be bear on the earth and unto him shall ye be gather . and it be he who maketh alive and killeth and of him be the change of the night and of the day will ye not understand ? but they say a say those of old they say what ! when we shall be dead and have become dust and bone shall we indeed be wake to life ? this have we be promise we and our father aforetime but it be only fable of the ancient . say whose be the earth and all that be therein if ye know ? they will answer god 's . say will ye not then reflect ? say who be the lord of the seven heaven and the lord of the glorious throne ? they will say they be god 's . say will ye not then fear him ? say in whose hand be the empire of all thing who protecteth but be not protect ? if ye know they will answer in god 's . say how then can ye be so spell bound ? yea we have bring them the truth but they be surely liars god hath not begotten offspring neither be there any other god with him else have each god assuredly take away that which he have create and some have assuredly uplifted themselves above others ! far from the glory of god be what they affirm of him ! he knoweth alike the unseen and the see far be he uplifted above the god whom they associate with him ! say o my lord ! if thou wilt let me witness the infliction of that with which they have be threaten ! o my lord ! place me not among the ungodly people . verily we be well able to make thee see the punishment with which we have threaten them . turn aside evil with that which be well we best know what they utter against thee . and say o my lord ! i betake me to thee against the prompting of the satan and i betake me to thee o my lord ! that they gain no hurtful access to me . when death overtaketh one of the wicked he saith lord send me back again that i may do the good which i have leave undone . by no mean . these be the very word which he shall speak but behind them shall be a barrier until the day when they shall be raise again . and when the trumpet shall be sound the tie of kindred between them shall cease on that day neither shall they ask each other 's help . they whose balance shall be heavy shall be the blest . but they whose balance shall be light these be they who shall lose their soul abide in hell for ever the fire shall scorch their face and their lip shall quiver therein what ! be not my sign rehearse unto you ? and do ye not treat them a lie ? they shall say o our lord ! our ill fortune prevail against u and we become an err people . o our lord ! bring u forth hence if we go back again to our sin we shall indeed be evil doer . he will say be ye drive down into it and address me not . a part truly of my servant be there who say o our lord ! we believe forgive u then and be merciful to u for of the merciful art thou the best . but ye receive them with such scoff that they suffer you to forget my warning and ye laugh them to scorn . verily this day will i reward then for their patient endurance the blissful one shall they be ! he will say what number of year tarry ye on earth ? they will say we tarry a day or part of a day but ask the recording angel . god will say short indeed be the time ye tarry if that ye know it . what ! do ye then think that we have create you for pastime and that ye should not be bring back again to u ? wherefore let god be exalt the king the truth ! there be no god but he ! lord of the stately throne ! and whoso together with god shall call on another god for whom he hath no proof shall surely have to give account to his lord . aye it shall fare ill with the infidel . and say o my lord pardon and have mercy for of those who show mercy art thou the best . this sura be say by wahidi intr and by assuy ti to be the last meccan revelation . but there seem to be no reason for this opinion . in prayer . eccl . v. i matt . vi . . but it may be understood of idle talk generally . see sura xxii . n. that be a perfect man at last composed of soul and body . the verb halaka to create be use throughout for which i have necessarily substitute to make in order to retain the same word throughout the verse . these word be say by most commentator on sura vi . to have be utter by muhammad 's scribe abdallah on hear the previous part of this verse and to have be adopt by the prophet at the same moment a identical with his own inspiration . lit . seven path a talmudic expression . see sura lxxv . xi . n. comp . sura xix . ff . p. . wahl understand this passage of paradise . comp . sura xxi . p. . there be no reliable tradition a to the nature of the visitation here allude to . that be each would have form a separate and independent kingdom . or in the world which i have leave . that be our past life seem brevity itself in comparison with eternal torment . lit . those who number or keep account i.e . our torment distract u too much to allow u to compute . sura xxi . the prophet . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful this people 's reckon hath drawn nigh yet sink in carelessness they turn aside . every fresh warning that cometh to them from their lord they only hear to mock it their heart set on lust and they who have do this wrong say in secret discourse be he more than a man like yourselves ? what ! will ye with your eye open accede to sorcery ? say my lord knoweth what be speak in the heaven and on the earth he be the hearer the knower . nay say they it be the medley of dream nay he hath forge it nay he be a poet let him come to u with a sign a the prophet of old be send . before their time none of the city which we have destroy believe will these men then believe ? and we send none previous to thee but men to whom we have reveal ourselves . ask ye the people who be warn by scripture if ye know it not . we give them not body which could dispense with food and they be not to live for ever . then make we good our promise to them and we deliver them and whom we please and we destroy the transgressor . and now have we send down to you the book in which be your warn what will ye not then understand ? and how many a guilty city have we break down and raise up after it other people and when they felt our vengeance lo ! they flee from it . flee not say the angel in mockery but come back to that wherein ye revel and to your abode ! question will haply be put to you . they say oh woe to u ! verily we have be evil doer . and this cease not to be their cry until we make them like reap corn extinct . we create not the heaven and the earth and what be between them for sport have it be our wish to find a pastime we have surely find it in ourselves if to do so have be our will . nay we will hurl the truth at falsehood and it shall smite it and lo ! it shall vanish . but woe be to you for what ye utter of god ! all being in the heaven and on the earth be his and they who be in his presence disdain not his service neither be they weary they praise him night and day they rest not . have they take god from the earth who can quicken the dead ? have there be in either heaven or earth god besides god both surely have go to ruin . but glory be to god the lord of the throne beyond what they utter ! he shall not be ask of his doings but they shall be ask . have they take other god beside him ? say bring forth your proof that they be god . this be the warning of those who be with me and the warning of those who be before me but most of them know not the truth and turn aside . no apostle have we send before thee to whom we do not reveal that verily there be no god beside me therefore worship me . yet they say the god of mercy hath begotten issue from the angel . glory be to him ! nay they be but his honoured servant they speak not till he hath speak and they do his bidding . he knoweth what be before them and what be behind them and no plea shall they offer save for whom he pleaseth and they tremble for fear of him . and that angel among them who saith i be a god beside him will we recompense with hell in such sort will we recompense the offender . do not the infidel see that the heaven and the earth be both a solid mass and that we clave them asunder and that by mean of water we give life to everything ? will they not then believe ? and we set mountain on the earth lest it should move with them and we make on it broad passage between them a route for their guidance and we make the heaven a roof strongly upholden yet turn they away from it sign . and he it be who hath create the night and the day and the sun and the moon each move swiftly in it sphere . at no time have we grant to man a life that shall last for ever if thou then die shall they live for ever ? every soul shall taste of death and for trial will we prove you with evil and with good and unto u shall ye be bring back . and when the infidel see thee they receive thee only with scoff what ! be this he who maketh such mention of your god ? yet when mention be make to them of the god of mercy they believe not . man say they be make up of haste . but i will shew you my sign desire them not then to be hasten . they say when will this threat be make good ? tell u if ye be men of truth ? do the infidel but know the time when they shall not be able to keep the fire of hell from their face or from their back neither shall they be help ! but it shall come on them suddenly and shall confound them and they shall not be able to put it back neither shall they be respite . other apostle have be scoff at before thee but that doom at which they mock encompass the scoffer . say who shall protect you by night and by day from the god of mercy ? yet turn they away from the warning of their lord . have they god beside u who can defend them ? for their own succour have they no power neither shall the god they join with god screen them from u . yes ! we have give these men and their father enjoyment so long a their life last . what ! see they not that we come to a land and straiten it border be it they who be the conqueror ? say i only warn you of what hath be reveal to me but the deaf will not hear the call whenever they be warn yet if a breath of thy lord 's chastisement touch them they will assuredly say oh ! woe to u ! we have indeed be offender . just balance will we set up for the day of the resurrection neither shall any soul be wrong in aught though be a work but the weight of a grain of mustard seed we would bring it forth to be weigh and our reckoning will suffice . we give of old to moses and aaron the illumination and a light and a warning for the god fearing who dread their lord in secret and who tremble for the hour . and this koran which we have send down be a blessed warning will ye then disown it ? of old we give unto abraham his direction for we know him worthy . when he say to his father and to his people what be these image to which ye be devote ? they say we find our father worship them . he say truly ye and your father have be in a plain mistake . they say hast thou come unto u in earnest ? or art thou of those who jest ? he say nay your lord be lord of the heaven and of the earth who hath create them both and to this be i one of those who witness and by god i will certainly lay a plot against your idol after ye shall have retire and turn your back . so he break them all in piece except the chief of them that to it they might return inquire . they say who hath do this to our god ? verily he be one of the unjust . they say we hear a youth make mention of them they call him abraham . they say then bring him before the people 's eye that they may witness against him . they say hast thou do this to our god o abraham ? he say nay that their chief hath do it but ask ye them if they can speak . so they turn their thought upon themselves and say ye truly be the impious person then become headstrong in their former error and exclaim thou knowest that these speak not . he say what ! do ye then worship instead of god that which doth not profit you at all nor injure you ? fie on you and on that ye worship instead of god ! what ! do ye not then understand ? they say burn him and come to the succour of your god if ye will do anything at all . we say o fire ! be thou cold and to abraham a safety ! and they seek to lay a plot against him but we make them the sufferer . and we bring him and lot in safety to the land which we have bless for all human being and we give him isaac and jacob a a farther gift and we make all of them righteous we also make them model who should guide others by our command and we inspire them with good deed and constancy in prayer and almsgiving and they worship u . and unto lot we give wisdom and knowledge and we rescue him from the city which work filthiness for they be a people evil perverse and we cause him to enter into our mercy for he be of the righteous . and remember noah when aforetime he cry to u and we hear him and deliver him and his family from the great calamity and we help him against the people who treat our sign a imposture . an evil people verily be they and we drown them all . and david and solomon when they give judgment concern a field when some people 's sheep have cause a waste therein and we be witness of their judgment . and we give solomon insight into the affair and on both of them we bestow wisdom and knowledge . and we constrain the mountain and the bird to join with david in our praise our do be it ! and we teach david the art of make mail for you to defend you from each other 's violence will ye therefore be thankful ? and to solomon we subject we subject the strongly blow wind it speed at his bidding to the land we have bless for we know all thing and sundry satan who should dive for him and perform other work beside and we keep watch over them . and remember job when he cry to his lord truly evil hath touch me but thou art the most merciful of those who shew mercy . so we hear him and lighten the burden of his woe and we give him back his family and a many more with them a mercy from u and a memorial for those who serve u and ismael and edris and dhoulkefl all steadfast in patience . and we cause them to enter into our mercy for they be of the righteous and dhoulnoun when he go on his way in anger and think that we have no power over him . but in the darkness he cry there be no god but thou glory be unto thee ! verily i have be one of the evil doer so we hear him and rescue him from misery for thus rescue we the faithful and zacharias when he call upon his lord say o my lord leave me not childless but there be no good heir than thyself . so we hear him and give him john and we make his wife fit for child bearing . verily these vie in goodness and call upon u with love and fear and humble themselves before u and her who keep her maidenhood and into whom we breathe of our spirit and make her and her son a sign to all creature . of a truth this your religion be the one religion and i your lord therefore serve me but they have rent asunder this their great concern among themselves into sect . all of them shall return to u . and whoso shall do the thing that be right and be a believer his effort shall not be disown and surely will we write them down for him . there be a ban on every city which we shall have destroy that they shall not rise again until a way be open for gog and magog and they shall hasten from every high land and this sure promise shall draw on . and lo ! the eye of the infidel shall stare amazedly and they shall say oh our misery ! of this be we careless ! yea we be impious person . verily ye and what ye worship beside god shall be fuel for hell ye shall go down into it . be these god they would not go down into it but they shall all abide in it for ever . therein shall they groan but nought therein shall they hear to comfort them . but they for whom we have before ordain good thing shall be far away from it it slight sound they shall not hear in what their soul long for they shall abide for ever the great terror shall not trouble them and the angel shall meet them with this be your day which ye be promise . on that day we will roll up the heaven a one rolleth up write scroll . a we make the first creation so will we bring it forth again . this promise bindeth u verily we will perform it . and now since the law be give have we write in the psalm that my servant the righteous shall inherit the earth . verily in this koran be teach for those who serve god . we have not send thee otherwise than a mercy unto all creature . say verily it hath be reveal to me that your god be one god be ye then resign to him ? muslim . but if they turn their back then say i have warn you all alike but i know not whether that with which ye be threaten be nigh or distant . god truly knoweth what be speak aloud and he also knoweth that which ye hide . and i know not whether haply this delay be not for your trial and that ye may enjoy yourselves for a time . my lord saith judge ye with truth for our lord be the god of mercy whose help be to be seek against what ye utter . lit . while ye see it to be such . lit . the people or family of the admonition . itq . considers this verse to have be reveal at medina . or they invent not concern him . comp . rev . iv . . lit . they precede him not in speech . lit . before thee which might seem to imply that the grant of immortality have be make to muhammad . i have therefore render a in the text to avoid the ambiguity . comp . suras xcvii . iii . lxxxi . xxix . and weil 's life of mohammad p. . comp . matt . xvi . heb . ii . . hist . josephi fabr . lign . c. at the end . see the index under the word man . the rabbins teach that man be create with innate evil propensity . see schr der 's talm . rabb . judenthum p. . that be my teaching a to the future lot of the infidel etc . muhammad appeal to the rapid progress of islam a a proof of his divine mission . ar . furquan a derive by muhammad from the jew constantly use in the talmud and meaning a in syr . and th . deliverance liberation . thus sura viii . and hence illumination revelation generally . the usual interpretation here and in other passage be the distinction i.e . between good and evil lawful and unlawful . the title be apply to the koran and pentateuch alike . this story be take in part verbatim from midr . rabbah on gen. par . . see also schalscheleth hakabala maimon de idol . ch . and yad hachazakah vii . who make abraham in his th year renounce star worship break image escape the wrath of the king by a miracle and preach that there be one god of the whole universe . lit . sie neigten sich nach ihren kopfen . they be turn down upon their head . ullm . and sale in note . but ullm . in the text verfielen sie wieder in ihren aberglauben . the rabbins make nimrod to have be the persecutor of abraham . comp . targ . jon . on gen. xv . . tr . bava bathra fol . a. maimon . more nevochim iii . . weil legenden p. . or let peace be upon abraham . comp . targ . jon . on gen. xi . from the mistranslation of which this legend take it rise the word ur in heb . meaning fire . see also targ . jon . on . gen. xv . . the legend be adopt by some of the eastern christian and commemorate in the syrian calendar on jan. . hyde de rel . . pers . . comp . the abyssinian calendar on jan. . ludolf . hist . p. . it have be observe that the blacksmith have ever be look upon with awe by barbarian on the same principle that make vulcan a deity . in abyssinia all artisan be budah sorcerer especially the blacksmith and he be a social outcast a among the somal throughout the rest of el islam the blacksmith be respect a treading in the path of david the father of the craft . burton . first footstep in e. africa p. . the numerous war in which david be engage may have give rise to the myth of his be the inventor of mail . see sura xxxviii . p. . see sura xix . p. . the man of the lot or portion . or of care support . accord to some elia a others say isaiah . it be more probable however that he be he obadiah of king xviii . who support prophet in the cave or ezechiel who be call kephil by the arab . see niebuhr travel ii . . the man of the fish jonah . see suras xcvii . iii . xix . p. for the story of zacharias in full . the conclude sentence of this clause be obscure . it probably mean that even if no heir be vouchsafe to zacharias yet since god will be the heir of all thing he would take zacharias to himself and thus abundantly recompense him . see sura lxxix . xxviii . . see sura cix . lxvi . . it be quite clear from these two passage that muhammad believe in the immaculate and miraculous conception of jesus . that be identical with that of the previous prophet etc . see sura lxix . xviii . . thus the ancient jewish and christian legend connects gog and magog with the end of the world . rev . xx . . pseudojon on lev . xxvi . . comp . numb . xi . . gog however be probably the mountain ghef or ghogh see reinegg 's beschreib . der caucasus ii . and the syllable ma in magog the sanscrit mah maha great . whenever a people be punish for idolatry the being honour by them a god shall also be punish for so it be write on all the god also of egypt will i inflict judgment . sakkah . ar . sidjill which be suppose by some to be the name of the angel who write down the action of every man 's life upon a scroll which be roll up at his death comp . isai . xxxiv . by others to be the name of one of muhammad 's secretary . p . xxxvii . . this be the only text quote in the koran . sura . al furkan lxvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful bless be he who hath send down al furkan the illumination on his servant that to all creature he may be a warner . his the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth ! no son hath he beget ! no partner hath he in his empire ! all thing hath he create and decree hath decree their destiny . yet have they adopt god beside him which have create nothing but be themselves create and no power have they over themselves for evil or for good nor have they power of death or of life or of raise the dead . and the infidel say this koran be a mere fraud of his own devising and others have help him with it who have come hither by outrage and lie . and they say tale of the ancient that he hath put in writing ! and they be dictate to him morn and even . say he hath send it down who knoweth the secret of the heaven and of the earth . he truly be the gracious the merciful . and they say what sort of apostle be this ? he eateth food and he walketh the street ! unless an angel be send down and take part in his warning or a treasure be throw down to him or he have a garden that supplieth him with food . . . and those unjust person say ye follow but a man enchant . see what liken they strike out for thee ! but they err and can not find their way . bless be he who if he please can give thee good than that of which they speak garden 'neath which the river flow and pavilion will he assign thee . aye they have treat the come of the hour a a lie . but a flaming fire have we get ready for those who treat the come of the hour a a lie . when it shall see them from afar they shall hear it raging and roaring and when they shall be fling into a narrow space thereof bound together they shall invoke destruction on the spot call not this day for one destruction but call for destruction many . say be this or the paradise of eternity which be promise to the god fear best ? their recompense shall it be and their retreat abide therein for ever they shall have in it all that they desire ! it be a promise to be claim of thy lord . and on the day when he shall gather them together and those whom they worship beside god he will say be it ye who lead these my servant astray or of themselves stray they from the path ? they will say glory be to thee ! it beseem not u to take other lord than thee . but thou gavest them and their father their fill of good thing till they forgat the remembrance of thee and become a lost people . then will god say to the idolater now have they make you liar in what ye say and they have no power to avert your doom or to succour you . and whosoever of you thus offendeth we will make him taste a great punishment . never have we send apostle before thee who eat not common food and walk not the street . and we test you by mean of each other . will ye be steadfast ? thy lord be look on ! they who look not forward to meet u say if the angel be not send down to u or unless we behold our lord . . . . ah ! they be proud of heart and exceed with great excess ! on the day when they shall see the angel no good news shall there be for the guilty one and they shall cry out a barrier that can not be pass ! then will we proceed to the work which they have work and make them a scattered dust . happier on that day the inmate of the garden a to abide and good off a to place of noontide slumber ! on that day shall the heaven with it cloud be cleave and the angel shall be send down descend on that day shall all empire be in very deed with the god of mercy and a hard day shall it be for the infidel . and on that day shall the wicked one bite his hand and say oh ! would that i have take the same path with the apostle ! oh ! woe be me ! would that i have not take such an one for my friend ! it be he who lead me astray from the warning which have reach me ! and satan be man 's betrayer . then say the apostle o my lord ! truly my people have esteem this koran to be vain babbling . thus have we give to every prophet an enemy from among the wicked one but thy lord be a sufficient guide and helper . and the infidel say unless the koran be send down to him all at once . . . . but in this way would we stablish thy heart by it in parcel have we parcel it out to thee nor shall they come to thee with puzzling question but we will come to thee with the truth and their best solution . they who shall be gather upon their face into hell shall have the bad place and be farthest from the path of happiness . heretofore we give the law to moses and appoint his brother aaron to be his counsellor and we say go ye to the people who treat our sign a lie . and them destroy we with utter destruction . and a to the people of noah ! when they treat their apostle a impostor we drown them and we make them a sign to mankind a grievous chastisement have we prepare for the wicked ! and ad and themoud and the men of ras and diver generation between them unto each of them do we set forth parable for warning and each of them do we utterly exterminate . oft be this have the unbelieving meccans pass by the city on which be rain a fatal rain . what ! have they not see it ? yet have they no hope of a resurrection ! and when they see thee they do but take thee a the subject of their raillery . what ! be this he whom god have send a an apostle ? indeed he have well nigh lead u astray from our god have we not persevere steadfastly in their service . but in the end they shall know when they shall see the punishment who hath most stray from the path . what thinkest thou ? he who hath take his passion a a god wilt thou be a guardian over him ? thinkest thou that the great part of them hear or understand ? they be just like the brute ! yes ! they stray even far from the right way . hast thou not see how thy lord lengtheneth out the shadow ? have he please he have make it motionless . but we make the sun to be it guide then draw it in unto u with easy indrawing . he it be who ordaineth the night a a garment and sleep for rest and ordaineth the day for wake up to life he it be who sendeth the wind a the forerunner of his mercy rain and pure water send we down from heaven that we may revive by it a dead land and we give it for drink to our creation beast and men in number and we distribute it among them on all side that they may reflect but most men refuse to be aught but thankless . have we please we have raise up a warner in every city . give not way therefore to the infidel but by mean of this koran strive against them with a mighty strife . and he it be who hath let loose the two seas the one sweet fresh and the other salt bitter and hath put an interspace between them and a barrier that can not be pass . and it be he who hath create man of water and establish between them the tie of kindred and affinity and potent be thy lord . yet beside god do they worship what can neither help nor hurt them and the infidel be satan 's helper against his lord still we have send thee only a a herald and a warner . say i ask of you no recompense for it except from him who be willing to take the way to his lord . and put thou thy trust in him that liveth and dieth not and celebrate his praise he fully knoweth the fault of his servant who in six day create the heaven and the earth and whatever be between them then mount his throne the god of mercy ! ask now of the wise concern him . but when it be say to them bow down before the god of mercy they say who be the god of mercy ? shall we bow down to what thou biddest ? and they fly from thee the more . bless be he who hath place in the heaven the sign of the zodiac ! who hath place in it the lamp of the sun and the light give moon ! and it be he who hath ordain the night and the day to succeed one another for those who desire to think on god or desire to be thankful . and the servant of the god of mercy be they who walk upon the earth softly and when the ignorant address them they reply peace ! they that pass the night in the worship of their lord prostrate and standing and that say o our lord ! turn away from u the torment of hell for it torment be endless it be indeed an ill abode and rest place ! those who when they spend be neither lavish nor niggard but keep the mean those who call on no other god with god nor slay whom god hath forbidden to be slain except for a just cause and who commit not fornication for he who doth this shall meet the reward of his wickedness double to him shall be the torment on the day of resurrection and in it shall he remain disgraced for ever save those who shall repent and believe and do righteous work for them god will change their evil thing into good thing for god be gracious merciful and whose turneth to god and doeth what be right he verily will convert with a true conversion and they who bear not witness to that which be false and when they pass by frivolous sport pas on with dignity and they who when monish by the sign of their lord fall not down thereat a if deaf and blind and who say o our lord ! give u in our wife and offspring the joy of our eye and make u example to those who fear thee these shall be reward with the high place of paradise for their steadfast endurance and they shall meet therein with welcome and salutation for ever shall they remain therein a fair abode and rest place ! say not on your account doth my lord care if ye call not on him ! ye have treat his apostle a an impostor but bye and bye a punishment shall cleave to them . see sura lxv . xxi . . comp . sura lxxiii . xvi . . the frequency with which muhammad feel it necessary to rebut this charge by mere denial be strongly indicative of it truth . the meaning may possibly be that the teacher of muhammad be person who have take refuge in arabia for offence and heresy . sprenger life of . p. n. or but they utter an injustice and a falsehood . n ldeke combat dr. sprenger 's supposition that tale of the ancient verse be a book . hist . of qoran p. . supply we will not believe . in your ascription of divinity to them . beidh . or far far be they remove . the same word occur at the end of verse . the commentator doubt whether they be speak by the wicked of the impossibility of their attaining paradise or by the angel to the wicked . say by beidh . to be the polytheist okbeh the son of abu mo'eyt who by muhammad 's persuasion profess islam but afterwards retract to please ubei ben khalaf . see gagnier 's vie de mahom . i. . ar . fulani whence the spanish fulano identical with the heb . p. use of a person only in ruth iv . but by the rabbinic writer constantly . or abandoner . this verse shews that the koran be of gradual growth in the time of muhammad himself . lit . parable . lit . vizier . it be uncertain whether ras be the name of a city in yemama or merely a some interpret it of a well near midian or accord to others in the territory of hadramont . geiger be mistake in suppose that this passage allude to kings xx . and his translation be inaccurate . lit . quiescent i.e . always the same . accord to some commentator muhammad here speaks of the water of the tigris which do not mingle with the salt water of the sea till they have reach a considerable distance from the river mouth . see zech . xiv . . see sura cv . xxiv . n. thou art taught that whoever would make a profit by the law depriveth himself of life . pirke aboth i. . this precept be of frequent occurrence in the talmud . comp . sura xc . xiii . and the following sura xvii . n. the idolater . sura xvii . the night journey lxvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful glory be to him who carry his servant by night from the sacred temple of mecca to the temple that be more remote whose precinct we have bless that we might shew him of our sign ! for he be the hearer the seer . and we give the book to moses and ordain it for guidance to the child of israel that ye take no other guardian than me . o posterity of those whom we bare with noah ! he truly be a grateful servant ! and we solemnly declare to the child of israel in the book twice surely will ye enact crime in the earth and with great loftiness of pride will ye surely be uplifted . so when the menace for the first crime come to be inflict we send against you our servant endue with terrible prowess and they search the inmost part of your abode and the menace be accomplish . then we give you the mastery over them in turn and increase you in wealth and child and make you a most numerous host . we say if ye do well to your own behoof will ye do well and if ye do evil against yourselves will ye do it . and when the menace for your latter crime come to be inflict then we send an enemy to sadden your face and to enter the temple a they enter it at first and to destroy with utter destruction that which they have conquer . haply your lord will have mercy on you ! but if ye return we will return and we have appoint hell the prison of the infidel . verily this koran guideth to what be most upright and it announceth to believer who do the thing that be right that for them be a great reward and that for those who believe not in the life to come we have get ready a painful punishment . man prayeth for evil a he prayeth for good for man be hasty . we have make the night and the day for two sign the sign of the night do we obscure but the sign of the day cause we to shine forth that ye may seek plenty from your lord and that ye may know the number of the year and the reckoning of time and we have make everything distinct by distinctiveness . and every man 's fate have we fasten about his neck and on the day of resurrection will we bring forth to him a book which shall be proffer to him wide open read thy book there needeth none but thyself to make out an account against thee this day . for his own good only shall the guided yield to guidance and to his own loss only shall the err err and the heavy laden shall not be laden with another 's load . we never punish until we have first send an apostle and when we will to destroy a city to it affluent one do we address our bidding but when they act criminally therein just be it doom and we destroy it with an utter destruction . and since noah how many nation have we exterminate ! and of the sin of his servant thy lord be sufficiently inform observant . whoso chooseth this quickly pass life quickly will we bestow therein that which we please even on him we choose afterward we will appoint hell for him in which he shall burn disgraced outcast but whoso chooseth the next life and striveth after it a it should be strive for be also a believer these ! their striving shall be grateful to god to all both to these and those will we prolong the gift of thy lord for not to any shall the gift of thy lord be deny . see how we have cause some of them to excel others ! but the next life shall be great in it grade and great in excellence . set not up another god with god l thou sit thee down disgraced helpless . thy lord hath ordain that ye worship none but him and kindness to your parent whether one or both of them attain to old age with thee and say not to them fie ! neither reproach them but speak to them both with respectful speech and defer humbly to them out of tenderness and say lord have compassion on them both even a they rear me when i be little . your lord well knoweth what be in your soul he knoweth whether ye be righteous and gracious be he to those who return to him . and to him who be of kin render his due and also to the poor and to the wayfarer yet waste not wastefully for the wasteful be brother of the satan and satan be ungrateful to his lord but if thou turn away from them while thou thyself seekest boon from thy lord for which thou hopest at least speak to them with kindly speech and let not thy hand be tie up to thy neck nor yet open it with all openness l thou sit thee down in rebuke in beggary . verily thy lord will provide with open hand for whom he pleaseth and will be spar . his servant doth he scan inspect . kill not your child for fear of want for them and for you will we provide . verily the kill them be a great wickedness . have nought to do with adultery for it be a foul thing and an evil way neither slay any one whom god hath forbidden you to slay unless for a just cause and whosoever shall be slay wrongfully to his heir have we give power but let him not outstep bound in put the manslayer to death for he too in his turn will be assist and avenge . and touch not the substance of the orphan unless in an upright way till he attain his age of strength and perform your covenant verily the covenant shall be enquire of and give full measure when you measure and weigh with just balance . this will be good and fair for settlement and follow not that of which thou hast no knowledge because the hearing and the sight and the heart each of these shall be enquire of and walk not proudly on the earth for thou canst not cleave the earth neither shalt thou reach to the mountain in height all this be evil odious to thy lord . this be a part of the wisdom which thy lord hath reveal to thee . set not up any other god with god l thou be cast into hell rebuke cast away . what ! hath your lord prepare son for you and take for himself daughter from among the angel ? indeed ye say a dreadful saying . moreover for man 's warn have we vary this koran yet it only increaseth their flight from it . say if as ye affirm there be other god with him they would in that case seek occasion against the occupant of the throne glory to him ! immensely high be he exalt above their blasphemy ! the seven heaven praise him and the earth and all who be therein neither be there aught which doth not celebrate his praise but their utterance of praise ye understand not . he be kind indulgent . when thou recitest the koran we place between thee and those who believe not in the life to come a dark veil and we put covering over their heart lest they should understand it and in their ear a heaviness and when in the koran thou namest thy one lord they turn their back in flight . we well know why they hearken when they hearken unto thee and when they whisper apart when the wicked say ye follow no other than a man enchant . see what liken they strike out for thee ! but they be in error neither can they find the path . they also say after we shall have become bone and dust shall we in sooth be raise a new creation ? say yes though ye be stone or iron or any other creature to your seem yet harder to be raise . but they will say who shall bring u back ? say he who create you at first . and they will wag their head at thee and say when shall this be ? say haply it be nigh . on that day shall god call you forth and ye shall answer by praise him and ye shall seem to have tarry but a little while . enjoin my servant to speak in kindly sort verily satan would stir up strife among them for satan be man 's avowed foe . your lord well knoweth you if he please he will have mercy on you or if he please he will chastise you and we have not send thee to be a guardian over them . thy lord hath full knowledge of all in the heaven and the earth . high gift have we give to some of the prophet than to others and the psalter we give to david . say call ye upon those whom ye fancy to be god beside him yet they will have no power to relieve you from trouble or to shift it elsewhere . those whom ye call on themselves desire union with their lord strive which of them shall be near to him they also hope for his mercy and fear his chastisement . verily the chastisement of thy lord be to be dread . there be no city which we will not destroy before the day of resurrection or chastise it with a grievous chastisement . this be write in the book . nothing hinder u from send thee with the power of work miracle except that the people of old treat them a lie . we give to themoud the she camel before their very eyes yet they maltreat her ! we send not a prophet with miracle but to strike terror . and remember when we say to thee verily thy lord be round about mankind we ordain the vision which we shew thee and likewise the cursed tree of the koran only for men to dispute of we will strike them with terror but it shall only increase in them enormous wickedness and when we say to the angel prostrate yourselves before adam and they all prostrate them save eblis . what ! say he shall i bow me before him whom thou hast created of clay ? seest thou this man whom thou hast honour above me ? verily if thou respite me till the day of resurrection i will destroy his offspring except a few . he say begone but whosoever of them shall follow thee verily hell shall be your recompense an ample recompense ! and entice such of them a thou canst by thy voice assault them with thy horseman and thy footman be their partner in their rich and in their child and make them promise but satan shall make them only deceitful promise . a to my servant no power over them shalt thou have and thy lord will be their sufficient guardian . it be your lord who speedeth onward the ship for you in the sea that ye may seek of his abundance for he be merciful towards you . when a misfortune befalleth you out at sea they whom ye invoke be not to be find god alone be there yet when he bringeth you safe to dry land ye place yourselves at a distance from him . ungrateful be man . what ! be ye sure then that he will not cleave the side of the earth for you ? or that he will not send against you a whirlwind charge with sand ? then shall ye find no protector . or be ye sure that he will not cause you to put back to sea a second time and send against you a storm blast and drown you for that ye have be thankless ? then shall ye find no helper against u therein . and now have we honour the child of adam by land and by sea have we carry them food have we provide for them of good thing and with endowment beyond many of our creature have we endow them . one day we will summon all men with their leader they whose book shall be give into their right hand shall read their book and not be wrong a thread and he who have be blind here shall be blind hereafter and wander yet more from the way . and verily they have well nigh beguile thee from what we reveal to thee and cause thee to invent some other thing in our name but in that case they would surely have take thee a a friend and have we not settle thee thou hadst well nigh lean to them a little in that case we would surely have make thee taste of woe in life and of woe in death then thou shouldest not have find a helper against u . and truly they have almost cause thee to quit the land in order wholly to drive thee forth from it but then themselves should have tarry but a little after thee . this be our way with the apostle we have already send before thee and in this our way thou shalt find no change . observe prayer at sunset till the first darkening of the night and the daybreak reading for the daybreak read hath it witness and watch unto it in the night this shall be an excess in service it may be that thy lord will raise thee to a glorious station and say o my lord cause me to enter with a perfect entry and to come forth with a perfect forthcoming and give me from thy presence a help power and say truth be come and falsehood be vanish . verily falsehood be a thing that vanisheth . and we send down of the koran that which be a healing and a mercy to the faithful but it shall only add to the ruin of the wicked . when we bestow favour on man he withdraweth and goeth aside but when evil toucheth him he be despair . say every one acteth after his own manner but your lord well knoweth who be best guide in his path . and they will ask thee of the spirit . say the spirit proceedeth at my lord 's command but of knowledge only a little to you be give . if we please we could take away what we have reveal to thee none couldst thou then find thee to undertake thy cause with u save a a mercy from thy lord great verily be his favour towards thee . say verily be men and djinn assemble to produce the like of this koran they could not produce it like though the one should help the other . and of a truth we have set out to men every kind of similitude in this koran but most men have refuse everything except unbelief . and they say by no mean will we believe on thee till thou cause a fountain to gush forth for u from the earth or till thou have a garden of palm tree and grape and thou cause forth gush river to gush forth in it midst or thou make the heaven to fall on u a thou hast give out in piece or thou bring god and the angel to vouch for thee or thou have a house of gold or thou mount up into heaven nor will we believe in thy mount up till thou send down to u a book which we may read . say praise be to my lord ! be i more than a man an apostle ? and what hindereth men from believe when the guidance hath come to them but that they say hath god send a man a an apostle ? say do angel walk the earth a it familiar we have surely send them an angel apostle out of heaven . say god be witness enough between you and me . his servant he scanneth eyeth . and he whom god shall guide will be guide indeed and whom he shall mislead thou shalt find none to assist but him and we will gather them together on the day of the resurrection on their face blind and dumb and deaf hell shall be their abode so oft a it fire die down we will rekindle the flame . this shall be their reward for that they believe not our sign and say when we shall have become bone and dust shall we surely be raise a new creation ? do they not perceive that god who create the heaven and the earth be able to create their like ? and he hath ordain them a term there be no doubt of it but the wicked refuse everything except unbelief . say if ye hold the treasure of my lord 's mercy ye would certainly refrain from them through fear of spend them for man be covetous . we therefore give to moses nine clear sign . ask thou therefore the child of israel how it be when he come unto them and pharaoh say to him verily i deem thee o moses a man enchant . say moses thou knowest that none hath send down these clear sign but the lord of the heaven and of the earth and i surely deem thee o pharaoh a person lose . so pharaoh sought to drive them out of the land but we drown him and all his follower . and after his death we say to the child of israel dwell ye in the land and when the promise of the next life shall come to pass we will bring you both up together to judgment . in truth have we send down the koran and in truth hath it descend and we have only send thee to announce and to warn . and we have parcel out the koran into section that thou mightest recite it unto men by slow degree and we have send it down piecemeal . say believe ye therein or believe ye not ? they verily to whom knowledge have be give previously fall on their face worship when it be recite to them and say glory be to god ! the promise of our lord be make good ! they fall down on their face weeping and it increaseth their humility . say call upon god allah or call upon the god of mercy arrahman by whichsoever ye will invoke him he hath most excellent name . and be not loud in thy prayer neither pronounce it too low but between these follow a middle way and say praise be to god who hath not beget a son who hath no partner in the kingdom nor any protector on account of weakness . and magnify him by proclaim his greatness . verse be suppose by many commentator to have originate at medina . waquidy say the night journey take place on the th of rabhy ' a twelvemonth before the hejira . of jerusalem and thence through the seven heaven to the throne of god on the back of borak accompany by gabriel accord to some tradition while others and those too of early date regard it a no more than a vision . it be however in all probability a dream . muir ii . n ld . p. who give the muhammadan source of information . it be probable that a this verse have no real or apparent connection with the precede a verse may have be lose and that verse have be place at the head of the sura merely because the night journey be elsewhere allude to in it . accord to the commentator the slaughter of isaiah and the imprisonment of jeremiah punish by the invasion of the assyrian . over sennacherib . the slay zacharias john baptist and jesus punish by the destruction of jerusalem by the roman . comp . tr . gittin fol . where we read of the suffering draw down upon the jew in consequence of the former of these crime . that be if ye return to sin we will return to punish . lit . bird . comp . mischnah aboth . comp . in heb . isai . liii . . lit . low a wing of humility . comp . sura lxxxix . vi . lxxxi . p. . zaid the sceptical seeker after truth be report to have discourage the killing of daughter say i will support them . kit b al wackidi p. . see note at sura xcvii . iii . . or next of kin . or run not after vain thing which will avail nought . or accuse not any of a crime if thou art not sure of his guilt . use a variety of argument and illustration . thus tr . chagiga fol . b. there be seven heaven rakian the veil the firmament the cloud the habitation the abode the fixed seat the araboth . see wetst . on cor . xii . . in obvious allusion to the saint worship of the christian . see sura lxxxvii . vii . . see note on v. . the tree be zakkoum sura xlv . lvi . the rabbins teach that food of the bitter herb be one of the punishment of hell . see schr der 's rabb . und . talm . judenthum p. . that be with all thy might . zamakshary relate that this passage be reveal when the thaqyfites in frame the document of agreement between themselves and muhammad require that the word require the prostration in worship should not be add . the writer look at the prophet who stand by in silence when omar stand up and draw his sword with menacing word . they reply we speak not thee but to muhammad . then this verse be reveal . thus dr. sprenger . life p. . he render the last clause but at the right moment a friend reprehend thee . lit . weakness languor . the jew envious of muhammad 's good reception and stay there tell him by way of counsel that syria be the land of the prophet and that if he be really a prophet he ought to go there . sale from djelal eddin ap . mar . geiger p. quote a talmudical saying to the same effect but without any reference . a work of supererogation and therefore doubly meritorious . thus tr . berachoth fol . . the word station mekam be still use of the nearness to god attain in spiritual ecstacies etc . that be to enter the grave or mecca . lit . with an entry of truth . the word spirit be probably to be understood of the angel gabriel . comp . king xxii . . others understand it of the immaterial soul of man . see note on sura xci . ii . . the infidel hear muhammad say ya allah ! ya rahman ! in his prayer imagine that he be address two deity hence this passage . comp . lxxiii . xvi . lxvi . xxv . . a this title of god rahman disappears from the late sura it have be infer that muhammad 's original intention be to have combine it with allah but that through fear l allah and arrahman should be suppose to be two god he drop the latter . this title be apply to their deity by the himyarites and it occur in p . lxxviii . and ex . xxxiv . . the root be not find in thiopic . the talm . tr . berachoth forbids loudness in prayer by the example of hannah . lit . magnify him by magnify . sura xxvii . the ant lxviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ta . sad . these be the sign verse of the koran and of the lucid book guidance and glad tidings to the believer who observe prayer and pay the state alms and believe firmly do they in the life to come . a to those who believe not in the life to come we have make their own doings fair seem to them and they be bewilder therein . these be they whom the woe of chastisement awaiteth and in the next life they shall suffer yes shall they great loss but thou hast certainly receive the koran from the wise the knowing . bear in mind when moses say to his family i have perceive a fire i will bring you tidings from it or will bring you a blaze brand that ye may warm you . and when he come to it he be call to bless he who be in the fire and he who be about it and glory be to god the lord of the world ! o moses ! verily i be god the mighty the wise ! throw down now thy staff . and when he saw that it move itself a though it be a serpent he retreat backward and return not . o moses fear not for the sent one fear not in my presence save he who have do amiss shall afterwards exchange the evil for good for i be forgive merciful . put now thy hand into thy bosom it shall come forth white yet free from hurt one of nine sign to pharaoh and his people for a perverse people be they . and when our sign be work in their very sight they say this be plain magic . and though in their soul they know them to be true yet in their wickedness and pride they deny them . but see what be the end of the corrupt doer ! and of old we give knowledge to david and solomon and they say praise be to god who hath make u to excel many of his believe servant ! and in knowledge solomon be david 's heir . and he say o men we have be teach the speech of bird and be endue with everything . this be indeed a clear boon from god . and to solomon be gather his host of djinn and men and bird and they be march on in band till they reach the valley of ant . say an ant o ye ant enter your dwelling l solomon and his army crush you and know it not . then smile solomon laughing at her word and he say stir me up o lord to be thankful for thy favour which thou hast shew upon me and upon my parent and to do righteousness that shall be well please to thee and bring me in by thy mercy among thy servant the righteous . and he review the bird and say how be it that i see not the lapwing ? be it one of the absent ? surely with a severe chastisement will i chastise it or i will certainly slaughter it unless it bring me a clear excuse . nor tarry it long ere it come and say i have gain the knowledge that thou knowest not and with sure tidings have i come to thee from saba i find a woman reign over them gift with everything and she hath a splendid throne and i find her and her people worship the sun instead of god and satan hath make their work fair seem to them so that he hath turn them from the way wherefore they be not guide to the worship of god who bringeth to light the secret thing of heaven and earth and knoweth what men conceal and what they manifest god ! there be no god but he ! the lord of the glorious throne ! he say we shall see whether thou hast speak truth or whether thou art of them that lie . go with this my letter and throw it down to them then turn away from them and await their answer . she say o my noble ! an honourable letter hath be throw down to me it be from solomon and it be this 'in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ! set not up yourselves against me but come to me submit muslim . ' she say o my noble advise me in mine affair i decide it not without your concurrence . they say we be endue with strength and be endue with mighty valour . but to command be thine see therefore what thou wilt command u . she say king when they enter a city spoil it and abase the mighty of it people and in like manner will these also do . but i will send to them with a gift and await what my envoy bring back . and when the messenger come to solomon he say aid ye me with rich ? but what god hath give to me be good than what he hath give you yet ye glory in your gift return to them for we will surely come to them with force which they can not withstand and we will drive them from their land humble and contemptible . say he o nobles which of you will bring me her throne before they come to me submit ? muslim . an efreet of the djinn say i will bring it thee ere thou risest from thy place i have power for this and be trusty . and one who have the knowledge of scripture say i will bring it to thee in the twinkling of an eye . and when he saw it set before him he say this be of the favour of my lord to try me whether i will be thankful or unthankful . and he who be thankful be thankful to his own behoof and a for him who be unthankful truly my lord be self sufficient bounteous ! say he make her throne so that she know it not we shall see whether she hath or not guidance . and when she come he say be thy throne like this ? she say a though it be the same . and we say he have have knowledge give u before her and have be muslim . but the god she have worship instead of god have lead her astray for she be of a people who believe not . it be say to her enter the palace and when she saw it she think it a lake of water and bar her leg . he say it be a palace pave with glass . she say o my lord ! i have sin against my own soul and i resign myself with solomon to god the lord of the world . and of old we send to themoud their brother saleh with serve ye god but lo ! they become two set of disputant wrangle with each other . he say o my people why if ye ask not pardon of god that ye may find mercy hasten ye on evil rather than good ? they say we augur ill concern thee and those who be with thee . he say the ill of which ye augur depend on god . but ye be a people on your trial . and there be in the city nine person who commit excess in the land and do not that which be right . they say swear ye to one another by god that we will surely fall on him and on his family by night then will be say to the avenger of blood we witness not the destruction of his family and verily we speak the truth . and they devise a device and we devise a device and they be not aware of it and see what be the end of their device ! we destroy them and their whole people and for their sin these their house be empty ruin verily in this be a sign to those who understand and we deliver those who believe and fear . and lot when he say to his people what ! proceed ye to such filthiness with your eye open ? what ! come ye with lust unto men rather than to woman ? surely ye be an ignorant people . and the answer of his people be but to say cast out the family of lot from your city they forsooth be men of purity ! so we rescue him and his family but a for his wife we decree her to be of them that linger and we rain a rain upon them and fatal be the rain to those who have have their warning . say praise be to god and peace be on his servant whom he hath chosen ! be god the more worthy or the god they join with him ? be not he who hath make the heaven and the earth and hath send down rain to you from heaven by which we cause the luxuriant grove to spring up ! it be not in your power to cause it tree to spring up ! what ! a god with god ? yet they find equal for him ! be not he who hath set the earth so firm and hath make river in it midst and hath place mountain upon it and put a barrier between the two sea ? what ! a god with god ? yet the great part of them have no knowledge ! be not he the more worthy who answereth the oppress when they cry to him and taketh off their ill and maketh you to succeed your sire on the earth ? what ! a god with god ? how few bear these thing in mind ! be not he who guideth you in the darkness of the land and of the sea and who sendeth forth the wind a the forerunner of his mercy ? what ! a god with god ? far from god be what ye join with him ! be not he who create a be then reneweth it and who supplieth you out of the heaven and the earth ? what ! a god with god ? say bring forth your proof if you speak the truth . say none either in the heaven or in the earth knoweth the unseen but god . and they know not when they shall be raise . yet they have attain to a knowledge of the life to come yet be they in doubt about it yet be they blind about it ! and the unbeliever say when we and our father have be dead shall we be take forth ? of old have we be promise this we and our sire of old it be but fable of the ancient . say go ye through the land and see what hath be the end of the wicked . and grieve not thou for them nor be in distress at their devising . and they say when will this promise be make good if ye speak true ? say haply a part of what ye desire to be hasten may be close behind you . and truly thy lord be full of goodness towards men but most of them be not thankful . and thy lord knoweth well what their breast enshroud and what they bring to light and there be no secret thing in the heaven or on the earth but it be in the clear book . truly this koran declareth to the child of israel most thing wherein they disagree and it be certainly guidance and a mercy to the faithful . verily by his wisdom will thy lord decide between them for he be the mighty the knowing . put thou then thy trust in god for thou hast clear truth on thy side . thou shalt not make the dead to hear neither shalt thou make the deaf to hear the call when they turn away backward neither art thou the guide of the blind out of their error none truly shalt thou make to hear but those who believe our sign and they be muslim . when the doom shall be ready to light upon them we will cause a monster to come forth to them out of the earth and cry to them verily men have not firmly believe our sign . and on that day shall be gather out of every nation a company of those who have gainsay our sign in separate band till they come before god who will say treated ye my sign a imposture although ye embrace them not in your knowledge ? or what be it that ye be do ? and doom shall light upon them for their evil deed and nought shall they have to plead . see they not that we have ordain the night that they may rest in it and the day with it gift of light ? of a truth herein be sign to people who believe . on that day there shall be a blast on the trumpet and all that be in the heaven and all that the on the earth shall be terror stricken save him whom god pleaseth to deliver and all shall come to him in humble guise . and thou shalt see the mountain which thou thinkest so firm pas away with the passing of a cloud ! 't be the work of god who ordereth all thing ! of all that ye do be he well aware . to him who shall present himself with good work shall be a reward beyond their desert and they shall be secure from the terror on that day and they who shall present themselves with evil shall be fling downward on their face into the fire . shall ye be reward but a ye have work ? say specially be i command to worship the lord of this land which he hath sanctify . all thing be his and i be command to be one of those who surrender them to god a muslim and to recite the koran and whoever be rightly guide assuredly will be rightly guide to his own behoof . and a to him who erreth say i truly be a warner only.and say praise be to god ! he will shew you his sign and ye shall acknowledge them and of what ye do thy lord be not regardless . see sura lxviii . p. n. not really leprous . lit . when our visible sign come to them . this tradition may be derive from king iv . . comp . geiger p. . the legend of solomon 's power over the genius originate in a mistranslation of eccl . ii . . comp . also for other point in this story prov . vi . king x. . demon obey him solomon . . . and evil spirit be subject to him . targ . . on esther . from the same source muhammad have adopt with slight variation the whole story of solomon 's intercourse with the queen of saba . comp . also tr . gittin fol . and midr . jalkut on king vi . ch . . lit . unless ye bear me witness . that be malignant . the efreets be generally believe to differ from the other djinn in be very powerful and always malicious but to be in other respect of a similar nature lane 's modern egyptian i. . the ghost of dead person be also call by this name ib . . or before thy glance can be withdraw from an object . lit . we have consult the flight of bird hence presage . lit . your bird augury . comp . sura lxvi . xxv . . lit . their knowledge attaineth to the next life . lit . art on clear truth . al jassaca the spy . or shall derive advantage from them . sura xviii . the cave lxix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise be to god who hath send down the book to his servant and hath not make it tortuous but direct that it may warn of a grievous woe from him and announce to the faithful who do the thing that be right that a goodly reward wherein they shall abide for ever awaiteth them and that it may warn those who say god hath beget a son . no knowledge of this have either they or their father ! a grievous say to come out of their mouth ! they speak no other than a lie ! and haply if they believe not in this new revelation thou wilt slay thyself on their very footsteps out of vexation . verily we have make all that be on earth a it adornment that we might make trial who among mankind would excel in work but we be surely about to reduce all that be thereon to dust ! hast thou reflect that the inmate of the cave and of al rakim be on our wondrous sign ? when the youth betook them to the cave they say o our lord ! grant u mercy from before thee and order for u our affair aright . then strike we upon their ear with deafness in the cave for many a year then we awake them that we might know which of the two party could best reckon the space of their abiding . we will relate to thee their tale with truth . they be youth who have believe in their lord and in guidance have we increase them and we have make them stout of heart when they stand up and say our lord be lord of the heaven and of the earth we will call on no other god than him for in that case we have say a thing outrageous . these our people have take other god beside him though they bring no clear proof for them but who more iniquitous than he who forgeth a lie of god ? so when ye shall have separate you from them and from that which they worship beside god then betake you to the cave your lord will unfold his mercy to you and will order your affair for you for the best . and thou mightest have see the sun when it arise pas on the right of their cave and when it set leave them on the leave while they be in it spacious chamber . this be one of the sign of god . guide indeed be he whom god guideth but for him whom he misleadeth thou shalt by no mean find a patron director . and thou wouldst have deem them awake though they be sleep and we turn them to the right and to the left . and in the entry lay their dog with paw outstretched . hadst thou come suddenly upon them thou wouldst surely have turn thy back on them in flight and have be fill with fear at them . so we awake them that they might question one another . say one of them how long have ye tarry here ? they say we have tarry a day or part of day . they say your lord knoweth best how long ye have tarry send now one of you with this your coin into the city and let him mark who therein hath purest food and from him let him bring you a supply and let him be courteous and not discover you to any one . for they if they find you out will stone you or turn you back to their faith and in that case it will fare ill with you for ever . and thus make we their adventure know to their fellow citizen that they might learn that the promise of god be true and that a to the hour there be no doubt of it come . when they dispute among themselves concern what have befall them some say build a building over them their lord knoweth best about them . those who prevail in the matter say a place of worship will we surely raise over them . some say they be three their dog the fourth others say five their dog the sixth guessing at the secret others say seven and their dog the eighth . say my lord best knoweth the number none save a few shall know them . therefore be clear in they discussion about them and ask not any christian concern them . say not thou of a thing i will surely do it to morrow without if god will . and when thou hast forget call thy lord to mind and say haply my lord will guide me that i may come near to the truth of this story with correctness . and they tarry in their cave year and year over . say god best knoweth how long they tarry with him be the secret of the heaven and of the earth look thou and hearken unto him alone . man hath no guardian but him and none may bear part in his judgment and publish what hath be reveal to thee of the book of thy lord none may change his word and thou shalt find no refuge beside him . be patient with those who call upon their lord at morn and even seek his face and let not thine eye be turn away from them in quest of the pomp of this life neither obey him whose heart we have make careless of the remembrance of u and who followeth his own lust and whose way be unbridled . and say the truth be from your lord let him then who will believe and let him who will be an infidel . but for the offender we have get ready the fire whose smoke shall enwrap them and if they implore help help shall they be with water like molten brass which shall scald their wretched the drink ! and an unhappy couch ! but a to those who have believe and do the thing that be right verily we will not suffer the reward of him whose work be good to perish ! for them the garden of eden under whose shade shall river flow deck shall they be therein with bracelet of gold and green robe of silk and rich brocade shall they wear recline them therein on throne . blissful the reward ! and a pleasant couch ! and set forth to them a a parable two men on one of whom we bestow two garden of grape vine and surround both with palm tree and place corn field between them each of the garden do yield it fruit and fail not thereof at all and we cause a river to flow in their midst and this man receive his fruit and say dispute with him to his companion more have i than thou of wealth and my family be mighty . and he go into his garden to his own soul unjust . he say i do not think that this will ever perish and i do not think that 'the hour ' will come and even if i be take back to my lord i shall surely find a good than it in exchange . his fellow say to him dispute with him what ! hast thou no belief in him who create thee of the dust then of the germ of life then fashion thee a perfect man ? but god be my lord and no other be will i associate with my lord . and why didst thou not say when thou enteredst thy garden 'what god willeth ! there be no power but in god . ' though thou seest that i have less than thou of wealth and child yet haply my lord may bestow on me good than thy garden and may send his bolt upon it out of heaven so that the next dawn shall find it barren dust or it water become deep sunk so that thou art unable to find it . and his fruit be encompass by destruction . then begin he to turn down the palm of his hand at what he have spend on it for it vine be fall down on their trellis and he say oh that i have not join any other god to my lord ! and he have no host to help him instead of god neither be he able to help himself . protection in such a case be of god the truth he be the best rewarder and he bringeth to the best issue . and set before them a similitude of the present life . it be a water which we send down from heaven and the herb of the earth be mingle with it and on the morrow it becometh dry stubble which the wind scatter for god hath power over all thing . wealth and child be the adornment of this present life but good work which be last be well in the sight of thy lord a to recompense and good a to hope . and call to mind the day when we will cause the mountain to pass away and thou shalt see the earth a levelled plain and we will gather mankind together and not leave of them any one . and they shall be set before thy lord in rank now be ye come unto u a we create you at first but ye thought that we should not make good to you the promise . and each shall have his book put into his hand and thou shalt see the wicked in alarm at that which be therein and they shall say o woe to u ! what meaneth this book ? it leaveth neither small nor great unnoted down ! and they shall find all that they have work present to them and thy lord will not deal unjustly with any one . when we say to the angel prostrate yourselves before adam they all prostrate them save eblis who be of the djinn and revolt from his lord 's behest . behest . what ! will ye then take him and his offspring a patron rather than me ? and they your enemy ? sad exchange for the ungodly ! i make them not witness of the creation of the heaven and of the earth nor of their own creation neither do i take seducer a my helper . on a certain day god shall say call ye on the companion ye join with me deem them to be god and they shall call on them but they shall not answer them then will we place a valley of perdition between them and the wicked shall see the fire and shall have a foreboding that they shall be fling into it and they shall find no escape from it . and now in this koran we have present to man similitude of every kind but at most thing be man a caviller . and what now that guidance be come to them letteth men from believe and from ask forgiveness of their lord unless they wait till that the doom of the ancient overtake them or the chastisement come upon them in the sight of the universe ? we send not our sent one but to announce and to warn but the infidel cavil with vain word in order to refute the truth and they treat my sign and their own warning with scorn . but who be bad than he who when told of the sign of his lord turneth him away and forgetteth what in time past his hand have work ? truly we have throw veil over their heart lest they should understand this koran and into their ear a heaviness and if thou bid them to the guidance yet will they not even then be guide ever . the gracious one full of compassion be thy lord ! if he would have chastise them for their demerit he would have hasten their chastisement . but they have a time fix for the accomplishment of our menace and beside god they shall find no refuge . and those city do we destroy when they become impious and of their coming destruction we give them warn . remember when moses say to his servant i will not stop till i reach the confluence of the two sea or for year will i journey on . but when they reach their confluence they forget their fish and it take it way in the sea at will . and when they have pass on say moses to his servant bring u our morning meal for now have we incur weariness from this journey . he say what thinkest thou ? when we repair to the rock for rest i forget the fish and none but satan make me forget it so a not to mention it and it hath take it way in the sea in a wondrous sort . he say it be this we be in quest of . and they both go back retrace their footstep . then find they one of our servant to whom we have vouchsafe our mercy and whom we have instruct with our knowledge . and moses say to him shall i follow thee that thou teach me for guidance of that which thou too hast be teach ? he say verily thou canst not have patience with me how canst thou be patient in matter whose mean thou comprehendest not ? he say thou shalt find me patient if god please nor will i disobey thy bidding . he say then if thou follow me ask me not of aught until i have give thee an account thereof . so they both go on till they embark in a ship and he the unknown stave it in . what ! say moses hast thou stave it in that thou mayest drown it crew ? a strange thing now hast thou do ! he say do i not tell thee that thou couldst not have patience with me ? he say chide me not that i forgat nor lay on me a hard command . then go they on till they meet a youth and he slew him . say moses hast thou slay him who be free from guilt of blood ? now hast thou work a grievous thing ! he say do i not tell thee that thou couldst not have patience with me ? moses say if after this i ask thee aught then let me be thy comrade no longer but now hast thou my excuse . they go on till they come to the people of a city . of this people they ask food but they refuse them for guest . and they find in it a wall that be about to fall and he set it upright . say moses if thou hadst wish for this thou mightest have obtain pay . he say this be the part point between me and thee . but i will first tell thee the meaning of that which thou couldst not await with patience . a to the vessel it belong to poor men who toil upon the sea and i be mind to damage it for in their rear be a king who seize every ship by force . a to the youth his parent be believer and we fear l he should trouble them by error and infidelity . and we desire that their lord might give them in his place a child well than he in virtue and nearer to filial piety . and a to the wall it belong to two orphan youth in the city and beneath it be their treasure and their father be a righteous man and thy lord desire that they should reach the age of strength and take forth their treasure through the mercy of thy lord . and not of mine own will have i do this . this be the interpretation of that which thou couldst not bear with patience . they will ask thee of dhoulkarnain the two horn . say i will recite to you an account of him . we stablished his power upon the earth and make for him a way to everything . and a route he follow until when he reach the setting of the sun he find it to set in a miry fount and hard by he find a people . we say o dhoulkarnain ! either chastise or treat them generously . the impious say he will we surely chastise then shall he be take back to his lord and he will chastise him with a grievous chastisement . but a to him who believeth and doeth that which be right he shall have a generous recompense and we will lay on them our easy behest . then follow he a route until when he reach the rising of the sun he find it to rise on a people to whom we have give no shelter from it . thus it be . and we have full knowledge of the force that be with him . then follow he a route until he come between the two mountain beneath which he find a people who scarce understand a language . they say o dhoulkarnain ! verily gog and magog waste this land shall we then pay thee tribute so thou build a rampart between u and them ? he say good than your tribute be the might wherewith my lord hath strengthen me but help me strenuously and i will set a barrier between you and them . bring me block of iron until when it fill the space between the mountain side ply say he your bellow until when he have make it red with heat fire he say bring me molten brass that i may pour upon it . and gog and magog be not able to scale it neither be they able to dig through it . this say he be a mercy from my lord but when the promise of my lord shall come to pass he will turn it to dust and the promise of my lord be true . on that day we will let them dash like billow one over another and there shall be a blast on the trumpet and we will gather them together in a body . and we will set hell on that day close before the infidel whose eye be veil from my warning and who have no power to hear . what ! do the infidel think that they can take my servant a their patron beside me ? verily we have get hell ready a the abode of the infidel . say shall we tell you who they be that have lose their labour most ? whose aim in the present life hath be mistake and who deem that what they do be right ? they be those who believe not in the sign of the lord or that they shall ever meet him . vain therefore be their work and no weight will we allow them on the day of resurrection . this shall be their reward hell . because they be unbeliever and treat my sign and my apostle with scorn . but a for those who believe and do the thing that be right they shall have the garden of paradise for their abode they shall remain therein for ever they shall wish for no change from it . say should the sea become ink to write the word of my lord the sea would surely fail ere the word of my lord would fail though we bring it like in aid . say in sooth i be only a man like you . it hath be reveal to me that your god be one only god let him then who hopeth to meet his lord work a righteous work nor let him give any other creature a share in the worship of his lord . lit . hath not put crookedness into it . the valley or mountain in which the cave of the seven sleeper be situate . comp . fundgreiben des orient iii . . gibbon 's decline and fall ch . xxxiii . especially the concluding sentence . because they sleep with their eye open . beidh . the muhammadan believe that this dog will be admit into paradise . one of it traditional name be katmir a word whose letter it should be observe be with one exception identical with rakim . lit . dispute not about them unless with clear disputation . muhammad have omit to use the qualifying phrase when in reply to the jew who ask for the history of the seven sleeper he simply promise to give it on the morrow hence this verse . comp . james iv . . they enter the cavern under decius and awoke in the time of theodosius accord to the tradition which can not be reconcile with the number of year give in the text . thus ullm . but the word may be take with beidh . and sale a ironical . make thou him to see and hear . say to have be promulgate at medina . n ld . p. omaya ibn chalf who advise muhammad to cast off all his poorer follower out of respect to the koreisch . it be probable that this and the numerous similar description of the enjoyment in paradise be base upon muhammad 's knowledge or possibly personal observation of the luxurious habit of the persian to whom many arabian tribe owe allegiance and with whom they have mercantile transaction by mean of caravan . the word paradise the name of cup and brocade in sura lvi . pp . and the word sundus in this passage be all persian . lit ex spermate . comp . isai . xl . etc . muhammad appear accord to this text to have consider eblis not only a the father of the djinn but a one of their number . the truth appear to be that muhammad derive his doctrine of the genius from the persian and indian mythology and attempt to identify them with the satan and demon of the semitic race . both the satan and djinn represent in the koran the principle of evil . see sura xci . ii . n. the sea of greece and the sea of persia . but a no literal interpretation of the passage seem satisfactory the commentator have devise a spiritual or metaphorical one and explain it of the two ocean of natural and supernatural knowledge . there be no trace of this legend in the rabbinic writing . the loss of our fish be a sign to u of our find him whom we seek namely el khidr or el khadir the reputed vizier of dhoulkarnain and say to have drunk of the fountain of life by virtue of which he still live and will live till the day of judgment . he be also say to appear clad in green robe to muslim in distress whence his name . perhaps the name khidr be form from jethro . probably alexander the great so call from his expedition to the east and west . he seem to be regard in this passage a invest with a divine commission for the extirpation of impiety and idolatry . comp . dan . viii . and tr . tanith fol . . hottinger bibl . orient . . ar . yadjoudj and madjoudj the barbarous people of e. asia . see ibn batoutah 's travel iv . p. par.ed . this rampart have be identify with fortification which extend from the w. shore of the caspian sea to the pontus euxinus make a it be say by alexander and repair by yezdegird ii . caussin de perceval vol.i.p . . see sura lxv . xxi . the form of this word in the arabic with the h in the second syllable and the final m shews that the word be borrow from the hebrew and not from the greek or syriac . observe in this expression the same admixture of the semitic and indo persian element a be notice above in the identification of satan and djinn verse . sura xxxii . adoration . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful . elif . lam . mim . this book be without a doubt a revelation send down from the lord of the world . will they say he hath forge it ? nay it be the truth from thy lord that thou mayest warn a people to whom no warner hath come before thee that haply they may be guide . god it be who hath create the heaven and the earth and all that be between them in six day then ascend his throne . save him ye have no patron and none to plead for you . will ye not then reflect ? from the heaven to the earth he governeth all thing hereafter shall they come up to him on a day whose length shall be a thousand of such year a ye reckon . this be he who knoweth the unseen and the see the mighty the merciful who hath make everything which he hath create most good and begin the creation of man with clay then ordain his progeny from germ of life from sorry water then shape him and breathe of his spirit into him and give you hearing and seeing and hearts what little thanks do ye return ! and they say what ! when we shall have lie hide in the earth shall we become a new creation ? yea they deny that they shall meet their lord . say the angel of death who be charge with you shall cause you to die then shall ye be return to your lord . couldst thou but see when the guilty shall droop their head before their lord and cry o our lord ! we have see and we have hear return u then to life we will do that which be right . verily we believe firmly ! have we please we have certainly give to every soul it guidance . but true shall be the word which hath go forth from me i will surely fill hell with djinn and men together . taste then the recompense of your have forget the meeting with this your day . we too we have forget you taste then an eternal punishment for that which ye have work . they only believe in our sign who when mention be make of them fall down in adoration and celebrate the praise of their lord and be not puff up with disdain who a they raise them from their couch call on their lord with fear and desire and give alms of that with which we have supply them . no soul knoweth what joy of the eye be reserve for the good in recompense of their work . shall he then who be a believer be a he who sinneth grossly ? they shall not be hold alike . a to those who believe and do that which be right they shall have garden of eternal abode a the meed of their work but a for those who grossly sin their abode shall be the fire so oft a they shall desire to escape out of it back shall they be turn into it . and it shall be say to them taste ye the torment of the fire which ye treat a a lie . and we will surely cause them to taste a punishment yet nearer at hand besides the great punishment that haply they may turn to u in penitence . who acteth bad than he who be warn by the sign of his lord then turneth away from them ? we will surely take vengeance on the guilty one . we heretofore give the book of the law to moses have thou no doubt a to our meeting with him and we appoint it for the guidance of the child of israel . and we appoint im m from among them who should guide after our command when they have themselves endure with constancy and have firmly believe in our sign . now thy lord ! he will decide between them on the day of resurrection a to the subject of their dispute . be it not notorious to them how many generation through whose abode they walk we have destroy before them ? truly herein be sings will they not then hear ? see they not how we drive the rain to some parch land and thereby bring forth corn of which their cattle and themselves do eat ? will they not then behold ? they say when will this decision take place ? tell u if ye be men of truth ? say on the day of that decision the faith of infidel shall not avail them and they shall have no further respite . stand aloof from them then and wait thou for they too wait . see sura lxviii . p. . comp . sura cvii . xxii . and p . xc . which be take literally by many of the talmudists . comp . e.g . sanhed . . lit . ex spermate genitali . lit . their side be raise . n ldeke think that the word for meeting be use here in the same sense a in v. above and sura lxxi . xli . and that the clause do not belong to this verse p. n. wait thou for their punishment a they wait for thy downfall . sura xli . the make plain lxxi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . a revelation from the compassionate the merciful ! a book whose verse sign be make plain an arabic koran for men of knowledge announcer of glad tidings and charge with warning ! but most of them withdraw and hearken not and they say our heart be under shelter from thy teaching and in our ear be a deafness and between u and thee there be a veil . act a thou thinkest right we verily shall act a we think right . say i be only a man like you . it be reveal to me that your god be one god go straight then to him and implore his pardon . and woe to those who join god with god who pay not the alms of obligation and in the life to come believe not ! but they who believe and do the thing that be right shall receive a perfect recompense . say do ye indeed disbelieve in him who in two day create the earth ? and do ye assign him peer ? the lord of the world be he ! and he hath place on the earth the firm mountains which tower above it and he hath bless it and distribute food throughout it for the craving of all alike in four day then he apply himself to the heaven which then be but smoke and to it and to the earth he say come ye whether in obedience or against your will ? and they both say we come obedient . and he make them seven heaven in two day and in each heaven make know it office and we furnish the low heaven with light and guardian angel . this the disposition of the almighty the all knowing . if they turn away then say i warn you of a tempest like the tempest of ad and themoud ! when the apostle come to them on every side say worship none but god they say have our lord be please to send down he have surely send down angel and in sooth your message we do not believe . a to ad they bore them proudly and unjustly in the land and say who more mighty than we in prowess ? saw they not that god their creator be mighty than they in prowess ? and they reject our sign . therefore on ill omen day do we send against them an impetuous blast that we might make them taste the chastisement of shame in this world but more shameful shall be the chastisement of the life to come and they shall not be protect . and a to themoud we have vouchsafe them guidance but to guidance do they prefer blindness wherefore the tempest of a shameful punishment overtake them for their doings but we rescue the believing and the god fearing and warn of the day when the enemy of god shall be gather unto the fire urge on in band until when they reach it their ear and their eye and their skin shall bear witness against them of their deed and they shall say to their skin why witness ye against u ? they shall say god who giveth a voice to all thing hath give u a voice he create you at first and to him be ye bring back . and ye do not hide yourselves so that neither your ear nor your eye nor your skin should witness against you but ye thought that god know not many a thing that ye do ! and this your thought which ye do think of your lord hath ruin you so that ye be become of those who perish . and be they patient still the fire shall be their abode or if they beg for favour yet shall they not be of favoured . and we will appoint satan a their fast companion for it be they who make their present and future state seem fair and right to them and the sentence pass on the people of djinn and men who flourish before them hath become their due and they shall perish . yet the unbeliever say hearken not to this koran but keep up a talk that ye may overpower the voice of the reader . surely therefore will we cause the unbeliever to taste a terrible punishment and recompense them accord to the bad of their action . this the reward of the enemy of god the fire ! it shall be their eternal abode in requital for their gainsaying our sign . and they who believe not shall say o our lord ! shew u those of the djinn and men who lead u astray both of them will we put under out foot that they may be of the humble . but a for those who say our lord be god and who go straight to him angels shall descend to them and say fear ye not neither be ye grieve but rejoice ye in the paradise which ye have be promise . we be your guardian in this life and in the next your 's therein shall be your soul 's desire and your 's therein whatever ye shall ask for the hospitality of a gracious a merciful one . and who speaketh fair than he who biddeth to god and doth the thing that be right and saith i for my part be of the muslim ? moreover good and evil be not to be treat a the same thing . turn away evil by what be good and lo ! he between whom and thyself be enmity shall be a though he be a warm friend . but none attain to this save men steadfast in patience and none attain to it except the most highly favour . and if an enticement from satan entice thee then take refuge in god for he be the hear the knowing . and among his sign be the night and the day and the sun and the moon . bend not in adoration to the sun or the moon but bend in adoration before god who create them both if ye would serve him . but if they be too proud for this yet they who be with thy lord do celebrate his praise night and day and cease not . and among his sign be this that thou seest the earth droop but when we send down the rain upon it it be stir and swelleth verily he who giveth it life will surely give life to the dead for his might extendeth over all thing . they truly who with obloquy disown our sign be not hide from u . be he then who shall be cast into the fire or he who shall come forth secure on the day of resurrection in the good position ? do what ye will but his eye be on all your doings . verily they who believe not in the warning after it hath come to them . . . and yet the koran be a glorious book ! falsehood from whatever side it cometh shall not come night it it be a missive down from the wise the praiseworthy . nothing hath be say to thee which hath not be say of old to apostles before thee . verily with thy lord be forgiveness and with him be terrible retribution . have we make it a koran in a foreign tongue they have surely say unless it sign be make clear . . . ! what ! in a foreign tongue ? and the people arabian ? say it be to those who believe a guide and a medicine but a to those who believe not there be a thickness in their ear and to them it be a blindness they be like those who be call to from afar . of old we give the book to moses and dispute arise about it and if a decree of respite from thy lord have go before there would surely have be a decision between them for great be their doubt and questioning about it . he who doth right it be for himself and he who doth evil it be for himself and thy lord will not deal unfairly with his servant . with him alone be the knowledge of the hour . no fruit cometh forth from it covering neither doth any female conceive nor be she deliver but with his knowledge . and on that day he shall call men to him say where be the companion ye give me ? they shall say we own to thee there be no one of u can witness for them . and what they erst call on shall pass away from them and they shall perceive that there will be no escape for them . man ceaseth not to pray for good but if evil betide him he despondeth despair . and if we cause him to taste our mercy after affliction hath touch him he be sure to say this be my due and i take no thought of the hour of resurrection and if i be bring back to my lord i shall indeed attain with him my high good . but we will then certainly declare their doings to the infidel and cause them to taste a stern punishment . when we be gracious to man he withdraweth and turneth him aside but when evil toucheth him he be a man of long prayer . say what think ye ? if this book be from god and ye believe it not who will have go far astray than he who be at a distance from it ? we will shew them our sign in different country and among themselves until it become plain to them that it be the truth . be it not enough for thee that thy lord be witness of all thing ? be they not in doubt a to the meeting with their lord ? but doth he not encompass all thing ? in some ms . this sura be entitle adoration . thus beidh . accord to his . comp . caussin f. muhammad 's aim in this sura be the conversion of a noble meccan utba ben rabia to islam . the precise year be uncertain . see sura lxviii . p. . thus s . paul and barnabas act xiv . . or never fail . lit . from before them and from behind them . see sura lx . xxxvi . n. comp . sura lxxxviii . xlvi . . lit . the possessor of great good fortune . comp . rev . iv . in the original . thus tr . taanith init . . lit . vanity shall not come to it from before it or from behind it . we will not receive it . the literal rendering of the following word be what ! foreign and arabian ? comp . sura lxvii . xvii . . lit . verily they be in suspicious doubt about it . lit . for his soul . see next sura v. . lit . to him be refer . sura . the kneel lxxii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . this book be send down from god the mighty the wise ! assuredly in the heaven and the earth be sign for those who believe and in your own creation and in the beast which be scatter abroad be sign to the firm in faith and in the succession of night and day and in the supply which god sendeth down from the heaven whereby he giveth life to the earth when dead and in the change of the wind be sign for a people of discernment . such be the sign of god with truth do we recite them to thee . but in what teach will they believe if they reject god and his sign ? woe to every lying sinner who heareth the sign of god recite to him and then a though he hear them not persisteth in proud disdain ! apprise him of an afflictive punishment . and when he becometh acquaint with any of our sign he turneth them into ridicule . these ! a shameful punishment for them ! hell be behind them ! and neither their gain nor the lord whom they have adopt beside god shall avail them in the least and theirs a great punishment ! this be guidance and for those who disbelieve the sign of their lord be the punishment of an afflictive torment . it be god who hath subject the sea to you that the ship may traverse it at his bidding and that ye may go in quest of the gift of his bounty and that ye may be thankful . and he hath subject to you all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth all be from him . verily herein be sign for those who reflect . tell the believer to pardon those who hope not for the day of god in which he purposeth to reward men accord to their deed . he who doth that which be right doth it to his own behoof and whoso doth evil doth it to his own hurt . hereafter to your lord shall ye be bring back . to the child of israel give we of old the book and the wisdom and the gift of prophecy and we supply them with good thing and privilege them above all people and we give them clear sanction for our behest neither do they differ through mutual envy till after they have become possess of knowledge but thy lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection a to the subject of their dispute . afterwards we set thee over our divine law follow it then and follow not the wish of those who have no knowledge for against god shall they avail thee nothing . and in sooth the doer of evil be one another 's patron but the patron of them that fear him be god himself . this book hath insight for mankind and a guidance and mercy to a people who be firm in faith . deem they whose getting be only evil that we will deal with them a with those who believe and work righteousness so that their life and death shall be alike ? ill do they judge . in all truth hath god create the heaven and the earth that he may reward every one a he shall have work and they shall not be wrong . what thinkest thou ? he who hath make a god of his passion and whom god causeth wilfully to err and whose ear and whose heart he hath seal up and over whose sight he hath place a veil who after his rejection by god shall guide such a one ? will ye not then be warn ? and they say there be only this our present life we die and we live and nought but time destroyeth u . but in this they have no knowledge it be merely their own conceit . and when our clear sign be recite to them their only argument be to say bring back our father if ye speak the truth . say god giveth you life then causeth you to die then will he assemble you on the day of resurrection there be no doubt of it but most men have not this knowledge . and god 's be the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth and on the day when the hour shall arrive on that day shall the despisers perish . and thou shalt see every nation kneel to it own book shall every nation be summon this day shall ye be repay a ye have work . this our book will speak of you with truth therein have we write down whatever ye have do . a to those who have believe and work righteously into his mercy shall their lord cause them to enter . this shall be undoubted bliss ! but a to the infidel be not my sign recite to you ? but ye proudly scorn them and become a sinful people . and when it be say verily the promise of god be truth and a to the hour there be no doubt of it ye say we know not what the hour be we conceive it a mere conceit we have no assurance of it . and the evil they have work shall rise up into their view and that at which they mock shall hem them in on every side . and it shall be say to them this day will we forget you a ye forgat your meeting with u this day and your abode shall be the fire and none shall there be to succour you this because ye receive the sign of god with mockery and this present life deceive you . on that day therefore they shall not come out from it and they shall not be ask to win the favour of god . praise then be to god lord of the heaven and lord of the earth the lord of the world ! and his be the greatness in the heaven and on the earth for he be the mighty the wise ! see sura lxviii . p. . lit . the send down i.e . the revelation of the book . lit . after god . that be the day of victory . in scripture phrase the day of the right hand of the most high . the arabic amri may be render either command or business i.e . of religion . lit . the maker vain i.e . vanitatis arguentes alcoranum . mar . sura xvi . the bee lxxiii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the doom of god cometh to pass . then hasten it not . glory be to him ! high let him be exalt above the god whom they join with him ! by his own behest will he cause the angel to descend with the spirit on whom he pleaseth among his servant bid them warn that there be no god but me therefore fear me . he hath create the heaven and the earth to set forth his truth high let him be exalt above the god they join with him ! man hath he create from a moist germ yet lo ! man be an open caviller . and the cattle ! for you hath he create them in them ye have warm garment and gainful us and of them ye eat and they beseem you well when ye fetch them home and when ye drive them forth to pasture and they carry your burden to land which ye could not else reach but with travail of soul truly your lord be full of goodness and merciful and he hath give you horse mule and ass that ye may ride them and for your ornament and thing of which ye have no knowledge hath he create . of god it be to point out the way . some turn aside from it but have he please he have guide you all aright . it be he who sendeth down rain out of heaven from it be your drink and from it be the plant by which ye pasture . by it he causeth the corn and the olive and the palm tree and the grape to spring forth for you and all kind of fruit verily in this be sign for those who ponder . and he hath subject to you the night and the day the sun and the moon and the star too be subject to you by his behest verily in this be sign for those who understand and all of varied hue that he hath create for you over the earth verily in this be sign for those who remember . and he it be who hath subject the sea to you that ye may eat of it fresh fish and take forth from it ornament to wear thou seest the ship plough it billow and that ye may go in quest of his bounty and that ye might give thanks . and he hath thrown firm mountains on the earth least it move with you and river and path for your guidance and way mark . by the star too be men guide . shall he then who hath create be a he who hath not create ? will ye not consider ? and if ye would reckon up the favour of god ye could not count them . aye ! god be right gracious merciful ! and god knoweth what ye conceal and what ye bring to light while the god whom they call on beside god create nothing but be themselves create dead be they lifeless ! and they know not when they shall be raise ! your god be the one god and they who believe not in a future life have heart give to denial and be men of pride beyond a doubt god knoweth what they conceal and what they manifest he truly loveth not the men of pride . for when it be say to them what be this your lord hath send down ? they say fable of the ancient that on the day of resurrection they may bear their own entire burden and the burden of those whom they in their ignorance mislead . shall it not be a grievous burden for them ? they who be before them do plot of old . but god attack their building at it foundation the roof fell on them from above and whence they look not for it punishment overtake them on the day of resurrection too will he shame them . he will say where be the god ye associate with me the subject of your dispute ? they to whom the knowledge hath be give will say verily this day shall shame and evil fall upon the infidel . the sinner against their own soul whom the angel shall cause to die will proffer the submission no evil have we do . nay ! god knoweth what ye have work enter ye therefore the gate of hell to remain therein for ever and horrid the abide place of the haughty one ! but to those who have fear god it shall be say what be this that your lord hath award ? they shall say that which be best . to those who do good a good reward in this present world but good the mansion of the next and right pleasant the abode of the god fearing ! garden of eden into which they shall enter river shall flow beneath their shade all they wish for shall they find therein ! thus god rewardeth those who fear him to whom a righteous person the angel shall say when they receive their soul peace be on you ! enter paradise a the meed of your labour . what can the infidel expect but that the angel of death come upon them or that a sentence of thy lord take effect ? thus do they who flourish before them . god be not unjust to them but to their ownselves be they unjust and the ill which they have do recoil upon them and that which they have scoff at encompass them round about . they who have join other god with god say have he please neither we nor our father have worship aught but him nor should we apart from him have forbid aught . thus act they who be before them . yet be the duty of the apostle other than public preaching ? and to every people have we send an apostle say worship god and turn away from taghout . some of them there be whom god guide and there be others decree to err . but go through the land and see what hath be the end of those who treat my apostle a liar ! if thou art anxious for their guidance know that god will not guide him whom he would lead astray neither shall they have any helper . and they swear by god with their most sacred oath that god will never raise him who once be dead . nay but on him be a promise bind though most men know it not that he may clear up to them the subject of their dispute and that the infidel may know that they be liar . our word to a thing when we will it be but to say be and it be . and a to those who when oppress have flee their country for the sake of god we will surely provide them a goodly abode in this world but great the reward of the next life do they but know it they who bear ill with patience and put their trust in the lord ! none have we send before thee but men inspire ask of those who have book of monition if ye know it not with proof of their mission and scripture and to thee have we send down this book of monition that thou mayest make clear to men what hath be send down to them and that they may ponder it . what ! be they then who have plot mischiefs sure that god will not cause the earth to cleave under them ? or that a chastisement will not come upon them whence they look not for it ? or that he will not seize upon them in their coming and going while they shall not be able to resist him ? or that he will not seize them with some slowly waste scourge ? but verily your lord be good gracious . have they not see how everything which god hath create turneth it shadow right and leave prostrate itself before god in all abasement ? and all in the heaven and all on the earth each thing that moveth and the very angels prostrate them in adoration before god and be free from pride they fear their lord who be above them and do what they be bidden for god hath say take not to yourselves two god for he be one god me therefore ! yea me revere ! all in the heaven and in the earth be his ! his due unceasing service ! will ye then fear any other than god ? and all your blessing be assuredly from god then when trouble befalleth you to him ye turn for help then when he relieveth you of the trouble lo ! some of you join associate with your lord to prove how thankless be they for our gift ! enjoy yourselves then but in the end ye shall know the truth . and for idol of which they know nothing they set apart a share of our bounty ! by god ye shall be call to account for your device ! and they ascribe daughter unto god ! glory be to him ! but they desire them not for themselves for when the birth of a daughter be announce to any one of them dark shadows settle on his face and he be sad he hideth him from the people because of the ill tidings shall he keep it with disgrace or bury it in the dust ? be not their judgment wrong ? to whatever be evil may they be liken who believe not in a future life but god be to be liken to whatever be lofty for he be the mighty the wise . should god punish men for their perverse doings he would not leave on earth a move thing ! but to an appoint term doth he respite them and when their term be come they shall not delay or advance it an hour . yet what they loathe themselves do they assign to god and their tongue utter the lie that theirs shall be a goodly lot . but beyond a doubt be it that the fire awaiteth them and that they shall be the first sent into it . by god we have send apostle to nation before thee but satan prepare their work for them and this day be he their liege and a woeful punishment doth await them . and we have send down the book to thee only that thou mightest clear up to them the subject of their wrangling and a a guidance and a mercy to those who believe . and god sendeth down water from heaven and by it giveth life to the earth after it hath be dead verily in this be a sign to those who hearken . ye have also teach from the cattle . we give you drink of the pure milk between dreg and blood which be in their belly the pleasant beverage of them that quaff it . and among fruit ye have the palm and the vine from which ye get wine and healthful nutriment in this verily be sign for those who reflect . and thy lord hath teach the bee say provide thee house in the mountain and in the tree and in the hive which men do build thee feed moreover on every kind of fruit and walk the beaten path of thy lord . from it belly cometh forth a fluid of vary hue which yieldeth medicine to man . verily in this be a sign for those who consider . and god hath create you by and bye will he take you to himself and some among you will he carry on to abject old age when all that once be know be know no longer . aye god be know powerful . and god hath abound to some of you more than to others in the supply of life yet they to whom he hath abound impart not thereof to the slave whom their right hand possess so that they may share alike . what ! will they deny then that these boon be from god ? god too hath give you wife of your own race and from your wife hath he give you son and grandson and with good thing hath he supply you . what will they then believe in vain idol ? for god 's boon they be ungrateful ! and they worship beside god those who neither out of the heaven or earth can provide them a particle of food and have no power in themselves ! make no comparison therefore with god . verily god hath knowledge but ye have not . god maketh comparison between a slave the property of his lord who hath no power over anything and a free man whom we have ourselves supply and who giveth alms therefrom both in secret and openly . shall they be hold equal ? no praise be to god ! but most men know it not . god setteth forth also a comparison between two men one of whom be dumb from his birth and hath no power over anything and be a burden to his lord send him where he will he cometh not back with success . shall he and the man who enjoineth what be just and keepeth in the straight path be hold equal ? god 's be the secret of the heaven and of the earth ! and the business of the last hour will be but a the twinkling of an eye or even less . yes ! for all thing be god potent . god hath bring you out of your mother ' womb devoid of all knowledge but hath give you hear and sight and heart that haply ye might render thanks . have they never look up at the bird subject to him in heaven 's vault ? none holdeth them in hand but god ! in this be sign for those who believe . and god hath give you tent to dwell in and he hath give you the skin of beast for tent that ye may find them light when ye shift your quarter or when ye halt and from their wool and soft fur and hair hath he supply you with furniture and good for temporary use . and from the thing which he hath create hath god provide shade for you and hath give you the mountain for place of shelter and hath give you garment to defend you from the heat and garment to defend you in your war . thus doth he fill up the measure of his goodness towards you that you may resign yourselves to him . but if they turn their back still thy office be only plain spoken preaching . they own the goodness of god then they disown it and most of them be infidels . but one day we will raise up a witness out of every nation them shall the infidel have no permission to make excuse and they shall find no favour . and when they who have act thus wrongly shall behold their torment it shall not be make light to them nor will god deign to look upon them . and when they who have join associate with god shall see those their associate god they shall say o our lord ! these be our associate god whom we call upon beside thee . but they shall retort on them verily ye be liar . and on that day shall they proffer submission to god and the deity of their own invention shall vanish from them . a for those who be infidel and turn others aside from the way of god to them we will add punishment on punishment for their corrupt doings . and one day we will summon up in every people a witness against them from among themselves and we will bring thee up a a witness against these meccans for to thee have we send down the book which cleareth up everything a guidance and mercy and glad tidings to those who resign themselves to god to muslim . verily god enjoineth justice and the do of good and gift to kindred and he forbiddeth wickedness and wrong and oppression . he warneth you that haply ye may be mindful . be faithful in the covenant of god when ye have covenant and break not your oath after ye have pledge them for now have ye make god to stand surety for you . verily god hath knowledge of what ye do . and because you be a more numerous people than some other people be not like her who unravelleth the thread which she have strongly spin by take your oath with mutual perfidy . god be make trial of you in this and in the day of resurrection he will assuredly clear up to you that concern which ye be now at variance . have god please he could have make you one people but he causeth whom he will to err and whom he will he guideth and ye shall assuredly be call to account for your doings . therefore take not your oath with mutual fraud l your foot slip after it hath be firmly fix and ye taste of evil because ye have turn others aside from the way of god and great be your punishment . and barter not the covenant of god for a mean price for with god be that which be well for you if ye do but understand . all that be with you passeth away but that which be with god abideth . with a reward meet for their best deed will we surely recompense those who have patiently endure . whoso doeth that which be right whether male or female if a believer him will we surely quicken to a happy life and recompense them with a reward meet for their best deed . when thou readest the koran have recourse to god for help against satan the stone for no power hath he over those who believe and put their trust in their lord but only hath he power over those who turn away from god and join other deity with him . and when we change one sign verse for another and god knoweth best what he revealeth they say thou art only a fabricator . nay ! but most of them have no knowledge . say the holy spirit hath bring it down with truth from thy lord that he may stablish those who have believe and a guidance and glad tidings to the muslim . we also know that they say surely a certain person teacheth him . but the tongue of him at whom they hint be foreign while this koran be in the plain arabic . a for those who believe not in the sign of god god will not guide them and a sore torment doth await them . surely they invent a lie who believe not in the sign of god and they be the liar . whoso after he hath believe in god denieth him if he be force to it and if his heart remain steadfast in the faith shall be guiltless but whoso openeth his breast to infidelity on such shall be wrath from god and a severe punishment awaiteth them . this because they have love this present life beyond the next and because god guideth not the unbeliever ! these be they whose heart and ear and eye god hath seal up these be the careless one in the next world shall they perish beyond a doubt . to those also who after their trial flee their country then fight and endure with patience verily thy lord will in the end be forgive gracious . on a certain day shall every soul come to plead for itself and every soul shall be repay accord to it deed and they shall not be wrong . god proposeth the instance of a city secure and at ease to which it supply come in plenty from every side . but she be thankless for the boon of god god therefore make her taste the woe of famine and of fear for what they have do . moreover an apostle of their own people come to them and they treat him a an impostor . so chastisement overtake them because they be evil doer . of what god hath supply you eat the lawful and good and be grateful for the favour of god if ye be his worshipper . forbidden to you be that only which dieth of itself and blood and swine 's flesh and that which hath be slay in the name of any other than god but if any be force and neither lust for it nor wilfully transgress then verily god be forgive gracious . and say not with a lie upon your tongue this be lawful and this be forbidden for so will ye invent a lie concern god but they who invent a lie of god shall not prosper brief their enjoyment but sore their punishment ! to the jew we have forbid that of which we before told thee we injure them not but they injure themselves . to those who have do evil in ignorance then afterwards have repent and amend verily thy lord be in the end right gracious merciful . verily abraham be a leader in religion obedient to god sound in faith he be not of those who join god with god . grateful be he for his favour god choose him and guide him into the straight way and we bestow on him good thing in this world and in the world to come he shall be among the just . we have moreover reveal to thee that thou follow the religion of abraham the sound in faith . he be not of those who join god with god . the sabbath be only ordain for those who differ about it and of a truth thy lord will decide between them on the day of resurrection a to the subject of their dispute . summon thou to the way of thy lord with wisdom and with kindly warn dispute with them in the kind manner thy lord best knoweth those who stray from his way and he best knoweth those who have yield to his guidance . if ye make reprisal then make them to the same extent that ye be injure but if ye can endure patiently best will it be for the patiently endure . endure then with patience . but thy patient endurance must be seek in none but god . and be not grieve about the infidel and be not trouble at their device for god be with those who fear him and do good deed . see sura lxxxiv . x. n. ex gutta spermatis . pirke aboth iii . unde venisti ? ex gutt foetid . this verse be say to be an allusion to a difficulty propose by an idolatrous arab who bring a carious leg bone to muhammad and ask whether it could be restore to life . compare a similar argument for the resurrection tr . sanhedrin fol . a. lit . there be beauty in them for you i.e . they win you credit . in allusion to gen. xi . . an arabian idol . p . xxxv . . lit . the family of the admonition i.e . jew and christian verse in the pentateuch and gospel . the idolatrous arabian regarded angel a female and daughter of god . but their own preference be always for male offspring . thus rabbinism teach that to be a woman be a great degradation . the modern jew say in his daily prayer fol . bless art thou o lord our god ! king of the universe ! who hath not make me a woman . see sura lxxxi . p. . it be say that the only occasion on which othman ever shed a tear be when his little daughter whom he be bury alive wipe the dust of the grave earth from his beard . lit . the likeness of evil to those etc . the arab be curious in and fond of honey mecca alone affords eight or nine variety green white red and brown . burton 's pilgr . iii . . ex . xx . . the slave and the dumb in verse following be the idol . see sura xcvii . iii . and n. p. . gabriel . this passage have be suppose to refer to salman the persian . he do not however embrace islam till a much later period at medina . n ld . p. . mr. muir think that it may refer to suheib son of sinan the first fruit of greece a muhammad style him who while yet a boy have be carry off by some greek a a slave from mesopotamia to syria bring by a party of the beni kalb and sell to abdallah ibn jodda ' n of mecca . he become rich and embrace islam . dr. sprenger think the person allude to may have be addas a monk of nineveh who have settle at mecca . life of . p. . this be to be understood of the persecution endure by the more humble and needy muslim by their townspeople of mecca . from mecca to medina i.e . the mohadjers to whom also verse refers . both passage therefore be of a later date than the rest of this sura . thus n ldeke . sprenger however life p. explain this passage of the seven slave purchase and manumit by abu bekr . they have be torture for profess islam shortly after muhammad assume the prophetic office . mecca . lit . the garment . comp . sura lxxxix . vi . . comp . sura lxxxix . vi . . this verse as well a the following and verse be probably add at medina . antistes . maracci . or the text may be literally render abraham be a people i.e . the people of abraham from whom the idolatrous koreisch pretend to derive their origin . ar . a hanyf . accord to a tradition in waquidi fol . zaid who die only five year before muhammad receive his first inspiration and undoubtedly prepare the way for many of his subsequent announcement adopt this term at the instance of a christian and a jew who exhort him to become a hanyf . zaid have at this time renounce idolatry and be unable to receive either judaism or christianity what say he be a hanyf ? they both tell him it be the religion of abraham who worship nothing but god . on this zaid exclaim o god i bear witness that i follow the religion of abraham . the root whence hanyf be derive mean generally to turn from good to bad or vice vers and be equivalent to the verb convert and pervert . all muhammadan commentator explain this verse a a prohibition to avenge the death of hamza on the meccans with too great severity . sura . the greek lxxiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . the greek have be defeat in a land hard by but after their defeat they shall defeat their foe in a few year . first and last be the affair with god . and on that day shall the faithful rejoice in the aid of their god he aideth whom he will and he be the mighty the merciful . it be the promise of god to his promise god will not be untrue but most men know it not . they know the outward shews of this life present but of the next life be they careless . have they not consider within themselves that god hath not create the heaven and the earth and all that be between them but for a serious end and for a fixed term ? but truly most men believe not that they shall meet their lord . have they never journey through the land and see what hath be the end of those who be before them ? mighty be they than these in strength and they break up the land and dwelt in it in great number than they who dwell there now and their apostle come to them with proof of their mission and it be not god who would wrong them but they wrong themselves . then evil be the end of the evil doer because they have treat our sign a lie and laugh them to scorn . god bringth forth the creation then causeth it to return again then to him shall ye come back . and on the day when the hour shall arrive the guilty shall be strike dumb for despair and they shall have no intercessor from among the god whom they have join with god and they shall deny the god they join with him . and on that day when the hour shall arrive shall men be separate one from another and a for those who shall have believe and do the thing that be right they shall enjoy themselves in a flowery mead but a for those who shall not have believe but treat our sign and the meeting of the next life a lie they shall be give over to the torment . glorify god therefore when ye reach the evening and when ye rise at morn and to him be praise in the heaven and on the earth and at twilight and when ye rest at noon . he bringeth forth the live out of the dead and he bringeth forth the dead out of the living and he quickeneth the earth when dead . thus be it that ye too shall be bring forth . and one of his sign it be that he hath create you out of dust then lo ! ye become men who spread themselves far and wide and one of his sign it be that he hath created wife for you of your own specie that ye may dwell with them and hath put love and tenderness between you . herein truly be sign for those who reflect . and among his sign be the creation of the heaven and of the earth and your variety of tongue and colour . herein truly be sign for all men . and of his sign be your sleep by night and by day and your going in quest of his bounty . herein truly be sign to those who hearken . and of his sign be that he sheweth you the lightning a source of awe and hope and that he sendeth down rain from the heaven and giveth life by it to the earth when dead . herein truly be sign to those who understand . and of his sign also one be that the heaven and the earth stand firm at his bidding hereafter when with one summons he shall summon you out of the earth lo ! forth shall ye come . his whatsoever be in the heaven and on the earth all be obedient to him . and he it be who bringeth a creature forth then causeth it to return again and to him be this most easy . to whatever be lofty in heaven and earth be he to be liken and he be the mighty the wise . he setteth forth to you an instance drawn from yourselves . have ye among the slave whom your right hand have win any partner in what we have bestow on you so that ye share alike ? fear ye them a ye fear each other ? thus make we our sign clear to men of understand . no ye do not . but the wicked devoid of knowledge follow their own desire and those whom god shall mislead who shall guide and who shall be their protector ? set thou thy face then a a true convert towards the faith which god hath make and for which he hath make man . no change be there in the creation of god . this be the right faith but the great part of men know it not . and be ye turn to him and fear him and observe prayer and be not of those who unite god with god of those who have split up their religion and have become sect where every party rejoices in what be their own . when some evil toucheth men they turn to their lord and call upon him then when he hath make them taste his mercy lo a part of them join other god with their lord ungrateful for our favour ! enjoy yourselves then . but in the end ye shall know your folly . have we send down to them any mandate which speaketh in favour of what they join with god ? when we cause men to taste mercy they rejoice in it but if for that which their hand have aforetime wrought evil befall them they despair . see they not that god bestoweth full supply on whom he pleaseth and giveth sparingly to whom he pleaseth ? sign truly be there herein to those who believe . to him who be of kin to thee give his due and to the poor and to the wayfarer this will be best for those who seek the face of god and with them it shall be well . whatever ye put out at usury to increase it with the substance of others shall have no increase from god but whatever ye shall give in alms a seek the face of god shall be double to you . it be god who create you then feed you then will cause you to die then will make you alive . be there any of your companion god who can do aught of these thing ? praise be to him ! and far be he exalt above the god they join with him . destruction hath appear by land and by sea on account of what men 's hand have work that it might make them taste somewhat of the fruit of their doings that haply they might turn to god . say journey through the land and see what hath be the end of those who be before you ! the great part of them join other god with god . set thy face then towards the right faith ere the day come which none can hinder god from bring on . on that day shall they be part in twain unbeliever on whom shall be their unbelief and they who have work righteousness and prepared for themselves couch of repose that of his bounty he may reward those who have believe and wrought righteousness for the unbeliever he loveth not . and one of his sign be that he sendeth the wind with glad tidings of rain both that he may cause you to taste his mercy and that ship may sail at his command that out of his bounty ye may seek wealth and that haply ye may render thanks . we have send apostle before thee to their people and they present themselves to them with clear proof of their mission and while it behove u to succour the faithful we take vengeance on the guilty . it be god who sendeth the wind and uplifteth the cloud and a he pleaseth spreadeth them on high and breaketh them up and thou mayest see the rain issue from their midst and when he poureth it down on such of his servant a he pleaseth lo ! they be fill with joy even they who before it be send down to them be in mute despair . look then at the trace of god 's mercy how after it death he quickeneth the earth ! this same god will surely quicken the dead for to all thing his might be equal . yet should we send a blast and should they see their harvest turn yellow they would afterwards shew themselves ungrateful . thou canst not make the dead to hear neither canst thou make the deaf to hear the call when they withdraw and turn their back neither canst thou guide the blind out of their error in sooth none shalt thou make to hear save him who shall believe in our sign for they be resign to our will muslims . it be god who hath create you in weakness then after weakness hath give you strength then after strength weakness and grey hair he createth what he will and he be the wise the powerful . and on the day whereon the hour shall arrive the wicked will swear that not above an hour have they wait even so do they utter lie on earth but they to whom knowledge and faith have be give will say ye have wait in accordance with the book of god till the day of resurrection for this be the day of the resurrection but ye know it not . on that day their plea shall not avail the wicked neither shall they again be bid to seek acceptance with god . and now have we set before men in this koran every kind of parable yet if thou bring them a single verse of it the infidel will surely say ye be only utterer of vain thing . it be thus that god hath seal up the heart of those who be devoid of knowledge . but do thou muhammad bear with patience for true be the promise of god and let not those who have no firm belief unsettle thee . see sura lxviii . p. . by the persian probably in palestine in the th year before the hejira under khosrou parviz . ann . . see gibbon 's decline and fall ch . xlvi . the sympathy of muhammad would naturally be enlist on the side of the christian rather than on that of the idolatrous fire worshipper with whom islam have nothing in common . this allude to the defeat of the persian by heraclius ann . . the muhammadan appeal to this passage a a clear proof of the inspiration of their prophet . but it should be bear in mind that the vowel point of the consonant of the arabic word for defeat in verse not be originally write and depend entirely on the speaker or reader would make the prophecy true in either event accord a the verb receive an active or passive sense in pronunciation . the whole passage be probably construct with the view of it prove true in any event . comp . psalm xc . in the arabic version . the talmudists apply the description of god of the sender of the rain to the divine command which shall cause the dead to arise . taanith init . . lit . from yourselves i.e . either from the side of adam or of human and of no other kind of be . beidh . by worship idol conjointly with god . lit . a a hanyf . see note on the precede sura p. . peculiar to and distinctive of themselves . muhammad have a just appreciation of that narrowness of mind which be the characteristic of sectarian in every age who seize upon some one point of truth through inability to grasp the whole in it due proportion and bearing and glory in it a if the fragment be the whole . comp . p . xv . . lit . which none can put back from god . sura xi . houd . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . ra . a book whose verse be stablished in wisdom and then set forth with clearness from the wise the all inform that ye worship none other than god verily i come to you from him charge with warning announcement and that ye seek pardon of your lord and then be turn unto him ! goodly enjoyment will he give you to enjoy until a destined time and his favour will he bestow on every one who deserve his favour . but if ye turn away then verily i fear for you the chastisement of the great day . unto god shall ye return and over all thing be he potent . do they not doubly fold up their breast that they may hide themselves from him ? but when they enshroud themselves in their garment doth he not know alike what they conceal and what they shew ? for he knoweth the very inmost of their breast . there be no move thing on earth whose nourishment dependeth not on god he knoweth it haunt and final resting place all be in the clear book . and he it be who hath make the heaven and the earth in six day his throne have stand ere this upon the water that he might make proof which of you would excel in work . and if thou say after death ye shall surely be raise again the infidel will certainly exclaim this be nothing but pure sorcery . and if we defer their chastisement to some definite time they will exclaim what keepeth it back ? what ! will it not come upon them on a day when there shall be none to avert it from them ? and that at which they scoff shall enclose them in on every side . and if we cause man to taste our mercy and then deprive him of it verily he be despair ungrateful . and if after trouble hath befall him we cause him to taste our favour he will surely exclaim the evil be pass away from me . verily he be joyous boastful . except those who endure with patience and do the thing that be right these doth pardon await and a great reward . perhaps thou wilt suppress a part of what hath be reveal to thee and wilt be distress at heart l they say if a treasure be not send down to him or an angel come with him . . . . but thou art only a warner and god hath all thing in his charge . if they shall say the koran be his own device say then bring ten sura like it of your devising and call whom ye can to your aid beside god if ye be men of truth . but if they answer you not then know that it hath be send down to you in the wisdom of god only and that there be no god but he . be ye then muslim ? those who choose this present life and it bravery we will recompense for their work therein they shall have nothing less therein than their desert . these be they for whom there be nothing in the next world but the fire all that they have work in this life shall come to nought and vain shall be all their doings . with such can they be compare who rest upon clear proof from their lord ? to whom a witness from him reciteth the koran and who be precede by the book of moses a guide and mercy ? these have faith in it but the partisan of idolatry who believe not in it be menace with the fire ! have thou no doubt about that book for it be the very truth from thy lord . but most men will not believe . who be guilty of a great injustice than he who inventeth a lie concern god ? they shall be set before their lord and the witness shall say these be they who make their lord a liar . shall not the malison of god be on these unjust doer who pervert others from the way of god and seek to make it crooked and believe not in a life to come ? god 's power on earth they shall not weaken and beside god they have no protector ! double shall be their punishment ! they be not able to hearken and they could not see . these be they who have lose their own soul and the deity of their own devising have vanish from them there be no doubt but that in the next world they shall be the lost one . but they who shall have believe and do the thing that be right and humble them before their lord shall be the inmate of paradise therein shall they abide for ever . these two sort of person resemble the blind and deaf and the seeing and hear shall these be compare a alike ? ah ! do ye not comprehend ? we send noah of old unto his people verily i come to you a plain admonisher that ye worship none but god . verily i fear for you the punishment of a grievous day . then say the chief of his people who believe not we see in thee but a man like ourselves and we see not who have follow thee except our mean one of hasty judgment nor see we any excellence in you above ourselves nay we deem you liar . he say o my people ! how think you ? if i be upon a clear revelation from my lord who hath bestow on me mercy from himself to which ye be blind can we force it on you if ye be averse from it ? and o my people ! i ask you not for rich my reward be of god alone and i will not drive away those who believe that they shall meet their lord but i see that ye be an ignorant people . and o my people ! be i to drive them away who shall help me against god ? will ye not therefore consider ? and i tell you not that with me be the treasure of god nor do i say ' i know the thing unseen ' nor do i say ' i be an angel ' nor do i say of those whom you eye with scorn no good thing will god bestow on them god best knoweth what be in their mind for then should i be one of those who act unjustly . they say o noah ! already hast thou dispute with u and multiply dispute with u bring then upon u what thou hast threaten if thou be of those who speak truth . he say god will bring it on you at his sole pleasure and it be not you who can weaken him nor if god desire to mislead you shall my counsel profit you though i fain would counsel you aright . he be your lord and unto him shall ye be bring back . do they say this koran be of his own devising ? say on me be my own guilt if i have devise it but i be clear of that whereof ye be guilty . and it be reveal unto noah . verily none of thy people shall believe save they who have believe already therefore be not thou grieve at their doings . but build the ark under our eye and after our revelation and plead not with me for the evil doer for they be to be drown . so he build the ark and whenever the chief of his people pass by they laugh him to scorn say he though ye laugh at u we truly shall laugh at you even a ye laugh at u and in the end ye shall know on whom a punishment shall come that shall shame him and on whom shall light a lasting punishment . thus be it until our sentence come to pass and the earth 's surface boil up . we say carry into it one pair of every kind and thy family except him on whom sentence hath before be pass and those who have believe . but there believe not with him except a few . and he say embark ye therein . in the name of god be it course and it riding at anchor ! truly my lord be right gracious merciful . and the ark move on with them amid wave like mountain and noah call to his son for he be apart embark with u o my child ! and be not with the unbeliever . he say i will betake me to a mountain that shall secure me from the water . he say none shall be secure this day from the decree of god save him on whom he shall have mercy . and a wave pass between them and he be among the drown . and it be say o earth ! swallow up thy water and cease o heaven ! and the water abate and the decree be fulfil and the ark rest upon al djoudi and it be say avaunt ! ye tribe of the wicked ! and noah call on his lord and say o lord ! verily my son be of my family and thy promise be true and thou art the most just of judge . he say o noah ! verily he be not of thy family in this thou actest not aright . ask not of me that whereof thou knowest nought i warn thee that thou become not of the ignorant . he say to thee verily o my lord do i repair l i ask that of thee wherein i have no knowledge unless thou forgive me and be merciful to me i shall be one of the lost . it be say to him o noah ! debark with peace from u and with blessing on thee and on people to be bear from those who be with thee but a for other and unbelieving people we will give them their good thing in this world but hereafter shall a grievous punishment light on them from u . this be one of the secret history we reveal it unto thee neither thou nor thy people know it ere this be patient thou verily there be a prosperous issue to the god fearing . and unto ad we send their brother houd . he say o my people worship god . you have no god beside him . ye only devise a lie . o my people ! i ask of you no recompense for this my recompense be with him only who hath make me . will ye not then understand ? o my people ! ask pardon of your lord then be turn unto him he will send down the heaven upon you with copious rain and with strength on strength will he increase you only turn not back with deed of evil . they say o houd thou hast not bring u proof of thy mission we will not abandon our god at thy word and we believe thee not . we can only say that some of our god have smite thee with evil . say he now take i god to witness and do ye also witness that i be clear of your join other god to god . conspire then against me all of you and delay me not . for i trust in god my lord and yours . no single beast be there which he holdeth not by it forelock . right truly be the way in which my lord goeth . but if ye turn back i have already declare to you my message . and my lord will put another people in your place nor shall ye at all hurt him verily my lord keepeth watch over all thing . and when our doom come to be inflict we rescue houd and those who have like faith with him by our special mercy we rescue them from the rigorous chastisement . these men of ad gainsaid the sign of their lord and rebel against his messenger and follow the bidding of every proud contumacious person . follow therefore be they in this world by a curse and in the day of the resurrection it shall be say to them what ! do not ad disbelieve their lord ? be not ad the people of houd cast far away ? and unto themoud we send their brother saleh o my people ! say he worship god you have no other god than him . he hath raise you up out of the earth and hath give you to dwell therein . ask pardon of him then and be turn unto him for thy lord be nigh ready to answer . they say o saleh ! our hope be fix on thee till now forbiddest thou u to worship what our father worship ? truly we misdoubt the faith to which thou callest u a suspicious . he say o my people ! what think ye ? if i have a revelation from my lord to support me and if he hath shew his mercy on me who could protect me from god if i rebel against him ? ye would only confer on me increase of ruin . o my people ! this be the she camel of god and a sign unto you . let her go at large and feed in god 's earth and do her no harm l a speedy punishment overtake you . yet they hamstring her then say he yet three day more enjoy yourselves in your dwelling this menace will not prove untrue . and when our sentence come to pass we rescue saleh and those who have a like faith with him by our mercy from ignominy on that day . verily thy lord be the strong the mighty ! and a violent tempest overtook the wicked and they be find in the morning prostrate in their dwelling a though they have never abide in them . what ! do not themoud disbelieve his lord ? be not themoud utterly cast off ? and our messenger come formerly to abraham with glad tidings . peace say they . he say peace and he tarry not but bring a roasted calf . and when he saw that their hand touch it not he misliked them and grow fearful of them . they say fear not for we be send to the people of lot . his wife be stand by and laughed and we announce isaac to her and after isacc jacob . she say ah woe be me ! shall i bear a son when i be old and when this my husband be an old man ? this truly would be a marvellous thing . they say marvellest thou at the command of god ? god 's mercy and blessing be upon you o people of this house praise and glory be his due ! and when abraham 's fear have pass away and these glad tidings have reach him he plead with u for the people of lot . verily abraham be right kind pitiful relenting . o abraham ! desist from this for already hath the command of thy god go forth a for them a punishment not to be avert be come on them . and when our messenger come to lot he be grieve for them and he be too weak to protect them and he say this be a day of difficulty . and his people come rush on towards him for aforetime have they work this wickedness . he say o my people ! these my daughter will be purer for you fear god and put me not to shame in my guest . be there no rightminded man among you ? they say thou knowest now that we need not thy daughter and thou well knowest what we require . he say would that i have strength to resist you or that i could find refuge with some powerful chieftain . the angel say o lot ! verily we be the messenger of thy lord they shall not touch thee depart with thy family in the dead of night and let not one of you turn back a for thy wife on her shall light what shall light on them . verily that with which they be threaten be for the morning . be not the morning near ? and when our decree come to be execute we turn those city upside down and we rain down upon them block of claystone one after another mark by thy lord himself . nor be they far distant from the wicked meccans . and we send to madian their brother shoaib . he say o my people ! worship god no other god have you than he give not short weight and measure i see indeed that ye revel in good thing but i fear for you the punishment of the all encompassing day . o my people ! give weight and measure with fairness purloin not other men 's good and perpetrate not injustice on the earth with corrupt practice a residue the gift of god will be best for you if ye be believer but i be not a guardian over you . they say to him o shoaib ! be it thy prayer which enjoin that we should leave what our father worship or that we should not do with our substance a pleaseth u ? thou forsooth art the mild the right director ! he say o my people ! how think ye ? if i have a clear revelation from my lord and if from himself he hath supply me with goodly supply and if i will not follow you in that which i myself forbid you do i seek aught but your amendment so far a in me lieth ? my sole help be in god . in him do i trust and to him do i turn me . o my people ! let not your opposition to me draw down upon you the like of that which befel the people of noah or the people of houd or the people of saleh and the abode of the people of lot be not far distant from you ! seek pardon of your lord and be turn unto him verily my lord be merciful love . they say o shoaib ! we understand not much of what thou sayest and we clearly see that thou art powerless among u be it not for thy family we would have surely stone thee nor couldest thou have prevail against u . he say o my people ! think ye more highly of my family than of god ? cast ye him behind your back with neglect ? verily my lord be round about your action . and o my people ! act with what power ye can for my hurt i verily will act and ye shall know on whom shall light a punishment that shall disgrace him and who be the liar . await ye verily i will await with you . and when our decree come to pass we deliver shoaib and his companion in faith by our mercy and a violent tempest overtook the wicked and in the morning they be find prostrate in their house a if they have never dwell in them . be not madian sweep off even a themoud have be sweep off ? of old sent we moses with our sign and with incontestable power to pharaoh and to his noble who follow the behest of pharaoh and unrighteous be pharaoh 's behest . he shall head his people on the day of the resurrection and cause them to descend into the fire and wretched the descent by which they shall descend ! they be follow by a curse in this world and in the day of the resurrection wretched the gift that shall be give them ! such the history of the city which we relate to thee . some of them be stand others mown down we deal not unfairly by them but they deal not fairly by themselves and their god on whom they call beside god avail them not at all when thy lord 's behest come to pass . they do but increase their ruin . such be thy lord 's grasp when he lay that grasp on the city that have be wicked . verily his grasp be afflictive terrible ! herein truly be a sign for him who feareth the punishment of the latter day . that shall be a day unto which mankind shall be gather together that shall be a day witness by all creature . nor do we delay it but until a time appoint . when that day shall come no one shall speak a word but by his leave and some shall be miserable and others bless . and a for those who shall be consign to misery their place the fire ! therein shall they sigh and bemoan them therein shall they abide while the heaven and the earth shall last unless thy lord shall will it otherwise verily thy lord doth what he chooseth . and a for the bless one their place the garden ! therein shall they abide while the heaven and the earth endure with whatever imperishable boon thy lord may please to add . have thou no doubt therefore concern that which they worship they worship but what their father worship before them we will surely assign them their portion with nothing lack . of old give we moses the book and they fell to variance about it . if a decree of respite have not go forth from thy lord there have surely be a decision between them . thy people also be in suspicious doubt about the koran . and truly thy lord will repay every one accord to their work ! for he be well aware of what they do . go straight on then a thou hast be command and he also who hath turn to god with thee and let him transgress no more . he beholdeth what ye do . lean not on the evil doer lest the fire lay hold on you . ye have no protector save god and ye shall not be help against him . and observe prayer at early morning at the close of the day and at the approach of night for the good deed drive away the evil deed . this be a warning for those who reflect and persevere steadfastly for verily god will not suffer the reward of the righteous to perish . be the generation before you endue with virtue and who forbid corrupt doings on the earth more than a few of those whom we deliver ? but the evil doer follow their selfish pleasure and become transgressor . and thy lord be not one who would destroy those city unjustly when it inhabitant be righteous . have thy lord please he would have make mankind of one religion but those only to whom thy lord hath grant his mercy will cease to differ . and unto this hath he create them for the word of thy lord shall be fulfil i will wholly fill hell with djinn and men . and all that we have relate to thee of the history of these apostle be to confirm thy heart thereby . by these hath the truth reach thee and a monition and warn to those who believe . but say to those who believe not act a ye may and can we will act our part and wait ye we verily will wait . to god belong the secret thing of the heaven and of the earth all thing return to him worship him then and put thy trust in him thy lord be not regardless of your doings . see sura lxviii . p. . or will bestow his grace on every gracious one or will bestow his abundance on every one who hath abundance of merit . the difficulty of render this passage arise from the word fadhl which mean merit a apply to man favour a apply to god . that be before the creation . precisely the same statement occur in raschi on gen. i. also in the modern catechism . tsenah ur'enak b'noth tsion authoritatively put forth by the polish and german talmudist rabbins . at the first creation of heaven and earth . . . the throne of glory of the bless god stood in the air above the water . comp . p . civ . . men heaven and earth . comp . tr . aboth v. mischna . comp . verse and sura xci . ii . . it should be observe that the challenge in these passage be not to produce a book which shall equal the koran in point of poetry or rhetoric but in the importance of it subject matter with reference to the divine unity the future retribution etc . upon these topic muhammad well know that he have preoccupy the ground . and we may infer from the fragment of the revelation of musailima and saj h hisam . attab ri ed . kosegarten i. tab . ag ni which be mere imitation of the koran that he felt this to be the case . they laugh and jeer at him in their word . midr . tanchuma . the passage job xii . refers to the righteous noah who teach them and spake to them word severe a flame but they scorn him and say 'old man ! for what purpose be this ark ? ' sanhedr . . comp . midr . rabbah on gen. and on eccl . ix . . or oven accord to others reservoir . geiger think that the expression the oven boil up may be a figurative mode of express the rabbinic idea that the generation of the deluge be punish by hot water . rosch . haschanah sanhedr . . comp . weil 's legenden p. . the monte gordyoei perhaps . accord to another reading he hath do amiss . the origin of this story be probably gen. ix . . a prophet so far a we know of muhammad 's own invention unless muir 's conjecture be admit that he be a christian or jewish missionary whose adventure and persecution be recast into this form . the name may have be suggest by methusaleh upon whose piety the midrasch enlarge . that be we have intend to make thee our chief . beidh . thus in contradiction to gen. xviii . the rabbins comp . tr . baba mezia fol . they make a though they eat . or menstrua passa est in token of the possibility of her bear a child . lit . his arm be straiten concern them . lit . column . with the name it be say of the person each should strike . see sura lvi . xxvi . . that be after give fair measure . seizure for punishment . hence the punishment itself . in the late period of his life muhammad attribute his gray hair to the effect produce upon him by this sura and it sister . while abu bekr and omar sat in the mosque at medina muhammad suddenly come upon them from the door of one of his wife ' house . . . . and abu bekr say ah ! thou for whom i would sacrifice father and mother white hair be hasten upon thee ! and the prophet raise up his beard with his hand and gaze at it and abu bekr 's eye fill with tear . yes say muhammad h d and it sister have hasten my white hair . and what ask abu bekr be it sister ? the inevitable sura lvi . and the blow sura ci . . kit b al wackidi p. ap . muir . sura xiv . abraham on whom be peace lxxvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . ra . this book have we send down to thee that by their lord 's permission thou mayest bring men out of darkness into light into the path of the mighty the glorious of god to whom belongeth whatever be in the heaven and whatever be on the earth and woe ! for their terrible punishment to the infidel who love the life that now be above that which be to come and mislead from the way of god and seek to make it crooked . these be in a far go error . and in order that he might speak plainly to them we have not send any apostle save with the speech of his own people but god misleadeth whom he will and whom he will he guideth and he be the mighty the wise . of old do we send moses with our sign and say to him bring forth thy people from the darkness into the light and remind them of the day of god . verily in this be sign for every patient grateful person when moses say to his people remember the kindness of god to you when he rescue you from the family of pharaoh who lay on you a cruel affliction slaughter your male child and suffer only your female to live . in this be a sore trial from your lord and when your lord cause it to be hear that if we render thanks then will i surely increase you more and more but if ye be thankless . . . . verily right terrible my chastisement . and moses say if ye and all who be on the earth be thankless yet truly god be pass rich and worthy of all praise . hath not the story reach you of those who be before you the people of noah and ad and themoud and of those who live after them ? none knoweth them but god . when their prophet come to them with proof of their mission they put their hand on their mouth and say in sooth we believe not your message and in sooth of that to which you bid u we be in doubt a of a thing suspicious . their prophet say be there any doubt concerning god maker of the heaven and of the earth who calleth you that he may pardon your sin and respite you until an appoint time ? they say ye be but men like u fain would ye turn u from our father ' worship . bring u therefore some clear proof . their apostle say to them we be indeed but men like you . but god bestoweth favour on such of his servant a he pleaseth and it be not in our power to bring you any special proof but by the leave of god . in god therefore let the faithful trust . and why should we not put our trust in god since he hath already guide u in our way . we will certainly bear with constancy the harm you would do to u . in god let the trustful trust . and they who believe not say to their apostle forth from our land will we surely drive you or to our religion shall ye return . then their lord reveal to them we will certainly destroy the wicked doer and we shall certainly cause you to dwell in the land after them . this for him who dreadeth the appearance at my judgment seat and who dreadeth my menace ! then seek they help from god and every proud rebellious one perish hell be before him and of tainted water shall he be make to drink he shall sup it and scarce swallow it for loathe and death shall assail him on every side but he shall not die and before him shall be see a grievous torment . a likeness of those who believe not in their lord . their work be like ash which the wind scattereth on a stormy day no advantage shall they gain from their work . this be the far go wander . seest thou not that in truth hath god create the heaven and the earth ? be such his pleasure he could make you pass away and cause a new creation to arise . and this would not be hard for god . all mankind shall come forth before god and the weak shall say to the men of might verily we be your follower will ye not then relieve u of some part of the vengeance of god ? they shall say if god have guide u we surely have guide you . it be now all one whether we be impatient or endure with patience . we have no escape . and after doom hath be give satan shall say verily god promise you a promise of truth i too make you a promise but i deceive you . yet i have no power over you but i only call you and ye answer me . blame not me then but blame yourselves i can not aid you neither can ye aid me . i never believe that i be his equal with whom ye join me . a for the evil doer a grievous torment doth await them . but they who shall have believe and do the thing that be right shall be bring into garden beneath which the river flow therein shall they abide for ever by the permission of their lord their greeting therein shall be peace . seest thou not to what god likeneth a good word ? to a good tree it root firmly fix and it branch in the heaven yield it fruit in all season by the will of it lord . god setteth forth these similitude to men that haply they may reflect . and an evil word be like an evil tree tear up from the face of the earth and without strength to stand . those who believe shall god stablish by his steadfast word both in this life and in that which be to come but the wicked shall he cause to err god doth his pleasure . hast thou not behold those who repay the goodness of god with infidelity and sink their people into the abode of perdition hell ? therein shall they be burn and wretched the dwelling ! they set up compeer with god in order to mislead man from his way . say enjoy your pleasure yet awhile but assuredly your go hence shall be into the fire . speak to my servant who have believe that they observe prayer and give alms of that with which we have supply them both privately and openly ere the day come when there shall be neither traffic nor friendship . it be god who hath create the heaven and the earth and sendeth down water from the heaven and so bringeth forth the fruit for your food and he hath subject to you the ship so that by his command they pass through the sea and he hath subject the river to you and he hath subject to you the sun and the moon in their constant course and he hath subject the day and the night to you of everything which ye ask him giveth he to you and if ye would reckon up the favour of god ye can not count them ! surely man be unjust ungrateful ! abraham say o lord make this land secure and turn aside me and my child from serve idol for many men o my lord have they lead astray . but whosoever shall follow me he truly shall be of me and whosoever shall disobey me . . . . thou truly art gracious merciful . o our lord ! verily i have settle some of my offspring in an unfruitful valley nigh to thy holy house o our lord that they may strictly observe prayer ! make thou therefore the heart of men to yearn toward them and supply them with fruit that they may be thankful . o our lord ! thou truly knowest what we hide and what we bring to light nought on earth or in heaven be hide from god . praise be to god who hath give me in my old age ismael and isaac ! my lord be the hearer of prayer . lord ! grant that i and my posterity may observe prayer . o our lord ! and grant this my petition . o our lord ! forgive me and my parent and the faithful on the day wherein account shall be take . think thou not that god be regardless of the deed of the wicked . he only respiteth them to the day on which all eye shall stare up with terror they hasten forward in fear their head upraise in supplication their look rivet and their heart a blank . warn men therefore of the day when the punishment shall overtake them and when the evil doers shall say o our lord ! respite u yet a little while to thy call will we make answer thine apostle will we follow . do ye not once swear that no change should befal you ? yet ye dwelt in the dwelling of those who be the author of their undoing and it be make plain to you how we have deal with them and we hold them up to you a example . they plot their plot but god could master their plot even though their plot have be so powerful a to move the mountain . think not then that god will fail his promise to his apostle aye ! god be mighty and vengeance be his . on the day when the earth shall be change into another earth and the heaven also men shall come forth unto god the only the victorious . and thou shalt see the wicked on that day link together in chain their garment of pitch and fire shall enwrap their face that god may reward every soul a it deserveth verily god be prompt to reckon . this be a message for mankind that they may thereby be warn and that they may know that there be but one god and that men of understanding may ponder it . see sura lxxxiv . x. . lit . i truly renounce your have associate me with god heretofore . the preaching and the profession of islam . comp . p . i. . the caaba . lit . to a term near at hand . of the anciently destroyed city of themoud ad etc . lit . be unjust to their own soul . sura xii . joseph peace be on him lxxvii . mecca . iii verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . ra . these be sign of the clear book . an arabic koran have we send it down that ye might understand it . in reveal to thee this koran one of the most beautiful of narrative will we narrate to thee of which thou hast hitherto be regardless . when joseph say to his father o my father ! verily i behold eleven star and the sun and the moon behold them make obeisance to me ! he say o my son ! tell not thy vision to thy brother l they plot a plot against thee for satan be the manifest foe of man . it be thus that thy lord shall choose thee and will teach thee the interpretation of dark say and will perfect his favour on thee and on the family of jacob a of old he perfect it on thy father abraham and isaac verily thy lord be know wise ! now in joseph and his brother be sign for the enquirer when they say surely well love by our father than we who be more in number be joseph and his brother verily our father hath clearly err . slay ye joseph ! or drive him to some other land and on you alone shall your father 's face be set ! and after this ye shall live a upright person . one of them say slay not joseph but cast him down to the bottom of the well if ye do so some wayfarer will take him up . they say o our father ! why dost thou not entrust u with joseph ? indeed we mean him well . send him with u to morrow that he may enjoy himself and sport we will surely keep him safely . he say verily your take him away will grieve me and i fear l while ye be heedless of him the wolf devour him . they say surely if the wolf devour him and we so many we must in that case be weak indeed . and when they go away with him they agree to place him at the bottom of the well . and we reveal to him thou wilt yet tell them of this their deed when they shall not know thee . and they come at nightfall to their father weep . they say o our father ! of a truth we go to run race and we leave joseph with our clothes and the wolf devour him but thou wilt not believe u even though we speak the truth . and they bring his shirt with false blood upon it . he say nay but yourselves have manage this affair . but patience be seemly and the help of god be to be implore that i may bear what you tell me . and wayfarer come and send their drawer of water and he let down his bucket . good news ! say he this be a youth ! and they keep his case secret to make merchandise of him . but god know what they do . and they sell him for a paltry price for some dirhems count down and at no high rate do they value him . and he who buy him an egyptian say to his wife treat him hospitably haply he may be useful to u or we may adopt him a a son . thus do we settle joseph in the land and we instruct him in the interpretation of dark saying for god be equal to his purpose but most men know it not . and when he have reach his age of strength we bestow on him judgment and knowledge for thus do we recompense the well doer . and she in whose house he be conceive a passion for him and she shut the door and say come hither . he say god keep me ! verily my lord hath give me a good home and the injurious shall not prosper . but she long for him and he have long for her have he not see a token from his lord . thus we avert evil and defilement from him for he be one of our sincere servant . and they both make for the door and she rent his shirt behind and at the door they meet her lord . what say she shall be the recompense of him who would do evil to thy family but a prison or a sore punishment ? he say she solicit me to evil . and a witness out of her own family witness if his shirt be rent in front she speaketh truth and he be a liar but if his shirt be rent behind she lieth and he be true . and when his lord saw his shirt torn behind he say this be one of your device ! verily your device be great ! joseph ! leave this affair . and thou o wife ask pardon for thy crime for thou hast sin . and in the city the woman say the wife of the prince hath solicit her servant he hath fire her with his love but we clearly see her manifest error . and when she hear of their cabal she send to them and get ready a banquet for them and give each one of them a knife and say joseph shew thyself to them . and when they saw him they be amaze at him and cut their hand and say god keep u ! this be no man ! this be no other than a noble angel ! she say this be he about whom ye blame me . i wish him to yield to my desire but he stand firm . but if he obey not my command he shall surely be cast into prison and become one of the despised . he say o my lord ! i prefer the prison to compliance with their bidding but unless thou turn away their snare from me i shall play the youth with them and become one of the unwise . and his lord hear him and turn aside their snare from him for he be the hearer the knower . yet resolve they even after they have see the sign of his innocence to imprison him for a time . and there come into the prison with him two youth . say one of them methought in my dream that i be press grape . and the other say i dream that i be carry bread on my head of which the bird do eat . declare to u the interpretation of this for we see thou art a virtuous person . he say there shall not come to you in a dream any food wherewith ye shall be feed but i will acquaint you with it interpretation ere it come to pass to you . this be a part of that which my lord hath teach me for i have abandon the religion of those who believe not in god and who deny the life to come and i follow the religion of my father abraham and isaac and jacob . we may not associate aught with god . this be of god 's bounty towards u and towards mankind but the great part of mankind be not thankful . o my two fellow prisoner ! be sundry lord best or god the one the mighty ? ye worship beside him mere name which ye have name ye and your father for which god hath not send down any warranty . judgment belongeth to god alone . he hath bidden you worship none but him . this be the right faith but most men know it not . o my two fellow prisoner ! a to one of you he will serve wine unto his lord but a to the other he will be crucify and the bird shall eat from off his head . the matter be decree concern which ye enquire . and he say unto him who he judge would be set at large remember me with thy lord . but satan cause him to forget the remembrance of his lord so he remain some year in prison . and the king say verily i saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven lean devour and seven green ear and other wither . o noble teach me my vision if a vision ye be able to expound . they say they be confused dream nor know we aught of the unravelling of dream . and he of the twain who have be set at large say i will tell you the interpretation let me go for it . joseph man of truth ! teach u of the seven fat kine which seven lean devour and of the seven green ear and other wither that i may return to the men and that they may be inform . he say ye shall sow seven year a be your wont and the corn which ye reap leave ye in it ear except a little of which ye shall eat . then after that shall come seven grievous year which shall eat what ye have store for them except a little which ye shall have keep . then shall come after this a year in which men shall have rain and in which they shall press the grape . and the king say bring him to me . and when the messenger come to joseph he say go back to thy lord and ask him what mean the woman who cut their hand for my lord well knoweth the snare they lay . then say the prince to the woman what be your purpose when ye solicit joseph ? they say god keep u ! we know not any ill of him . the wife of the prince say now doth the truth appear . it be i who would have lead him into unlawful love and he be one of the truthful . by this say joseph may my lord know that i do not in his absence play him false and that god guideth not the machination of deceiver . yet i hold not myself clear for the heart be prone to evil save theirs on whom my lord hath mercy for gracious be my lord merciful . and the king say bring him to me i will take him for my special service . and when he have speak with him he say from this day shalt thou be with u invest with place and trust . he say set me over the granary of the land i will be their prudent keeper ! thus do we stablish joseph in the land that he might house himself therein at pleasure . we bestow our favour on whom we will and suffer not the reward of the righteous to perish . and truly the recompense of the life to come be well for those who have believe and fear god . and joseph 's brother come and go in to him and he know them but they recognise him not . and when he have provide them with their provision he say bring me your brother from your father . see ye not that i fill the measure and be the best of host ? but if ye bring him not to me then no measure of corn shall there be for you from me nor shall ye come near me . they say we will ask him of his father and we will surely do it . say he to his servant put their money into their camel pack that they may perceive it when they have return to their family haply they will come back to u . and when they return to their father they say o our father ! corn be withholden from u send therefore our brother with u and we shall have our measure and all care of him will we take . he say shall i entrust you with him otherwise than a i before entrust you with his brother ? but god be the best guardian and of those who shew compassion he be the most compassionate . and when they open their good they find their money have be return to them . they say o our father what more can we desire ? here be our money return to u we will provide corn for our family and will take care of our brother and shall receive a camel 's burden more of corn . this be an easy quantity . he say i will not send him with you but on your oath before god that ye will indeed bring him back to me unless hindrance encompass you . and when they have give him their pledge he say god be witness of what we say . and he say o my son ! enter not by one gate but enter by different gate . yet can i not help you against aught decreed by god judgment belongeth to god alone . in him put i my trust and in him let the trusting trust . and when they enter a their father have bid them it do not avert from them anything decreed of god but it only serve to satisfy a desire in the soul of jacob which he have charge them to perform for he be possess of knowledge which we have teach him but most men have not that knowledge . and when they come in to joseph he take his brother to him . he say verily i be thy brother . be not thou grieve for what they do . and when he have provide them with their provision he place his drinking cup in his brother 's camel pack . then a crier cry after them o traveller ! ye be surely thief . they turn back to them and say what be that ye miss ? we miss say they the prince 's cup . for him who shall restore it a camel 's load of corn ! i pledge myself for it . they say by god ! ye know certainly that we come not to do wrong in the land and we have not be thief . what say the egyptian shall be the recompense of him who hath steal it if ye be find liar ? they say that he in whose camel pack it shall be find be give up to you in satisfaction for it . thus recompense we the unjust . and joseph begin with their sack before the sack of his brother and then from the sack of his brother he draw it out . this stratagem do we suggest to joseph . by the king 's law he have no power to seize his brother have not god pleased . we uplift into grade of wisdom whom we will . and there be one knowing above every one else endue with knowledge . they say if he steal a brother of his hath steal heretofore . but joseph keep his secret and do not discover it to them . say he aside ye be in the bad condition . and god well knoweth what ye state . they say o prince ! verily he hath a very aged father in his stead therefore take one of u for we see that thou art a generous person . he say god forbid that we should take but him with whom our property be find for then should we act unjustly . and when they despair of benjamin they go apart for counsel . the eldest of them say know ye not how that your father hath take a pledge from you before god and how formerly ye fail in duty with regard to joseph ? i will not quit the land till my father give me leave or god decide for me for of those who decide be he the best . return ye to your father and say ' o our father ! verily thy son hath steal we bear witness only of what we know we could not guard against the unforeseen . enquire for thyself in the city where we have be and of the caravan with which we have arrive and we be surely speaker of the truth . ' he say nay ye have arrange all this among yourselves but patience be seemly god may be will bring them back to me together for he be the know the wise . and he turn away from them and say oh ! how i be grieve for joseph ! and his eye become white with grief for he bore a silent sorrow . they say by god thou wilt only cease to think of joseph when thou art at the point of death or dead . he say i only plead my grief and my sorrow to god but i know from god what ye know not go my son and seek tidings of joseph and his brother and despair not of god 's mercy for none but the unbelieving despair of the mercy of god . and when they come in to joseph they say o prince distress hath reach u and our family and little be the money that we have bring . but give u full measure and bestow it a alms for god will recompense the almsgiver . he say know ye what ye do to joseph and his brother in your ignorance ? they say canst thou indeed be joseph ? he say i be joseph and this be my brother . now hath god be gracious to u . for whoso feareth god and endureth . . . . god verily will not suffer the reward of the righteous to perish ! they say by god ! now hath god choose thee above u and we have indeed be sinner ! he say no blame be on you this day . god will forgive you for he be the most merciful of those who shew mercy . go ye with this my shirt and throw it on my father 's face and he shall recover his sight and bring me all your family . and when the caravan be depart their father say i surely perceive the smell of joseph think ye that i dote ? they say by god it be thy old mistake . and when the bearer of good tidings come he cast it on his face and jacob 's eyesight return . then he say do i not tell you that i know from god what ye know not ? they say our father ask pardon for our crime for u for we have indeed be sinner . he say i will ask your pardon of my lord for he be gracious merciful . and when they come into joseph he take his parent to him and say enter ye egypt if god will secure . and he raise his parent to the seat of state and they fell down bow themselves unto him . then say he o my father this be the meaning of my dream of old . my lord hath now make it true and he hath surely be gracious to me since he take me forth from the prison and hath brought you up out of the desert after that satan have stir up strife between me and my brother for my lord be gracious to whom he will for he be the know the wise . o my lord thou hast give me dominion and hast teach me to expound dark saying . maker of the heaven and of the earth ! my guardian art thou in this world and in the next ! cause thou me to die a muslim and join me with the just . this be one of the secret history which we reveal unto thee . thou wast not present with joseph 's brother when they conceive their design and lay their plot but the great part of men though thou long for it will not believe . thou shalt not ask of them any recompense for this message . it be simply an instruction for all mankind . and many a be the sign in the heaven and on the earth yet they will pass them by and turn aside from them and most of them believe not in god without also join other deity with him . what ! be they sure that the overwhelming chastisement of god shall not come upon them or that that hour shall not come upon them suddenly while they be unaware ? say this be my way rest on a clear proof i call you to god i and whoso followeth me and glory be to god ! i be not one of those who add other deity to him . never before thee have we send any but men choose out of the people of the city to whom we make revelation . will they not journey through the land and see what hath be the end of those who be before them ? but the mansion of the next life shall be good for those who fear god . will they not then comprehend ? when at last the apostle lose all hope and deem that they be reckon a liar our aid reach them and we deliver whom we would but our vengeance be not avert from the wicked . certainly in their history be an example for men of understanding . this be no new tale of fiction but a confirmation of previous scripture and an explanation of all thing and guidance and mercy to those who believe . see sura lxviii . p. . in no other sura beside this be one subject treat of throughout . it be recite to the first eight of the ansars who be convert and clearly prove that muhammad must have be in confidential intercourse with learned jew . the word koran be here use in the same sense a sura . muhammad be either unaware of the previous dream mention gen. xxxvii . or pass it by in silence . the captious and unbelieving koreisch . wir mussten denn zuerst das leben einb ssen . wahl . ullm . maracci . lit . your mind have make a thing seem pleasant to you . accord to gen. xxxvii . the well or pit have no water in it . some take the arabic boshra a the proper name of the person who accompany the drawer of water . the apparition of his father who say hereafter shall the name of thy brother engraven on precious stone shine on the breast of the high priest . shall thine be blot out ? tr . sotah fol . . comp . weil legenden p. n. lit . that he be imprison . an infant in the cradle . sepher hadjascher a below on v. . instead of their food through surprise at his beauty . seph . hadj . in midr . jalkut . see also midr . abkhir ib . ch . . it be curious to observe how muhammad in this and the following verse put his own doctrine and conviction into the mouth of joseph . satan induce joseph to place his confidence in man rather than in god alone in punishment of which sin the imprisonment be continue . thus midr . rabba . gen. par . . midr . jalkut ib . ch . . in gen. xli . joseph be release from prison before the interpretation of the dream . but the koran make him decline to quit it till his character be clear . accord to gen. xli . pharaoh of his own accord set joseph over his house and land . for the king to bestow . thus we read in mid . rab . on gen. par . jacob say to them enter ye not all by one gate . see also midr . jalkut ch . . thus also in the sepher hadjaschar joseph first discover himself to benjamin in opposition to gen. xlv . . comp . gen. xlii . . joseph be say by the muhammadan commentator to have steal an idol of gold belonging to his mother 's father which he break that he might not worship it . but this comment as well a the text of the koran be probably base upon some such tradition a that of midr . rabba par . he be a thief and the son of a thief comp . gen. xxxi . spoken of benjamin . that be that joseph be still alive . thus midr . tanchumah on gen. xlii . . comp . gen. xxvii . . joseph 's mother have long be dead . see gen. xxxv . . but the object of muhammad be probably to bring the event into strict accordance with the prediction of the dream . gen. xxxvii . . some however suppose that bilhah be here meant and her appearance before joseph be also assert to be the fulfilment of the dream by some of the rabbins . comp . raschi on gen. xxxvii . . lit . this be of the announcement of the thing unseen by thee muhammad . compare the manner in which the story of the creation and of moses in the mount be introduce . sura xxxviii . xxviii . . mr. muir think that muhammad must at this period while recast and work up these material have enter upon a course of wilful dissimulation and deceit although the end would justify to him the mean employ in claim inspiration for them . sura . the believer lxxviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . the revelation send down of the book be from god the almighty the all know forgiver of sin and receiver of penitence vehement in chastisement long suffer ! there be no god but he to him shall be the final gathering . none but infidel gainsay the sign of god but let not their prosperity in the land deceive thee . the people of noah and the confederate after them have bring the charge of imposture before these meccans each nation scheme against their apostle to lay violent hold on him and dispute with vain word to refute the truth . therefore do i lay violent hold on them and how great be my chastisement ! thus be it that thy lord 's sentence that inmates shall they be of the fire be accomplish upon the infidel . they who bear the throne and they who encircle it celebrate the praise of their lord and believe in him and implore forgiveness for the believer o our lord ! thou embracest all thing in mercy and knowledge forgive therefore those who turn to thee and follow thy path keep them from the pain of hell o our lord ! and bring them into the garden of eden which thou hast promise to them and to the righteous one of their father and their wife and their child for thou art the all mighty the all wise and keep them from evil for on him hast thou mercy whom on that day thou shalt keep from evil and this will be the great felicity . but to the infidel shall a voice cry surely the hatred of god be more grievous than your hatred of yourselves when ye be call to the faith and remain unbeliever . they shall say twice o our lord hast thou give u death and twice hast thou give u life and we acknowledge our sin be there no way to escape ? this hath befallen you for that when one god be proclaim to you ye believe not but when partner have be unite with him ye believe but judgment belongeth unto god the high the great . it be he who sheweth you his sign and sendeth down supply to you from heaven but none will receive warning save he who turneth to god . call then on god offer him a pure worship though the infidel abhor it . of exalted grade of the throne possess he sendeth forth the spirit at his own behest on whomsoever of his servant he pleaseth that he may warn of the day of meet the day when they shall come forth from their graf when nought that concerneth them shall be hide from god . with whom shall be the power supreme on that day ? with god the one the almighty . on that day shall every soul be recompense a it hath deserve no injustice on that day ! verily god will be swift to reckon . warn them then of the approach day when men 's heart shall rise up choke them into their throat . the evil doer shall have no friend or intercessor who shall prevail . god knoweth the deceitful of eye and what men 's breast conceal . and everything will god decide with truth but nothing shall those god whom men call on beside him decide . verily god ! the hearer the beholder he ! have they never journey in this land and see what hath be the end of those who flourish before them ? mighty be they in strength than these meccans and their trace remain in the land yet god take them in their sin and there be none to defend them against god . this because their apostle have come to them with proof of their mission and they believe not so god take them in hand for he be mighty vehement in punish . moreover we have send moses of old with our sign and with clear authority . to pharaoh and haman and karun and they say sorcerer impostor . and when he come to them from our presence with the truth they say slay the son of those who believe a he doth and save their female alive but the stratagem of the unbeliever issue only in failure . and pharaoh say let me alone that i may kill moses and let him call upon his lord i fear lest he change your religion or cause disorder to shew itself in the land . and moses say i take refuge with my lord and your lord from every proud one who believeth not in the day of reckon . and a man of the family of pharaoh who be a believer but hide his faith say will ye slay a man because he saith my lord be god when he hath already come to you with proof of his mission from your lord ? and if he be a liar on him will be his lie but if he be a man of truth part at least of what he threateneth will fall upon you . truly god guideth not him who be a transgressor a liar . o my people ! this day be the kingdom yours the eminent of the earth ! but who shall defend u from the vengeance of god if it come on u ? pharaoh say i would have you see only what i see and in a right way only will i guide you . then say he who believe o my people ! truly i fear for you the like of the day of the ally the like of the state of the people of noah and ad and themoud and of those who come after them yet god willeth not injustice to his servant . and o my people ! i indeed fear for you the day of mutual outcry the day when ye shall be turn back from the judgment into hell . no protector shall ye have then against god . and he whom god shall mislead no guide shall there be for him . moreover joseph have come to you before with clear token but ye cease not to doubt of the message with which he come to you until when he die ye say 'god will by no mean raise up an apostle after him . ' thus god misleadeth him who be the transgressor the doubter . they who gainsay the sign of god without authority have come to them be greatly hat by god and by those who believe . thus god sealeth up every proud contumacious heart . and pharaoh say o haman build for me a tower that i may reach the avenue the avenue of the heaven and may mount to the god of moses for i verily deem him a liar . and thus the evil of his doings be make fair seem to pharaoh and he turn away from the path of truth but the artifice of pharaoh end only in his ruin . and he who believe say o my people ! follow me into the right way will i guide you . o my people ! this present life be only a passing joy but the life to come be the mansion that abideth . whoso shall have work evil shall not be recompense but with it like but whoso shall have do the thing that be right whether male or female and be a believer these shall enter paradise good thing unreckoned shall they enjoy therein . and o my people ! how be it that i bid you to salvation but that ye bid me to the fire ? ye invite me to deny god and to join with him god of whom i know nothing but i invite you to the mighty the forgiving . no doubt be there that they to whom ye invite me be not to be invoke either in this world or in the world to come and that unto god be our return and that the transgressor shall be the inmate of the fire . then shall ye remember what i be say unto you and to god commit i my case verily god beholdeth his servant . so god preserve him from the evil which they have plan and the woe of the punishment encompass the people of pharaoh . it be the fire to which they shall be expose morning and evening and on the day when the hour shall arrive bring in the people of pharaoh into the severe punishment . and when they shall wrangle together in the fire the weak shall say to those who have bear themselves so proudly it be you we follow will ye therefore relieve u from aught of the fire ? and those proud one shall say verily we be all in it for now hath god judge between his servant . and they who be in the fire shall say to the keeper of hell implore your lord that he would give u ease but for one day from this torment . they shall say come not your apostle to you with the token ? they shall say yes . they shall say cry ye then aloud for help but the cry of the unbeliever shall be only in vain . assuredly in this present life will we succour our apostle and those who shall have believe and on the day when the witness shall stand forth a day whereon the plea of the evil doer shall not avail them but theirs shall be a curse and theirs the woe of the abode in hell . and of old give we moses the guidance and we make the child of israel the heritor of the book a guidance and warn to men endue with understanding . therefore be steadfast thou and patient for true be the promise of god and seek pardon for thy fault and celebrate the praise of thy lord at evening and at morning . a to those who cavil at the sign of god without authority have reach them nought be there but pride in their breast but they shall not succeed . fly thou for refuge then to god for he be the hearer the beholder . great surely than the creation of man be the creation of the heaven and of the earth but most men know it not . moreover the blind and the seeing and the evil doer and they who believe and do the thing that be right shall not be deem equal . how few ponder this ! aye the hour will surely come there be no doubt of it but most men believe it not . and your lord saith call upon me i will hearken unto you but they who turn in disdain from my service shall enter hell with shame . it be god who hath ordain the night for your rest and the day to give you light verily god be rich in bounty to men but most men render not the tribute of thanks . this be god your lord creator of all thing no god be there but he why then do ye turn away from him ? yet thus be they turn aside who gainsay the sign of god . it be god who hath give you the earth a a sure foundation and over it build up the heaven and form you and make your form beautiful and feedeth you with good thing . this be god your lord . bless then be god the lord of the world ! he be the live one . no god be there but he . call then upon him and offer him a pure worship . praise be to god the lord of the world ! say verily i be forbidden to worship what ye call on beside god after that the clear token have come to me from my lord and i be bid to surrender myself to the lord of the world . he it be who create you of the dust then of the germ of life then of thick blood then bring you forth infant then he letteth you reach your full strength and then become old men but some of you die first and reach the ordained term . and this that haply ye may understand . it be he who giveth life and death and when he decreeth a thing he only saith of it be and it be . seest thou not those who cavil at the sign of god ? how be they turn aside ! they who treat the book and the message with which we have send our sent one a a lie shall know the truth hereafter when the collar shall be on their neck and the chain to drag them into hell then in the fire shall they be burn . then shall it be say to them where be they whom ye make the object of joint worship with god ? they shall say they have vanish away from u . yea it be nought on which we call heretofore . thus god leadeth the unbeliever astray . this for you because of your unrighteous insolence and immoderate joy on earth . enter ye the portal of hell to abide therein for ever . and wretched the abode of the haughty one ! therefore be thou steadfast in patience for the promise of god be truth and whether we shall make thee see part of the woe with which we threaten them or whether we cause thee first to die unto u shall they be bring back . and we have already send apostle before thee of some we have tell thee and of others we have tell thee nothing but no apostle have the power to work a miracle unless by the leave of god . but when god 's behest cometh everything will be decide with truth and then they perish who treat it a a vain thing . it be god who hath give you the cattle that on some of them ye may ride and of some may eat other advantage too do ye derive from them and that by them ye may effect the project ye cherish in your breast for on them and on ship be ye borne and he sheweth you his sign which then of the sign of god will ye deny ? have they not journey in this land and see what hath be the end of those who flourish before them ? more be they than these in number and mightier in strength and great be the trace of their power remain in the land yet their labour avail them nothing . and when their apostle have come to them with the token of their mission they exult in what they possess of knowledge but that retribution at which they scoff encompass them . and when they behold our vengeance they say we believe in god alone and we disbelieve in the deity we once associate with him . but their faith after they have witness our vengeance profit them not . such the procedure of god with regard to his servant who flourish of old . and then the unbeliever perish . see sura xviii . p. . the cherubic being of scripture be say to be above the throne of god be . vi . beneath it ezek . x. and the mystical beast in the revelation be say to be in the midst of the throne and round about it . probably the union of life and death in the womb and the subsequent life follow by death . see sura lxxix . xxviii . . thus sura lxxix . xxviii and sura lx . xxxvi . we have a similar character introduce into the narrative . comp . act v. . these tribe no doubt constantly form temporary alliance . muhammad implies that they be confederate against their prophet . haman the favourite of ahasuerus and the enemy of the jew be thus make the vizier of pharaoh . the rabbins make this vizier to have be korah jethro or balaam . midr . jalkut on ex . ch . sect . and tr . solah fol . . see sura lxxix . xxviii . . thy remissness in propagate islam . beidh . it be possible that muhammad conscious of his ignorance of jewish history intend in this verse to screen himself from the charge of pass over the history of many of their prophet . the wealth of mecca although it still number about inhabitant as well a of arabia generally have much decline at the time of muhammad owe mainly to the navigation of the red sea under the roman dominion over egypt which of course impoverish the tribe situate on the line of the old mercantile route southward . mecca however be still to a certain extent prosperous . comp . sura lxi . xliii . . sura xxviii . the story lxxix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ta . sin . mim . these be the sign of the lucid book . we will recite to thee portion of the history of moses and pharaoh with truth for the teaching of the faithful . now pharaoh lift himself up in the earth and divide his people into party one portion of them he bring low he slew their male child and let their female only live for he be one of those who work disorder . and we be mind to shew favour to those who be bring low in the land and to make them spiritual chief and to make them pharaoh 's heir and to stablish them in the land and to make pharaoh and haman and their host the eye witness of what they dread from them . and we say by revelation to the mother of moses give him suck and if thou fearest for him launch him on the sea and fear not neither fret for we will restore him to thee and make him one of the apostle . and pharaoh 's family take him up to be a foe and a sorrow to them for sinner be pharaoh and haman and their host ! and pharaoh 's wife say joy of the eye to me and thee ! put him not to death haply he will be useful to u or we may adopt him a a son . but they know not what they do . and the heart of moses ' mother become a blank through fear and almost have she discover him but that we gird up her heart with constancy in order that she might be one of those who believe . she say to his sister follow him . and she watch him from afar and they perceive it not . and we cause him to refuse the nurse until his sister come and say shall i point out to you the family of a house that will rear him for you and will be careful of him ? so we restore him to his mother to be the joy of her eye and that she might not fret and that she might know that the promise of god be true . but most men know it not . and when he have reach his age of strength and have become a man we bestow on him wisdom and knowledge for thus do we reward the righteous . and he enter a city at the time when it inhabitant would not observe him and find therein two men fight the one of his own people the other of his enemy . and he who be of his own people ask his help against him who be of his enemy . and moses smite him with his fist and slew him . say he this be a work of satan for he be an enemy a manifest misleader . he say o my lord i have sin to mine own hurt forgive me . so god forgive him for he be the forgive the merciful . he say lord because thou hast show me this grace i will never again be the helper of the wicked . and in the city at noon he be full of fear cast furtive glance round him and lo ! the man whom he have help the day before cry out to him again for help . say moses to him thou art plainly a most depraved person . and when he would have lay violent hand on him who be their common foe he say to him o moses dost thou desire to slay me a thou slayedst a man yesterday ? thou desirest only to become a tyrant in this land and desirest not to become a peacemaker . but a man come run up from the city 's end . he say o moses of a truth the noble consult to slay thee begone then i counsel thee a a friend . so forth he go from it in fear look warily about him . he say o lord deliver me from the unjust people . and when he be journey toward madian he say haply my lord will direct me in an even path . and when he arrive at the water of madian he find at it a company of men water . and he find beside them two woman keep back their flock why do ye say he thus ? they say we shall not water till the shepherd shall have drive off for our father be very aged . so he water for them then retire to the shade and say o my lord of the good thou hast cause me to meet with i stand in need . and one of them come to him walk bashfully . say she my father calleth thee that he may pay thee wage for thy watering for u . and when he come to him and have tell him his story fear not say he thou hast escaped from an unjust people . one of them say o my father hire him for the best thou canst hire be the strong the trusty . he say truly to one of these my two daughter i desire to marry thee if for eight year thou wilt be my hired servant and if thou fulfil ten it shall be of thine own accord for i wish not to deal hardly with thee . thou wilt find me if god will one of the upright . he say be it so between me and thee whichever of the two term i fulfil there will be no injustice to me . and god be witness of what we say . and when moses have fulfil the term and be journey with his family he perceive a fire on the mountain side . he say to his family wait ye for i perceive a fire . haply i may bring you tidings from it or a brand from the fire to warm you . and when he come up to it a voice cry to him out of the bush from the right side of the valley in the sacred hollow o moses i truly be god the lord of the world throw down now thy rod . and when he saw it move a though it be a serpent he retreat and flee and return not . o moses cry the voice draw near and fear not for thou art in safety . put thy hand into thy bosom it shall come forth white but unharmed and draw back thy hand to thee without fear . these shall be two sign from thy lord to pharaoh and his noble for they be a perverse people . he say o my lord ! truly i have slay one of them therefore fear i l they slay me . my brother aaron be clear of speech than i. send him therefore with me a a help and to make good my cause for i fear l they treat me a an impostor . he say we will strengthen thine arm with thy brother and we will give power unto you both and they shall not equal you in our sign . ye twain and they who shall follow you shall gain the day . and when moses come to him with our demonstrative sign they say this be nought but magical device . we never hear the like among our sire of old . and moses say my lord best knoweth on whom he hath bestow his guidance and whose shall be the recompense of the abode of paradise . verily the wicked shall not prosper . and pharaoh say o ye noble ye have no other god that i know of but myself . burn me then haman brick of clay and build me a tower that i may mount up to the god of moses for in sooth i deem him a liar . and he and his host behave themselves proudly and unjustly on the earth and think that they should never be bring back to u . but we seize on him and his host and cast them into the sea behold then the end of the wrongful doer and we make them im m who invite to the fire of hell and on the day of resurrection they shall not be help . we follow them with a curse in this world and cover shall they be with shame on the day of resurrection . and after we have destroy the former generation we give the book of the law to moses for man 's enlightening and a guidance and a mercy that haply they might reflect . and thou wast not on the western slope of sinai when we lay his charge on moses nor wast thou one of the witness but we raise up generation after moses men whose day be lengthen neither didst thou dwell among the inhabitant of madian to rehearse to them our sign but we send apostle to them . nor wast thou on the slope of sinai when we call to moses but it be of the mercy of thy lord that thou warnest a people to whom no warner have come before thee to the intent that they should reflect and that they should not say when a calamity shall befal them for their previous handy work o our lord ! why hast thou not send an apostle to u ? then we should have follow thy sign and have be of the believer . yet when the truth come to them from our very presence they say unless the like power be give to him that be give to moses . . . . but do they not disbelieve in what of old be give to moses ? they say two work of sorcery have help each other and they say we disbelieve them both . say bring then a book from before god which shall be a good guide than these that i may follow it if ye speak the truth . and if they answer thee not then know that verily they be follow their own caprice and who goeth more widely astray than he who followeth his own caprice without guidance from god ? for god guideth not the wicked . and now have we cause our word to come unto them that they may be warn they to whom we give the scripture before it do in it believe . and when it be recite to them they say we believe in it for it be the truth from our lord . we be muslim before it come . twice shall their reward be give them for that they suffer with patience and repel evil with good and give alms out of that with which we provide them . and when they hear light discourse they withdraw from it and say our work for u and your work for you ! peace be on you ! we be not in quest of fool ! thou truly canst not guide whom thou desirest but god guideth whom he will and he best knoweth those who yield to guidance . but they say if we follow the way in which thou art guide we shall be drive from our country . but have we not establish for them a sacred secure precinct to which fruit of every kind our gift for their support be gather together ? but most of them have no knowledge . and how many city have we destroy that flourish in wanton ease ! and these their dwelling have not be inhabit since their time save by a few and it be we who become their heir . but thy lord do not destroy the city till he have send an apostle to their mother city to rehearse our sign to it people nor do we destroy the city unless it people be unjust . and all that hath be bestow on you be merely for enjoyment and pomp of this life present but that which be with god be good and more lasting . will ye not be wise ? shall he then to whom we have promise a goodly promise and who obtaineth it be a he on whom we have bestow the enjoyment of this life present and who on the day of resurrection shall be bring up for punishment ? on that day will god cry to them and say where be my companion a ye suppose them ? they on whom doom shall be justly pronounce will say o our lord ! these be they whom we lead astray we lead them astray even a we have be lead astray ourselves thou hast no cause of blame against u it be not we whom they worship . and it shall be say call now on those whom ye make god 's companion and they shall call on them but they will not answer them . and they shall see the punishment and wish that they have be guide aright . and on that day shall god call to them and say how answered ye the apostle ? but on that day they shall be too blind with confusion to give an account nor shall they ask it of one another . yet a to him who shall turn to god and believe and do the thing that be right it may come to pass that he shall be among the happy . and thy lord createth what he will and hath a free choice . but they the false god have no power to choose . glory be to god ! and high let him be exalt above those whom they associate with him . and thy lord knoweth what their breast conceal and what they bring to light . and he be god ! there be no god but he ! his all praise in this life and in the next and his the power supreme and to him shall ye be bring back ! say what think ye ? if god should enshroud you with a long night until the day of resurrection what god beside god would bring you light ? will ye not then hearken ? say what think ye ? if god should make it one long day for you until the day of resurrection what god but god could bring you the night in which to take your rest ? will ye not then see ? of his mercy he hath make for you the night that ye may take your rest in it and the day that ye may seek what ye need out of his bounteous supply and that ye may give thanks . one day god will call to them and say where be my companion a ye suppose them ? and we will bring up a witness out of every nation and say bring your proof . and they shall know that the truth be with god alone and the god of their own devise shall desert them . now korah be of the people of moses but he behave haughtily toward them for we have give him such treasure that it key would have burden a company of men of strength . when his people say to him exult not for god loveth not those who exult but seek by mean of what god hath give thee to attain the future mansion and neglect not thy part in this world but be bounteous to others a god hath be bounteous to thee and seek not to commit excess on the earth for god loveth not those who commit excess he say it hath be give me only on account of the knowledge that be in me . do he not know that god have destroy before him generation that be mighty than he in strength and have amass more abundant wealth ? but the wicked shall not be ask of their crime . and korah go forth to his people in his pomp . those who be greedy for this present life say oh that we have the like of that which hath be bestow on korah ! truly he be possess of great good fortune . but they to whom knowledge have be give say woe to you ! the reward of god be well for him who believeth and worketh righteousness and none shall win it but those who have patiently endure . and we clave the earth for him and for his palace and he have no force in the place of god to help him nor be he among those who be succour . and in the morning those who the day before have covet his lot say aha ! god enlargeth supply to whom he pleaseth of his servant or be spar . have not god be gracious to u he have cause it to cleave for u . aha ! the ungrateful can never prosper . a to this future mansion we will bestow it on those who seek not to exalt them in the earth or to do wrong and there be a happy issue for the god fearing . whoso doeth good shall have reward beyond it merit and whoso doeth evil they who do evil shall be reward only a they shall have wrought . he who hath sanction the koran to thee will certainly bring thee to thy home . say my lord best knoweth who hath guidance and who be in undoubted error . thou didst never expect that the book would be give thee . of thy lord 's mercy only hath it be send down . be not thou helpful then to the unbeliever neither let them turn thee aside from the sign of god after they have be send down to thee but bid men to thy lord and be not among those who add god to god and call not on any other god with god . there be no god but he ! everything shall perish except himself ! judgment be his and to him shall ye return ! see sura lxviii . p. . lit . im ms. comp . xci . ii . . that be this child will be a comfort to u . see sura lviii . xix . . why must the nurse be a hebrew woman ? ex . ii . . this shew that he refuse the breast of all the egyptian woman . for the holy bless be he have say shall the mouth that be to speak with me suck an unclean thing ? sotah . xii . . lit . in the time of neglect on the part of it people i.e . at the hour of the noon sleep . lit . i have act unjustly to my soul . comp . ex . ii . where the daughter be say to be seven . that be of a wife . the compact gen. xxix . between laban and jacob must have be present to the mind of muhammad when compose this tale . lit . he be cry to . accord to muhammad moses have resolve to quit madian previously to the vision of the bush which accord to ex . iii . be the real occasion . lit . thy wing . lit . kindle upon the clay . comp . lxxviii . xl . . he pharaoh say to them from the first have ye speak an untruth for lord of the world be i. i create myself and the nile a it be say ez . xxix . 'my river be mine own and i have make it for myself . ' e.t . mid . rab . on ex . par . . so that the oral tradition would be easily hand down . or yet have we send thee a an apostle to them . supply we will not believe . that be the pentateuch and the koran . the meccan jew and christian who have formerly embrace islam and could now affirm that they have always hold the same faith . this passage could not have be write after muhammad 's experience of jewish unbelief at medina . lit . the guidance with thee . but their own imagination and passion . lit . the account shall be blind or dark to them . sie werden vor best rzung keine rechenschaft geben . ullm . potestas judiciaria . mar . richteramt . ullm . ar . karun . joseph conceal three treasure in egypt one of which become know to korah . . . the key of korah 's treasure chamber be a burden for white mule . midr . jalkut on eccl . v. rich keep for the owner thereof to their hurt which may have furnish muhammad with the nucleus of this story . compare also tract . psachim . fol . a. or against god . probably to paradise accord to others to mecca a a conqueror . but this latter interpretation involve the revelation of this verse at least at medina . sura xxxix . the troop . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the book send down from god the mighty the wise ! we have send down the book to thee with the truth serve thou god then and be sincere in thy worship be not a sincere worship due to god ? but they who take others beside him a lord say we serve them only that they may bring u near to god god will judge between them and the faithful concerning that wherein they be at variance . verily god will not guide him who be a liar an infidel . have god desire to have have a son he have surely choose what he please out of his own creation . but praise be to him ! he be god the one the almighty . for truth hath he create the heaven and the earth it be of him that the night returneth upon the day and that the day returneth upon the night and he controlleth the sun and the moon so that each speedeth to an appoint goal . be he not the mighty the gracious ? he create you all of one man from whom he afterwards form his wife and of cattle he hath send down to you four pair . in the womb of your mother do he create you by creation upon creation in triple darkness . it be he who be god your lord the kingdom be his there be no god but he . how then be ye so turned aside from him ? suppose ye render him no thanks ! yet forsooth be god rich without you but he be not pleased with thanklessness in his servant yet if ye be thankful he will be please with you . the soul burden with it own work shall not be burden with the burden of another hereafter shall ye return to your lord and he will tell you of all your work for he knoweth the very secret of your breast . when some trouble toucheth a man he turneth to his lord and calleth on him yet no sooner hath he enrich him with his favour than he forgetteth him on whom he before have call and setteth up peer with god that he may beguile others from his way . say enjoy thou thyself yet a little in thine ingratitude ! but thou shalt surely be one of the inmate of the fire . shall he who observeth the hour of the night prostrate or standing in devotion heedful of the life to come and hop for the mercy of his lord . . . ? say shall they who have knowledge and they who have it not be treat alike ? in sooth men of understand only will take the warning . say o my believing servant fear your lord . for those who do good in this world there be good and broad be god 's earth verily those who endure with patience shall be repay their reward shall not be by measure . say i be bid to serve god with a sincere worship and i be bid to be the first of those who surrender themselves to him muslim . say verily i fear if i rebel against my lord the punishment of a great day . say god will i serve present him with a sincere worship and serve ye what ye choose beside him . say the loser truly will they be who shall lose their own soul and their family on the day of resurrection be not this the clear ruin ? canopy of fire shall be over them and floor of fire beneath them . with this doth god alarm his servant fear ye me then o my servant ! but good tidings be there for those who shun the worship of thagout and be turn to god . cheer then with good tidings those my servant who hearken to my word and follow it excellence . these be they whom god guideth and these be men of insight . him then on whom the sentence of punishment hath justly light him who be doom to the fire canst thou rescue ? but for those who fear their lord be storied pavilion beneath which shall the river flow it be the promise of god and god will not fail in his promise . seest thou not that god sendeth down water from heaven and guideth it along so a to form spring in the earth then bringeth forth by it corn of varied sort then causeth he it to wither and thou seest it become yellow then crumbleth it away ? lo ! herein be teach for men of insight . shall he then whose breast god hath open to islam and who hath light from his lord . . . ? but woe to those whose heart be harden against the remembrance of god ! they plainly err . the best of recital hath god send down a book in unison with itself and teach by iteration . the very skin of those who fear their lord do creep at it ! then do their skin and their heart soften at the remembrance of their lord ! this be god 's guidance by it will he guide whom he pleaseth and whom god shall mislead no guide shall there be for him . shall he who shall have nought but his own face to shelter him with from the torment of the punishment on the day of the resurrection . . . ? aye to the evil doer it shall be say taste what ye have earn . they who be before them say it be a lie but a punishment come upon them whence they look not for it and god make them taste humiliation in this present life but great surely will be the punishment of the life to come . do they but know it ! now have we set before man in this koran every kind of parable for their warn an arabic koran free from tortuous word to the intent that they may fear god . god setteth forth the comparison of a man with associate at variance among themselves and of a man devote wholly to a man . be these to be hold alike ? no praise be to god ! but the great part of them understand not . thou truly shall die o muhammad and they too shall die then at the day of resurrection ye shall wrangle with one another in the presence of your lord . and who acteth more unjustly than he who lieth of god and treateth the truth when it cometh to him a a lie ? be there not a dwell place in hell for the infidel ? but he who bringeth the truth and he who believeth it to be the truth these be the god fearing . whatever they shall desire awaiteth them with their lord ! this be the reward of the righteous that god may do away the guilt of their bad action and for their best action render them their reward . be not god all sufficient for his servant ? yet would they scare thee by their idol . but no guide shall there be for him whom god misleadeth and he whom god guideth shall have none to mislead him . be not god all mighty able to revenge ? and if thou ask them who hath create the heaven and the earth they will surely answer god . say think ye then that they on whom ye call beside god if god choose to afflict me could remove his affliction ? or if he choose to show me mercy could they withhold his mercy ? say god sufficeth me in him let the trusting trust . say o my people act your part a best ye can i too will act mine and in the end ye shall know on whom shall light a punishment that shall shame him and on whom a lasting punishment shall fall . assuredly we have send down the book to thee for man and for the end of truth . whoso shall be guide by it it will be for his own advantage and whoso shall err shall only err to his own loss . but not to thy keep be they entrust . god taketh souls unto himself at death and during their sleep those who do not die and he retaineth those on which he hath pass a decree of death but sendeth the others back till a time that be fix . herein be sign for the reflect . have they take aught beside god a intercessor ? say what ! though they have no power over anything neither do they understand ? say intercession be wholly with god his the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth ! to him shall ye be bring back hereafter ! but when the one god be name the heart of those who believe not in the life to come shrivel up but when the deity who be adore beside him be name lo ! they be fill with joy . say o god creator of the heaven and of the earth who knowest the hidden and the manifest thou shalt judge between thy servant a to the subject of their dispute . if the wicked possess all that be in the earth and as much again therewith verily they would ransom themselves with it from the pain of the punishment on the day of the resurrection and there shall appear to them from god thing they have never reckon on and their own ill deeds shall be clearly perceive by them and that fire at which they mock shall encircle them on every side . when trouble befalleth a man he crieth to u afterwards when we have vouchsafe favour to him he saith god know that i deserve it . nay it be a trial . but the great part of them know it not . the same say those who flourish before them but their deed profit them not . and their own ill deed recoil upon them . and whoso among these meccans shall do wrong on them likewise their own misdeed shall light neither shall they invalidate god . know they not that god giveth supply with open hand and that he be spar to whom he will ? of a truth herein be sign to those who believe . say o my servant who have transgress to your own hurt despair not of god 's mercy for all sin doth god forgive . gracious merciful be he ! and return ye to your lord and to him resign yourselves ere the punishment come on you for then ye shall not be help and follow that most excellent thing which hath be send down to you from your lord ere the punishment come on you suddenly and when ye look not for it so that a soul say oh misery ! for my failure in duty towards god ! and verily i be of those who scoff or say have god guide me i have surely be of those who fear him or say when it seeth the punishment could i but return then i would be of the righteous . nay ! my sign have already come to thee and thou didst treat them a untruth and wast arrogant and becamest of those who believe not . and on the resurrection day thou shalt see those who have lie of god with their face black . be there not an abode in hell for the arrogant ? but god shall rescue those who fear him into their safe retreat no ill shall touch them neither shall they be put to grief . god be the creator of all thing and of all thing be he the guardian ! his the key of the heaven and of the earth ! and who believe not in the sign of god these ! they shall perish ! say what ! do ye then bid me worship other than god o ye ignorant one ? but now hath it be reveal to thee and to those who flourish before thee verily if thou join partner with god vain shall be all thy work and thyself shalt be of those who perish . nay rather worship god ! and be of those who render thanks . but they have not deem of god a be his due for on the resurrection day the whole earth shall be but his handful and in his right hand shall the heaven be fold together . praise be to him ! and high be he uplifted above the partner they join with him ! and there shall be a blast on the trumpet and all who be in the heaven and all who be in the earth shall expire save those whom god shall vouchsafe to live . then shall there be another blast on it and lo ! arise they shall gaze around them and the earth shall shine with the light of her lord and the book shall be set and the prophet shall be bring up and the witness and judgment shall be give between them with equity and none shall be wrong and every soul shall receive a it shall have work for well knoweth he men 's action . and by troop shall the unbeliever be drive towards hell until when they reach it it gate shall be open and it keeper shall say to them come not apostle from among yourselves to you recite to you the sign of your lord and warn you of the meeting with him on this your day ? they shall say yes . but just be the sentence of punishment on the unbeliever . it shall be say to them enter ye the gate of hell therein to dwell for ever and wretched the abode of the arrogant ! but those who fear their lord shall be drive on by troop to paradise until when they reach it it gate shall be open and it keeper shall say to them all hail ! virtuous have ye be enter then in to abide herein for ever . and they shall say praise be to god who hath make good to u his promise and hath give to u the earth a our heritage that we may dwell in paradise wherever we please ! and goodly be the reward of those who travail virtuously . and thou shalt see the angel circle around the throne with praise of their lord and judgment shall be pronounce between them with equity and it shall be say glory be to god the lord of the world . lit . the send down or revelation of the book be etc . lit . in truth i.e . for a serious and earnest purpose and not a mere pastime . that be camels oxen sheep and goat . the wording of this verse would seem to indicate a period when muhammad be meditate flight from mecca . comp . lxxxi . xxix . . see on the word mathani sura xv . p. . or by rhyme couplet . the word associate contain an implied allusion to the deity associate with god and who distract the idolater in their worship . in the fem . gender in the ar . this passage be reveal shortly after the circumstance mention liii . n. p. . see sura lxxxix . vi . . that be none may intercede with him but those whom he permit to do so . lit . it be only give to me on account of knowledge . mar . deus sciebat me esse dignum eo . thus sale . by become apostate from islam . comp . sura lxxiii . xvi . . this and the two following verse be say to have originate at medina . his wah . omar ben muhammad . beidh . itq . . lit . they have not esteem god accord to the truth of his estimation . adventum diei hujus . mar . sura xxix . the spider lxxxi . mecca verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . think men that when they say we believe they shall be let alone and not be put to proof ? we put to proof those who live before them for god will surely take knowledge of those who be sincere and will surely take knowledge of the liar . think they who work evil that they shall escape u ? ill do they judge . to him who hopeth to meet god the set time of god will surely come . the hearer the knower he ! whoso maketh effort for the faith maketh them for his own good only . verily god be rich enough to dispense with all creature . and a to those who shall have believe and do the thing that be right their evil deed will we surely blot out from them and accord to their best action will we surely reward them . moreover we have enjoin on man to shew kindness to parent but if they strive with thee that thou join that with me of which thou hast no knowledge obey them not . to me do ye return and then will i tell you of your doings and those who shall have believe and do the thing that be right we will surely give them an entering in among the just . but some men say we believe in god yet when they meet with suffering in the cause of god they regard trouble from man a chastisement from god . yet if a success come from thy lord they be sure to say we be on your side ! doth not god well know what be in the breast of his creature ? yes and god well knoweth those who believe and he well knoweth the hypocrite . the unbeliever say to the faithful follow ye our way and we will surely bear your sin . but not aught of their sin will they bear verily they be liars ! but their own burden and burden beside their own burden shall they surely bear and inquisition shall be make of them on the day of resurrection a to their false device . of old sent we noah to his people a thousand year save fifty do he tarry among them and the flood overtake them in their wrongful doings but we rescue him and those who be in the vessel and we make it a sign to all men and abraham when he say to his people worship god and fear him . this will be best for you if ye have knowledge ye only worship idol beside god and be the author of a lie . those whom ye worship beside god can give you no supply seek then your supply from god and serve him and give him thanks . to him shall ye return . suppose that ye treat me a a liar ! nation before you have treat god 's messenger a a liar but open preaching be his only duty . see they not how god bringeth forth creation ? and then causeth it to return again ? this truly be easy for god . say go through the earth and see how he hath brought forth create being . hereafter with a second birth will god cause them to be bear again for god be almighty . whom he pleaseth will he chastise and on whom he pleaseth will he have mercy and to him shall ye be take back . and ye shall not invalidate his power either in the earth or in the heaven and save god ye shall have neither patron nor helper . a for those who believe not in the sign of god or that they shall ever meet him these of my mercy shall despair and these doth a grievous chastisement await . and the only answer of his people be to say slay him or burn him . but from the fire do god save him ! verily herein be sign to those who believe . and abraham say of a truth ye have take idol along with god a your bond of union in this life present but on the day of resurrection some of you shall deny the others and some of you shall curse the others and your abode shall be the fire and ye shall have none to help . but lot believe on him and say i betake me to my lord for he truly be the mighty the wise . and we bestow on him isaac and jacob and place the gift of prophecy and the scripture among his posterity and we give him his reward in this world and in the next he shall be among the just . we send also lot when he say to his people proceed ye to a filthiness in which no people in the world hath ever go before you ? proceed ye even to men ? attack ye them on the highway ? and proceed ye to the crime in your assembly ? but the only answer of his people be to say bring god 's chastisement upon u if thou art a man of truth . he cry my lord ! help me against this polluted people . and when our messenger come to abraham with the tidings of a son they say of a truth we will destroy the in dweller in this city for it in dweller be evil doer . he say lot be therein . they say we know full well who therein be . him and his family will we save except his wife she will be of those who linger . and when our messenger come to lot he be trouble for them and his arm be too weak to protect them and they say fear not and distress not thyself for thee and thy family will we save except thy wife she will be of those who linger . we will surely bring down upon the dweller in this city vengeance from heaven for the excess they have commit . and in what we have leave of it be a clear sign to men of understanding . and to madian we send their brother shoaib . and he say oh ! my people ! worship god and expect the latter day and enact not in the land deed of harmful excess . but they treat him a an impostor so an earthquake assail them and at morn they be find prostrate and dead in their dwelling . and we destroy ad and themoud . already be this make plain to you in the ruin of their dwelling . for satan have make their own work fair seem to them and draw them from the right path keen sight though they be . and corah and pharaoh and haman . with proof of his mission do moses come to them and they behave proudly on the earth but u they could not outstrip for every one of them do we seize in his sin . against some of them do wesend a stone charge wind some of them do the terrible cry of gabriel surprise for some of them we cleave the earth and some of them we drown . and it be not god who would deal wrongly by them but they wrong themselves . the likeness for those who take to themselves guardian instead of god be the likeness of the spider who buildeth her a house but verily frail of all house surely be the house of the spider . do they but know this ! god truly knoweth all that they call on beside him and he be the mighty the wise . these similitude do we set forth to men and none understand them except the wise . god hath create the heaven and the earth for a serious end . verily in this be a sign to those who believe . recite the portion of the book which have be reveal to thee and discharge the duty of prayer for prayer restraineth from the filthy and the blame worthy . and the grave duty be the remembrance of god and god knoweth what ye do . dispute not unless in kindly sort with the people of the book save with such of them a have deal wrongfully with you and say ye we believe in what hath be send down to u and hath be send down to you . our god and your god be one and to him be we self surrender muslim . thus have we send down the book of the koran to thee and they to whom we have give the book of the law believe in it and of these arabian there be those who believe in it and none save the infidel reject our sign . thou didst not recite any book of revelation before it with that right hand of thine thou didst not transcribe one else might they who treat it a a vain thing have justly doubt but it be a clear sign in the heart of those whom the knowledge hath reach . none except the wicked reject our sign . and they say unless a sign be send down to him from his lord . . . . say sign be in the power of god alone . i be only a plain spoken warner . be it not enough for them that we have send down to thee the book to be recite to them ? in this verily be a mercy and a warning to those who believe . say god be witness enough between me and you . he knoweth all that be in the heaven and the earth and they who believe in vain thing and disbelieve in god these shall be the lost one . they will challenge thee to hasten the punishment but have there not be a season fix for it that punishment have already come upon them . but it shall overtake them suddenly when they look not for it . they will challenge thee to hasten the punishment but verily hell shall be round about the infidel . one day the punishment shall wrap them round both from above them and from beneath their foot and god will say taste ye your own doings . o my servant who have believe ! vast truly be my earth me therefore ! yea worship me . every soul shall taste of death . then to u shall ye return . but those who shall have believe and wrought righteousness will we lodge in garden with palace beneath which the river flow . for ever shall they abide therein . how goodly the reward of those who labour who patiently endure and put their trust in their lord ! how many animal be there which provide not their own food ! god feedeth them and you . he heareth knoweth all thing . if thou ask them who hath create the heaven and the earth and hath impose law on the sun and on the moon they will certainly say god . how then can they devise lie ? god lavisheth supply on such of his servant a he pleaseth or giveth to them by measure . god knoweth all thing . if thou ask them who sendeth rain from heaven and by it quickeneth the earth after it hath be dead they will certainly answer god . say praise be to god ! yet most of them do not understand . this present life be no other than a pastime and a disport but truly the future mansion be life indeed ! would that they know this ! lo ! when they embark on shipboard they call upon god vow him sincere worship but when he bringeth them safe to land behold they join partner with him . in our revelation they believe not yet take their fill of good thing . but in the end they shall know their folly . do they not see that we have establish a safe precinct while all around them men be be spoil ? will they then believe in vain idol and not own the goodness of god ? but who acteth more wrongly than he who deviseth a lie against god or call the truth when it hath come to him a lie ? be there not an abode for the infidel in hell ? and whoso maketh effort for u in our way will we guide them for god be assuredly with those who do righteous deed . see sura lxviii . p. . the first ten verse of this sura be reveal at medina after the battle of bedr and ohod . n ld . p. . deity for whose worship thou canst shew no authority . comp . tr . jebhamoth fol . . if a father saith to his son defile thyself or saith make not restitution shall he obey him ? it be say lev . xix . let every man reverence his father and mother but keep my sabbaths all of you ye be all bound to honour me . thus also midr . jalkut . comp . next sura v. . the word say the usual address of god or gabriel to muhammad must either be consider a speak by god to abraham in which case we have a curious instance of the manner in which muhammad identifies himself with abraham and make abraham speak in word which he constantly elsewhere use himself or with wahl we must suppose that from v. to v. be misplace . comp . p . cxxxix . . lit . for love among yourselves or a an object of love i.e . devout worship . thus sura lxv . xxi . . the midr . rabbah on gen. par . say that haran the father of lot be bring by abraham 's deliverance from the furnace to the adoption of his doctrine . muhammad may have transfer this idea to lot . the following passage deserve to be compare a shew the loose way in which muhammad could speak of the relationship subsist between abraham and the other patriarch . see below . sura xci . ii . lxxxix . vi . lviii . xix . lxv . xxi . lxxvii . xii . . it be a curious coincidence that in the sonna joseph be say to be the grandson and jacob the son of abraham . lit . be straiten in regard to them . see lxxv . xi . . so a to fly from our vengeance . lit . in truth . with the jew . this passage be quote by modern muslim in justification of their indifference with respect to the propagation of their religion . the number of the faithful say one of them to mr. lane be decree by god and no act of man can increase or diminish it . mod . egypt . i. p. . n ldeke suppose this verse to have be reveal at medina and render contend not except in the best way i.e . not by word but by force . idol . that be you may find place of refuge where you may worship the true god in some other part of the earth if drive forth from your native city . this verse be very indicative of a late meccan origin . flight from mecca must have be imminent when muhammad could thus write . lit . carry not . comp . matth . vi . luke xii . . at mecca . sura xxxi . lokman lxxxii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . these be the verse sign of the wise book a guidance and a mercy to the righteous who observe prayer and pay the impost and believe firmly in the life to come these rest on guidance from their lord and with these it shall be well . but a man there be who buyeth an idle tale that in his lack of knowledge he may mislead others from the way of god and turn it to scorn . for such be prepare a shameful punishment ! and when our sign be rehearse to him he turneth away disdainfully a though he hear them not a though his ear be heavy with deafness . announce to him therefore tidings of an afflictive punishment ! but they who shall have believe and wrought good work shall enjoy the garden of delight for ever shall they dwell therein it be god 's true promise ! and he be the mighty the wise . without pillar that can be see hath he create the heaven and on the earth hath thrown mountains lest it should move with you and he hath scatter over it animal of every sort and from the heaven we send down rain and cause every kind of noble plant to grow up therein . this be the creation of god shew me now what others than he have create . ah ! the ungodly be in a manifest delusion . of old we bestow wisdom upon lokman and teach him thus be thankful to god for whoever be thankful be thankful to his own behoof and if any shall be thankless . . . god truly be self sufficient worthy of all praise ! and bear in mind when lokman say to his son by way of warn o my son ! join not other god with god for the joining god with god be the great impiety . we have command man concern his parent . his mother carrieth him with weakness upon weakness nor until after two year be he wean . be grateful to me and to thy parent . unto me shall all come . but if they importune thee to join that with me of which thou hast no knowledge obey them not comport thyself towards them in this world a be meet and right but follow the way of him who turneth unto me . unto me shall ye return at last and then will i tell you of your doings o my son ! verily god will bring everything to light though it be but the weight of a grain of mustard seed and hidden in a rock or in the heaven or in the earth for god be subtile inform of all . o my son ! observe prayer and enjoin the right and forbid the wrong and be patient under whatever shall betide thee for this be a bounden duty . and distort not thy face at men nor walk thou loftily on the earth for god loveth no arrogant vain glorious one . but let thy pace be middle and low thy voice for the least pleasing of voice be surely the voice of ass . see ye not how that god hath put under you all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth and hath be bounteous to you of his favour both for soul and body . but some be there who dispute of god without knowledge and have no guidance and no illuminating book and when it be say to them follow ye what god hath send down they say nay that religion in which we find our father will we follow . what ! though satan bid them to the torment of the flame ? but whoso setteth his face toward god with self surrender and be a doer of that which be good hath laid hold on a sure handle for unto god be the issue of all thing . but let not the unbelief of the unbelieving grieve thee unto u shall they return then will we tell them of their doings for god knoweth the very secret of the breast . yet a little while will we provide for them afterwards will we force them to a stern punishment . if thou ask them who hath create the heaven and the earth they will certainly reply god . say god be praise ! but most of them have no knowledge . god 's whatever be in the heaven and the earth ! for god he be the rich the praiseworthy . if all the tree that be upon the earth be to become pen and if god should after that swell the sea into seven sea of ink his word would not be exhaust for god be mighty wise . your creation and your quickening hereafter be but a those of a single individual . verily god heareth seeth ! seest thou not that god causeth the night to come in upon the day and the day to come in upon the night ? and that he hath subject the sun and the moon to law by which each speedeth along to an appoint goal ? and that god therefore be acquaint with that which ye do ? this for that god be the truth and that whatever ye call upon beside him be a vain thing and that god he be the high the great . seest thou not how the ship speed on in the sea through the favour of god that he may shew you of his sign ? for herein be sign to all patient grateful one . when the wave cover them like dark shadow they call upon god a with sincere religion but when he safely landeth them some of them there be who halt between two opinion . yet none reject our sign but all deceitful ungrateful one . o men ! fear ye your lord and dread the day whereon father shall not atone for son neither shall a son in the least atone for his father . aye ! the promise of god be a truth . let not this present life then deceive you neither let the deceiver deceive you concern god . aye ! god ! with him be the knowledge of the hour and he sendeth down the rain and he knoweth what be in the womb but no soul knoweth what it shall have get on the morrow neither knoweth any soul in what land it shall die . but god be know inform of all . nothing certain be know concern the history of this fabulist and philosopher . the opinion most generally receive be that lokman be the same person whom the greek not know his real name have call sop i.e . thiops . this sura shew the high degree of respect entertain for lokman in arabia at the time of muhammad who doubtless aim to promote the interest of his new religion by connect the koran with so celebrate a name . see sura lxviii . p. . beidh . and itq . suppose this verse to have be reveal at medina on account of the precept to pay the impost require by muhammad of his follower a a religious duty and different from the alms . the former be usually couple with the duty of observe prayer . mar . render sacrum censum in marg . nodhar ibn el hareth who have purchase in persia the romance of roustem and isfendiar two of the most famous hero of that land which he recite to the koreisch a superior to the koran . comp . p . civ . . this verse and the verse follow would seem more naturally to follow verse where wahl have place them . see precede sura v. . comp . talm . kethuboth a woman be to suckle her child two year . comp . jos . ant . ii . . or the see and unseen lit . outwardly and inwardly . or a render in verse the self sufficient . wah . omar ben muhammad zam . and beidh . suppose this and the three follow verse to have be reveal at medina in answer to the jew who have affirm that all knowledge be contain in their own law . but the accuracy of this supposition be very doubtful if consider with regard to the preceding and follow context . between idolatry and islam . sura xlii . counsel lxxxiii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . ain . sin . kaf . thus unto thee a unto those who precede thee doth god the mighty the wise reveal ! all that be in the heaven and all that be in the earth be his and he be the high the great ! ready be the heaven to cleave asunder from above for very awe and the angel celebrate the praise of their lord and ask forgiveness for the dweller on earth be not god the indulgent the merciful ? but whose take aught beside him a lord god watcheth them ! but thou hast them not in thy charge . it be thus moreover that we have reveal to thee an arabic koran that thou mayest warn the mother city and all around it and that thou mayest warn them of that day of the gathering of which there be no doubt when part shall be in paradise and part in the flame . have god so pleased he have make them one people and of one creed but he bringeth whom he will within his mercy and a for the doer of evil no patron no helper shall there be for them . will they take other patron than him ? but god be man 's only lord he quickeneth the dead and he be mighty over all thing . and whatever the subject of your dispute with god doth it decision rest . this be god my lord in him do i put my trust and to him do i turn in penitence creator of the heaven and of the earth ! he hath give you wive from among your own self and cattle male and female by this mean to multiply you nought be there like him ! the hearer the beholder he ! his the key of the heaven and of the earth ! he giveth with open hand or sparingly to whom he will he knoweth all thing . to you hath he prescribe the faith which he command unto noah and which we have reveal to thee and which we command unto abraham and moses and jesus say observe this faith and be not divide into sect therein . intolerable to those who worship idol jointly with god be that faith to which thou dost call them . whom he pleaseth will god choose for it and whosoever shall turn to him in penitence will he guide to it . nor be they divide into sect through mutual jealousy till after that the knowledge have come to them and have not a decree from thy lord go forth respite them to a fixed time verily there have at once be a decision between them . and they who have inherit the book after them be in perplexity of doubt concern it . for this cause summon thou them to the faith and go straight on a thou hast be bidden and follow not their desire and say in whatsoever book god hath send down do i believe i be command to decide justly between you god be your lord and our lord we have our work and you have your work between u and you let there be no strife god will make u all one and to him shall we return . and a to those who dispute about god after pledge of obedience give to him their disputings shall be condemn by their lord and wrath shall be on them and theirs shall be a sore torment . it be god who hath send down the book with truth and the balance but who shall inform thee whether haply the hour be nigh ? they who believe not in it challenge it speedy come but they who believe be afraid because of it and know it to be a truth . be not they who dispute of the hour in a vast error ? benign be god towards his servant for whom he will doth he provide and he be the strong the mighty . whoso will choose the harvest field of the life to come to him will we give increase in this his harvest field and whoso chooseth the harvest field of this life thereof will we give him but no portion shall there be for him in the life to come . be it that they have god who have sanction for them aught in the matter of religion which god hath not allow ? but have it not be for a decree of respite till the day of severance judgment have ere now take place among them and assuredly the impious shall undergo a painful torment . on that day thou shalt see the impious alarmed at their own work and the consequence thereof shall fall upon them but they who believe and do the thing that be right shall dwell in the meadow of paradise whatever they shall desire awaiteth them with their lord . this the great boon . this be what god announceth to his servant who believe and do the thing that be right . say for this ask i no wage of you save the love of my kin . and whoever shall have win the merit of a good deed we will increase good to him therewith for god be forgive grateful . will they say he hath forge a lie of god ? if god please he could then seal up thy very heart . but god will bring untruth to nought and will make good the truth by his word for he knoweth the very secret of the breast . he it be who accepteth repentance from his servant and forgiveth their sin and knoweth your action and to those who believe and do the thing that be right will he hearken and augment his bounty to them but the unbeliever doth a terrible punishment await . should god bestow abundance upon his servant they might act wantonly on the earth but he sendeth down what he will by measure for he knoweth beholdeth his servant . he it be who after that men have despair of it sendeth down the rain and spreadeth abroad his mercy he be the protector the praiseworthy . among his sign be the creation of the heaven and of the earth and the creature which he hath scatter over both and for their gathering together when he will he be allpowerful ! nor happeneth to you any mishap but it be for your own handy work and yet he forgiveth many thing . ye can not weaken him on the earth neither beside god patron or helper shall ye have . among his sign also be the sea traverse ship like mountain if such be his will he lulleth the wind and they lie motionless on the back of the wave truly herein be sign to all the constant the grateful or if for their ill desert he cause them to founder still he forgiveth much but they who gainsay our sign shall know that there will be no escape for them . all that you receive be but for enjoyment in this life present but good and more enduring be a portion with god for those who believe and put their trust in their lord and who avoid the heinous thing of crime and filthiness and when they be angered forgive and who hearken to their lord and observe prayer and whose affair be guide by mutual counsel and who give alms of that with which we have enrich them and who when a wrong be do them redress themselves yet let the recompense of evil be only a like evil but he who forgiveth and be reconcile shall be reward by god himself for he loveth not those who act unjustly . and there shall be no way open against those who after be wronged avenge themselves but there shall be a way open against those who unjustly wrong others and act insolently on the earth in disregard of justice . these ! a grievous punishment doth await them . and whoso beareth wrong with patience and forgiveth this verily be a bounden duty but he whom god shall cause to err shall thenceforth have no protector . and thou shalt behold the perpetrator of injustice exclaim when they see the torment be there no way to return ? and thou shalt see them when set before it downcast for the shame they shall look at it with stealthy glance and the believer shall say truly be the loser they who have lose themselves and their family on the day of resurrection ! shall not the perpetrator of injustice be in last torment ? and no other protector shall there be to succour them than god and no pathway for him whom god shall cause to err . hearken then to your lord ere the day come which none can put back when god doth ordain it come . no place of refuge for you on that day ! no deny your own work ! but if they turn aside from thee yet we have not send thee to be their guardian . 't be thine but to preach . when we cause man to taste our gift of mercy he rejoiceth in it but if for their by go handy work evil betide them then lo ! be man ungrateful . god 's the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth ! he createth what he will ! and he giveth daughter to whom he will and son to whom he will or he giveth them child of both sex and he maketh whom he will to be childless for he be wise powerful ! it be not for man that god should speak with him but by vision or from behind a veil or he sendeth a messenger to reveal by his permission what he will for he be exalt wise ! thus have we send the spirit gabriel to thee with a revelation by our command . thou knewest not ere this what the book be or what the faith . but we have ordain it for a light by it will we guide whom we please of our servant . and thou shalt surely guide into the right way the way of god whose be all that the heaven and the earth contain . shall not all thing return to god ? see sura lxviii . p. . mecca . jew and christian . or nachdem ihm mohamed die lehre geworden . ullm . postquam responsum fuit illi id est mahumeto de religione manifestanda . mar . the law contain in the koran . isai . v. . comp . gal . vi . . that be deprive thee of the prophetic mission or fortify thee with patience against the calumny of forge lie of god . thus mar . if this latter interpretation be adopt the remainder of the verse must be render and god will abolish the lie and etc . lit . he will increase them . comp . p . cxv . . thus beidhawi . sura . jonah peace be on him ! lxxxiv . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . ra . these be the sign of the wise book ! a matter of wonderment be it to the men of mecca that to a person among themselves we reveal bear warning to the people and to those who believe bear the good tidings that they shall have with their lord the precedence merit by their sincerity . the unbeliever say verily this be a manifest sorcerer . verily your lord be god who hath make the heaven and the earth in six day then mount his throne to rule all thing none can intercede with him till after his permission this be god your lord therefore serve him will ye not reflect ? unto him shall ye return all together the promise of god be sure he produceth a creature then causeth it to return again that he may reward those who believe and do the thing that be right with equity but a for the infidel ! for them the draught that boileth and an afflictive torment because they have not believe . it be he who hath appoint the sun for brightness and the moon for a light and hath ordain her station that ye may learn the number of year and the reckoning of time . god hath not create all this but for the truth . he maketh his sign clear to those who understand . verily in the alternation of night and of day and in all that god hath create in the heaven and in the earth be sign to those who fear him . verily they who hope not to meet u and find their satisfaction in this world 's life and rest on it and who of our sign be heedless these ! their abode the fire in recompense of their deed ! but they who believe and do the thing that be right shall their lord direct aright because of their faith . river shall flow at their foot in garden of delight their cry therein glory be to thee o god ! and their salutation therein peace ! and the close of their cry praise be to god lord of all creature ! should god hasten evil on men a they fain would hasten their good then be their end decreed ! so leave we those who hope not to meet u bewilder in their error . when trouble toucheth a man he crieth to u on his side or sit or stand and when we withdraw his trouble from him he passeth on a though he have not call on u against the trouble which touch him ! thus be the deed of transgressor pre arrange for them . and of old destroy we generation before you when they have act wickedly and their apostle have come to them with clear token of their mission and they would not believe thus reward we the wicked . then we cause you to succeed them on the earth that we might see how ye would act . but when our clear sign be recite to them they who look not forward to meet u say bring a different koran from this or make some change in it . say it be not for me to change it a mine own soul prompteth . i follow only what be reveal to me verily i fear if i rebel against my lord the punishment of a great day . say have god so pleased i have not recite it to you neither have i teach it to you . already have i dwell among you for year ere it be reveal to me . understand ye not ? and who be more unjust than he who coineth a lie against god or treateth his sign a lie ? surely the wicked shall not prosper ! and they worship beside god what can not hurt or help them and say these be our advocate with god ! say will ye inform god of aught in the heaven and in the earth which he knoweth not ? praise be to him ! high be he exalt above the deity they join with him ! men be of one religion only then they fell to variance and have not a decree of respite previously go forth from thy lord their difference have surely be decide between them ! they say unless a sign be send down to him from his lord . . . . but say the hidden be only with god wait therefore i truly will be with you among those who wait . and when after a trouble which you befall them we cause this people to taste of mercy lo ! a plot on their part against our sign ! say swifter to plot be god ! verily our messenger note down your plottings . he it be who enableth you to travel by land and sea so that ye go on board of ship which sail on with them with favour breeze in which they rejoice . but if a tempestuous gale overtake them and the billow come on them from every side and they think that they be encompass therewith they call on god profess sincere religion wouldst thou but rescue u from this then will we indeed be of the thankful . but when we have rescue them lo ! they commit unrighteous excess on the earth ! o men ! assuredly your self injure excess be only an enjoyment of this life present soon ye return to u and we will let you know what ye have do ! verily this present life be like the water which we send down from heaven and the produce of the earth of which men and cattle eat be mingle with it till the earth hath receive it golden raiment and be deck out and they who dwell on it deem that they have power over it ! but our behest cometh to it by night or by day and we make it a if it have be mow a if it have not teem only yesterday ! thus make we our sign clear to those who consider . and god calleth to the abode of peace and he guideth whom he will into the right way . goodness itself and an increase of it for those who do good ! neither blackness nor shame shall cover their face ! these shall be the inmate of paradise therein shall they abide for ever . and a for those who have work out evil their recompense shall be evil of like degree and shame shall cover them no protector shall they have against god a though their face be darken with deep murk of night ! these shall be inmate of the fire therein they shall abide for ever . and on that day will we gather them all together then will we say to those who add god to god to your place ye and those added god of yours ! then we will separate between them and those their god shall say ye serve u not and god be a sufficient witness between u and you we care not aught for your worship . there shall every soul make proof of what itself shall have send on before and they shall be bring back to god their true lord and the deity of their own devise shall vanish from them . say who supplieth you from the heaven and the earth ? who hath power over hearing and sight ? and who bringeth forth the living from the dead and bringeth forth the dead from the living ? and who ruleth all thing ? they will surely say god then say what ! will ye not therefore fear him ? this god then be your true lord and when the truth be go what remaineth but error ? how then be ye so pervert ? thus be the word of thy lord make good on the wicked that they shall not believe . say be there any of the god whom ye add to god who produceth a creature then causeth it to return to him ? say god produceth a creature then causeth it to return to him how therefore be ye turn aside ? say be there any of the god ye add to god who guideth into the truth ? say god guideth into the truth . be he then who guideth into the truth the more worthy to be follow or he who guideth not unless he be himself guide ? what then hath befallen you that ye so judge ? and most of them follow only a conceit but a conceit attaineth to nought of truth ! verily god knoweth what they say . moreover this koran could not have be devise by any but god but it confirmeth what be reveal before it and be a clear up of the scripture there be no doubt thereof from the lord of all creature . do they say he hath devise it himself ? say then bring a sura like it and call on whom ye can beside god if ye speak truth . but that which they embrace not in their knowledge have they charge with falsehood though the explanation of it have not yet be give them . so those who be before them bring charge of imposture but see what be the end of the unjust ! and some of them believe in it and some of them believe not in it . but thy lord well knoweth the transgressor . and if they charge thee with imposture then say my work for me and your work for you ! ye be clear of that which i do and i be clear of that which ye do . and some of them lend a ready ear to thee but wilt thou make the deaf to hear even though they understand not ? and some of them look at thee but wilt thou guide the blind even though they see not ? verily god will not wrong men in aught but men will wrong themselves . moreover on that day he will gather them all together they shall seem a though they have wait but an hour of the day ! they shall recognise one another ! now perish they who deny the meeting with god and be not guide aright ! whether we cause thee to see some of our menace against them fulfil or whether we first take thee to ourself to u do they return . then shall god bear witness of what they do . and every people hath have it apostle . and when their apostle come a rightful decision take place between them and they be not wrong . yet they say when will this menace be make good ? tell u if ye speak truly . say i have no power over my own weal or woe but a god pleaseth . every people hath it time when their time be come they shall neither retard nor advance it an hour . say how think ye ? if god 's punishment come on you by night or by day what portion of it would the wicked desire to hasten on ? when it falleth on you will ye believe it then ? yes ! ye will believe it then . yet do ye challenge it speedy come . then shall it be say to the transgressor taste ye the punishment of eternity ! shall ye be reward but a ye have work ? they will desire thee to inform them whether this be true ? say yes ! by my lord it be the truth and it be not ye who can weaken him . and every soul that hath sin if it possess all that be on earth would assuredly ransom itself therewith and they will proclaim their repentance when they have see the punishment and there shall be a rightful decision between them and they shall not be unjustly dealt with . be not whatever be in the heaven and the earth god 's ? be not then the promise of god true ? yet most of them know it not . he maketh alive and he causeth to die and to him shall ye return . o men ! now hath a warning come to you from your lord and a medicine for what be in your breast and a guidance and a mercy to believer . say through the grace of god and his mercy ! and in this therefore let them rejoice good be this than all ye amass . say what think ye ? of what god hath send down to you for food have ye make unlawful and lawful ? say hath god permit you ? or invent ye on the part of god ? but what on the day of resurrection will be the thought of those who invent a lie on the part of god ? truly god be full of bounty to man but most of them give not thanks . thou shalt not be employ in affair nor shalt thou read a text out of the koran nor shall ye work any work but we will be witness over you when ye be engage therein and not the weight of an atom on earth or in heaven escapeth thy lord nor be there aught that be less than this or great but it be in the perspicuous book . be not the friend of god those on whom no fear shall come nor shall they be put to grief ? they who believe and fear god for them be good tidings in this life and in the next ! there be no change in the word of god ! this the great felicity ! and let not their discourse grieve thee for all might be god 's the hearer the knower he ! be not whoever be in the heaven and the earth subject to god ? what then do they follow who beside god call upon deity they have join with him ? they follow but a conceit and they be but liars ! it be he who hath ordain for you the night wherein to rest and the lightsome day . verily in this be sign for those who hearken . they say god hath begotten child . no ! by his glory ! he be the self sufficient . all that be in the heaven and all that be in the earth be his ! have ye warranty for that assertion ? what ! speak ye of god that which ye know not ? say verily they who devise this lie concern god shall fare ill. a portion have they in this world ! then to u they return ! then make we them to taste the vehement torment for that they be unbeliever . recite to them the history of noah when he say to his people if o my people ! my abode with you and my reminding you of the sign of god be grievous to you yet in god be my trust muster therefore your design and your false god and let not your design be carry on by you in the dark then come to some decision about me and delay not . and if ye turn your back on me yet ask i no reward from you my reward be with god alone and i be command to be of the muslim . but they treat him a a liar therefore we rescue him and those who be with him in the ark and we make them to survive the others and we drown those who charge our sign with falsehood . see then what be the end of these warn one ! then after him we send apostle to their people and they come to them with credential but they would not believe in what they have deny aforetime thus seal we up the heart of the transgressor ! then send we after them moses and aaron to pharaoh and his noble with our sign but they act proudly and be a wicked people and when the truth come to them from u they say verily this be clear sorcery . moses say what ! say ye of the truth after it hath come to you 'is this sorcery ? ' but sorcerer shall not prosper . they say art thou come to u to pervert u from the faith in which we find our father and that you twain shall bear rule in this land ? but we believe you not . and pharaoh say fetch me every skilled magician . and when the magician arrive moses say to them cast down what ye have to cast . and when they have cast them down moses say verily god will render vain the sorcery which ye have bring to pass god prospereth not the work of the evildoer . and by his word will god verify the truth though the impious be averse to it . and none believe on moses but a race among his own people through fear of pharaoh and his noble lest he should afflict them for of a truth mighty be pharaoh in the land and one who commit excess . and moses say o my people ! if ye believe in god then put your trust in him if ye be muslims . and they say in god put we our trust . o our lord ! abandon u not to trial from that unjust people and deliver u by thy mercy from the unbelieving people . then thus reveal we to moses and to his brother provide house for your people in egypt and in your house make a kebla and observe prayer and proclaim good tidings to the believer . and moses say o our lord ! thou hast indeed give to pharaoh and his noble splendour and rich in this present life o our lord ! that they may err from thy way ! o our lord ! confound their rich and harden their heart that they may not believe till they see the dolorous torment . he say the prayer of you both be hear pursue ye both therefore the straight path and follow not the path of those who have no knowledge . and we lead the child of israel through the sea and pharaoh and his host follow them in eager and hostile sort until when the drown overtook him he say i believe that there be no god but he on whom the child of israel believe and i be one of the muslim . yes now say god but thou hast be rebellious hitherto and wast one of the wicked doer . but this day will we rescue thee with thy body that thou mayest be a sign to those who shall be after thee but truly most men be of our sign regardless ! moreover we prepare a settled abode for the child of israel and provide them with good thing nor do they fall into variance till the knowledge the law come to them truly thy lord will decide between them on the day of resurrection concern that in which they differ . and if thou art in doubt a to what we have send down to thee inquire at those who have read the scripture before thee . now hath the truth come unto thee from thy lord be not therefore of those who doubt . neither be of those who charge the sign of god with falsehood l thou be of those who perish . verily they against whom the decree of thy lord be pronounce shall not believe even though every kind of sign come unto them till they behold the dolorous torment ! be it otherwise any city have it believe might have find it safety in it faith . but it be so only with the people of jonas . when they believe we deliver them from the penalty of shame in this world and provide for them for a time . but if thy lord have please verily all who be in the earth would have believe together . what ! wilt thou compel men to become believer ? no soul can believe but by the permission of god and he shall lay his wrath on those who will not understand . say consider ye whatever be in the heaven and on the earth but neither sign nor warner avail those who will not believe ! what then can they expect but the like of such day of wrath a befel those who flourish before them ? say wait i too will wait with you then will we deliver our apostle and those who believe . thus be it bind on u to deliver the faithful . say o men ! if ye be in doubt a to my religion verily i worship not what ye worship beside god but i worship god who will cause you to die and i be command to be a believer . and set thy face toward true religion sound in faith and be not of those who join other god with god neither invoke beside god that which can neither help nor hurt thee for if thou do thou wilt certainly then be one of those who act unjustly . and if god lay the touch of trouble on thee none can deliver thee from it but he and if he will thee any good none can keep back his boon . he will confer them on such of his servant a he chooseth and he be the gracious the merciful ! say o men ! now hath the truth come unto you from your lord . he therefore who will be guide will be guide only for his own behoof but he who shall err will err only against it and i be not your guardian ! and follow what be reveal to thee and persevere steadfastly till god shall judge for he be the best of judge . see sura xviii . n. p. . that be for a serious end to manifest the divine unity . gen. xi . . this refer to the seven year of scarcity with which mecca have be visit . paradise . verse be to be note a define the proportion to be observe in reward and punishments the severity of the latter be only in proportion to the crime the excellence of the former be above and beyond it strict merit . but rather your own lust . the muhammadan believe that idol will be gift with speech at the day of judgment . the ordinary arabic word for to die seem to be avoid in speaking of jesus and muhammad . this be the doctrine of the rabbins . comp . midrasch rabba and midr . jalkut on numb . xxii . . the preaching of noah be mention by the rabbins . sanhedrin . comp . midr . rabbah on gen. par . and on eccl . ix . and in the probably sub . apostolic pet . ii . . this be in accordance with talmudic legend . recognise the power of repentance in the case of pharaoh king of egypt who rebel excessively against the most high who be god that i should hearken to his voice ? ex . v. . but with the same tongue that sin he do penance who be like thee o lord among the god ? xv . . the holy one bless be he deliver him from the dead . . . so that he should not die ix . . for now have i stretch forth my hand and verily thee have i raise up from among the dead to proclaim my might . ex . ix . . a strange comment ! pirke r. eliezer . comp . midr . on p . cvi . midr . jalkut ch . . that be whether thou art not foretell in the law and gospel and whether the koran be not in unison with and confirmatory of them . sura xxxiv . saba . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise be to god ! to whom belongeth all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth and to him be praise in the next world for he be the all wise the all informed ! he knoweth what entereth into the earth and what proceedeth from it and what cometh down from heaven and what goeth up into it and he be the merciful the forgiving ! never say the unbeliever will the hour come upon u ! say yea by my lord who knoweth the unseen it will surely come upon you ! not the weight of a mote either in the heaven or in the earth escapeth him nor be there aught less than this or aught great which be not in the clear book to the intent that god may reward those who have believe and do the thing that be right pardon and a noble provision shall they receive but a for those who aim to invalidate our sign a chastisement of painful torment awaiteth them ! and they to whom knowledge hath be give see that what hath be send down to thee from thy lord be the truth and that it guideth into the way of the glorious one the praiseworthy . but the unbeliever say to those whom they fall in with shall we shew you a man who will foretell you that when ye shall have be utterly torn and rent to piece ye shall be restore in a new form ? he deviseth a lie about god or there be a djinn in him but they who believe not in the next life shall incur the chastisement and be lose in the maze of estrangement from god . what ! have they never contemplate that which be before them and behind them the heaven and the earth ? if such be our pleasure we could sink them into that earth or cause a portion of that heaven to fall upon them ! herein truly be a sign for our every returning servant . of old bestow we on david a gift our special boon ye mountain and ye bird answer his song of praise . and we make the iron soft for him make coat of mail and arrange it plate and work ye righteousness for i behold your action . and unto solomon do we subject the wind which travel in the morning a month 's journey and a month 's journey in the evening . and we make a fountain of molten brass to flow for him . and of the djinn be some who work in his presence by the will of his lord and such of them a swerve from our bidding will we cause to taste the torment of the flame . they make for him whatever he please of lofty hall and image and dish large a tank for water camel and cook pot that stand firmly . work say we o family of david with thanksgiving but few of my servant be the thankful ! and when we decree the death of solomon nothing shew them that he be dead but a reptile of the earth that gnaw the staff which support his corpse . and when it fell the djinn perceive that if they have know the thing unseen they have not continue in this shameful affliction . a sign there be to saba in their dwelling place two garden the one on the right hand and the other on the left eat ye of your lord 's supply and give thanks to him goodly be the country and gracious be the lord ! but they turn aside so we send upon them the flood of irem and we change them their garden into two garden of bitter fruit and tamarisk and some few jujube tree . such be our retribution on them for their ingratitude but do we thus recompense any except the ungrateful ? and we place between them and the city which we have bless conspicuous city and we fix easy stage travel ye through them by night and day secure . but they say o lord ! make the distance between our journey longer and against themselves do they act unjustly so we make them a tale and scatter them with an utter scattering . truly herein be sign to everyone that be patient grateful . and eblis found that he have judge truly of them and they all except a remnant of the faithful follow him yet no power have he over them . only we would discern him who believe in the life to come from him who doubt of it for thy lord watcheth all thing . say call ye upon those whom ye deem god beside god their power in the heaven and in the earth be not the weight of an atom neither have they any share in either nor hath he a helper from among them . no intercession shall avail with him but that which he shall himself allow . until when at last their heart shall be relieve from terror they shall say what saith your lord ? they shall say the truth and he be the high the great . say who supplieth you out of the heaven and the earth ? say god . and either we or ye have guidance or be in palpable error ! say not a to our fault shall ye be question neither shall we be question a to your action . say our lord will gather u together then will he judge between u in justice for he be the judge the knowing ! say shew me those whom ye have unite with him a associate nay rather he be god the mighty the wise ! and we have send thee to mankind at large to announce and to threaten . but most men understand not . and they say when will this threat come to pass ? tell u if ye be men of truth . say ye be menace with a day which not for an hour shall ye retard or hasten on . the unbeliever say we will not believe in this koran nor in the book which precede it . but couldst thou see when the wicked shall be set before their lord ! with reproach will they answer one another . the weak shall say to the mighty one but for you we have be believer then shall the mighty one say to the weak what ! be it we who turn you aside from the guidance which have reach you ? nay but ye act wickedly yourselves . and the weak shall say to the mighty one nay but there be a plot by night and by day when ye bad u believe not in god and give him peer . and they shall proclaim their repentance after they have see the punishment ! and yoke will we place on the neck of those who have not believe ! shall they be reward but a they have work ? and never have we send a warner to any city whose opulent men do not say in sooth we disbelieve your message . and they say we be the more abundant in rich and in child nor shall we be among the punished . say of a truth my lord will be liberal or spar in his supply to whom he pleaseth but the great part of men acknowledge it not . neither by your rich nor by your child shall you bring yourselves into nearness with u but they who believe and do the thing that be right shall have a double reward for what they shall have do and in the pavilion of paradise shall they dwell secure ! but they who shall aim to invalidate our sign shall be consign to punishment . say of a truth my lord will be liberal in supply to whom he pleaseth of his servant or will be spar to him and whatever ye shall give in alms he will return and he be the best dispenser of gift . one day he will gather them all together then shall he say to the angel do these worship you ? they shall say glory be to thee ! thou art our master not these ! but they worship the djinn it be in them that most of them believe . on this day the one of you shall have no power over others for help or hurt . and we will say to the evil doer taste ye the torment of the fire which ye treat a a delusion . for when our distinct sign be recite to them they say this be merely a man who would fain pervert you from your father 's worship . and they say this koran be no other than a forged falsehood . and the unbeliever say to the truth when it be present to them tis nothing but palpable sorcery . yet have we give them no book in which to study deeply nor have we send any one to them before thee charge with warning . they also flourish before them treat our apostle a impostor in like sort but not to the tenth part of what we bestow on them have these attain . and yet when they charge my apostle with deceit how terrible be my vengeance say one thing in sooth do i advise you that ye stand up before god two and two or singly and then reflect that in your fellow citizen be no djinn he be no other than your warner before a severe punishment . say i ask not any wage from you keep it for yourselves my wage be from god alone . and he be witness over all thing ! say truly my lord sendeth forth the truth knower of thing unseen ! say truth be come and falsehood shall vanish and return no more . say if i err verily to my own cost only shall i err but if i have guidance it will be of my lord 's revealing for he be the hearer the near at hand . couldst thou see how they shall tremble and find no escape and be take forth from the place that be so near and shall say we believe in him ! but how in their present distance shall they receive the faith when they have before deny it and aim their shaft at the mystery from afar ? and a gulf shall be between them and that which they shall desire a be do unto their like of old who be lose in the questioning of doubt . in arabia felix three day ' journey from sanaa . the talmud mention the worm shameer use by solomon to cut the stone for build the temple . pirke aboth . v. see buxt . lex . talmud p. . tr . gittin fol . and midr . jalkut on king vi . . this passage of scripture may have suggest the idea that solomon build etc . by the aid of spirit . that be in their difficult toil . see . caussin de perceval hist . de arabes vol . iii . who as well a . de sacy fix this event in the second century of our era . the saba of verse form an important branch of the trading population of yemen . this whole passage alludes to the cessation of traffic between them and syria which lead to the desire to lengthen the stage and diminish the expense of the journey . see muir 's life of muhammad i. p. cxxxix . muhammad attribute this desire to covetousness . that be of strength and material prosperity . that be so a to form a judgment free from the influence of others . it be very remarkable that when the power of muhammad become firmly establish he never revert to the insinuation against the soundness of his mind which in the early sura he so often rebut . that be their graf . mar . so called because there be but a step into it from the surface of the earth . ullm . that be when in this life . sura . the creator or the angel lxxxvi . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise be to god maker of the heaven and of the earth ! who employeth the angel a envoy with pair of wing two three and four he addeth to his creature what he will ! truly god hath power for all thing . the mercy which god layeth open for man no one can keep back and what he shall keep back none can afterwards send forth . and he be the mighty the wise . o men ! bear in mind the favour of god towards you . be there a creator other than god who nourisheth you with the gift of heaven and earth ? there be no god but he ! how then be ye turn aside from him ? if they treat thee a an impostor then before thee have apostle be treat a impostor . but to god shall all thing return . o men ! assuredly the promise of god be true let not then the present life deceive you and let not the deceiver deceive you a to god . yes satan be your foe . for a foe then hold him . he calleth his follower to him that they may become inmate of the flame . the unbeliever for them a terrible punishment ! but believer and doer of good work for them be mercy and a great reward ! shall he the evil of whose deed be so trick out to him that he deemeth them good be treat like him who seeth thing aright ? verily god misleadeth whom he will and guideth whom he will . spend not thy soul in sigh for them god knoweth their doings . it be god who sendeth forth the wind which raise the cloud aloft then drive we them on to some land dead from drought and give life thereby to the earth after it death . so shall be the resurrection . if any one desireth greatness all greatness be in god . the good word riseth up to him and the righteous deed will he exalt . but a severe punishment awaiteth the plotter of evil thing and the plot of such will he render vain . moreover god create you of dust then of the germ of life then make you two sex and no female conceiveth or bringeth forth without his knowledge and the age ageth not nor be aught minished from man 's age but in accordance with the book . an easy thing truly be this to god . nor be the two sea alike the one fresh sweet pleasant for drink and the other salt bitter yet from both ye eat fresh fish and take forth for you ornament to wear and thou seest the ship cleave their water that ye may go in quest of his bounty and that ye may be thankful . he causeth the night to enter in upon the day and the day to enter in upon the night and he hath give law to the sun and to the moon so that each journeyeth to it appoint goal this be god your lord all power be his but the god whom ye call on beside him have no power over the husk of a date stone ! if ye cry to them they will not hear your cry and if they hear they would not answer you and in the day of resurrection they will disown your join them with god and none can instruct thee like him who be inform of all . o men ! ye be but pauper in need of god but god be the rich the praiseworthy ! if he please he could sweep you away and bring forth a new creation ! nor will this be hard for god . and the burdened soul shall not bear the burden of another and if the heavy laden soul cry out for it burden to be carry yet shall not aught of it be carry even by the near of kin ! thou shalt warn those who fear their lord in secret and observe prayer . and whoever shall keep himself pure he purifieth himself to his own behoof for unto god shall be the final gathering . and the blind and the seeing be not alike neither darkness and light nor the shade and the hot wind nor be the living and the dead the same thing ! god indeed shall make whom he will to hearken but thou shalt not make those who be in their graf to hearken for only with warn art thou charge . verily we have send thee with the truth a bearer of good tidings and a warner nor hath there be a people unvisited by it warner . and if they treat thee a a liar so do those who be before them threat their apostle who come to them with the proof of their mission and with the scripture and with the enlighten book then chastise i the unbeliever and how great be my vengeance ! seest thou not how that god sendeth down water from the heaven and that by it we cause the up growth of fruit of varied hue and that on the mountain be track of varied hue white and red and others be of a raven black ? and of men and reptile and animal various likewise be the hue . such only of his servant a be possess of knowledge fear god . lo ! god be mighty gracious ! verily they who recite the book of god and observe prayer and give alms in public and in private from what we have bestow upon them may hope for a merchandise that shall not perish god will certainly pay them their due wage and of his bounty increase them for he be gracious grateful . and that which we have reveal to thee of the book be the very truth confirmatory of previous scripture for god knoweth and beholdeth his servant . moreover we have make the book an heritage to those of our servant whom we have choose . some of them injure themselves by evil deed others keep the midway between good and evil and others by the permission of god outstrip in goodness this be the great merit ! into the garden of eden shall they enter with bracelet of gold and pearl shall they be deck therein and therein shall their raiment be of silk and they shall say praise be to god who hath put away sorrow from u . verily our lord be gracious grateful who of his bounty hath place u in a manison that shall abide for ever therein no toil shall reach u and therein no weariness shall touch u . but for infidel be the fire of hell to die shall never be decree them nor shall aught of it torment be make light to them . thus reward we every infidel ! and therein shall they cry aloud take u hence o our lord ! righteousness will we work and not what we work of old . prolong we not your day that whoever would be warn might be warn therein ? and the preacher come to you taste it then . there be no protector for the unjust . god truly knoweth the hidden thing both of the heaven and of the earth for he knoweth the very secret of the breast . he hath appoint you his vicegerent in the earth and whoever believeth not on him shall be his unbelief and their unbelief shall only increase for the unbeliever hatred at the hand of their lord and their unbelief shall only increase for the unbeliever their own perdition ! say what think ye of the god whom ye invoke beside god ? shew me what part of the earth they have create ? have they a share in the creation of the heaven ? have we give them a book in which they can find proof that they be to be call on ? nay the wicked promise one another only deceit . verily god holdeth fast the heaven and the earth that they pass not away and if they be pass away none could hold them back but he for he be kind gracious . they swear by god with their mighty oath that should a preacher come to them they would yield to guidance more than any people but when the preacher come to them it only increase in them their estrangement their haughtiness on earth and their plotting of evil ! but the plotting of evil shall only enmesh those who make use of it . look they then for aught but god 's way of deal with the people of old ? thou shalt not find any change in the way of god yea thou shalt not find any variableness in the way of god . have they never journey in the land and see what hath be the end of those who flourish before them though mightier in strength than they ? god be not to be frustrate by aught in the heaven or in the earth for he be the all know the all mighty . if moreover god should chastise men accord to their desert he would not leave even a reptile on the back of the earth ! but to an appoint time doth he respite them . and when their time shall come then verily god 's eye be on his servant . see note at sura xcvii . iii . . this be one of the passage say to have originate with zayd . not only seas properly so call but the great mass of fresh water in the nile tigris inland lakes etc . the gospel . this idea be probably suggest by muhammad 's reminiscence of the view from the cave of hira to the north and west of which there be a prospect thus describe by burckhardt travel p. . the country before u have a dreary aspect not a single green spot be visible barren black and grey hill and white sandy valley be the only object in sight . lit . shall encompass it people . method of deal i.e . first warning then punish . sura vii . al araf lxxxvii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . sad . a book hath be send down to thee therefore let there be no difficulty in thy breast concern it to the intent that thou mayest warn thereby and that it may be a monition to the faithful . follow ye what hath be send down to you from your lord and follow no master beside him . how little will ye be monish ! how many city have we destroy ! by night or while they be in their midday slumber do our wrath reach them ! and what be their cry when our wrath reach them but to say verily we have be impious . surely therefore will we call those to account to whom an apostle hath be send and of the sent one themselves will we certainly demand a reckoning . and with knowledge will we tell them of their deed for we be not absent from them . the weigh on that day with justice ! and they whose balance shall be heavy these be they who shall be happy . and they whose balance shall be light these be they who have lose their soul for that to our sign they be unjust and now have we stabilished you on the earth and give you therein the support of life . how little do ye give thanks ! we create you then fashion you then say we to the angel prostrate yourselves unto adam and they prostrate them all in worship save eblis he be not among those who prostrate themselves . to him say god what hath hinder thee from prostrate thyself in worship at my bidding ? he say nobler be i than he me hast thou create of fire of clay hast thou create him . he say get thee down hence paradise be no place for thy pride get thee go then one of the despised shalt thou be . he say respite me till the day when mankind shall be raise from the dead . he say one of the respited shalt thou be . he say now for that thou hast cause me to err surely in thy straight path will i lay wait for them then will i surely come upon them from before and from behind and from their right hand and from their left and thou shalt not find the great part of them to be thankful . he say go forth from it a scorn a banished one ! whoever of them shall follow thee i will surely fill hell with you one and all . and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in paradise and eat ye whence ye will but to this tree approach not l ye become of the unjust doer . then satan whisper them to shew them their nakedness which have be hide from them both . and he say this tree hath your lord forbidden you only l ye should become angel or l ye should become immortal . and he sware to them both verily i be unto you one who counselleth aright . so he beguile them by deceit and when they have taste of the tree their nakedness appear to them and they begin to sew together upon themselves the leaf of the garden . and their lord call to them do i not forbid you this tree and do i not say to you 'verily satan be your declared enemy . ' they say o our lord ! with ourselves have we deal unjustly if thou forgive u not and have pity on u we shall surely be of those who perish . he say get ye down the one of you an enemy to the other and on earth shall be your dwell and your provision for a season . he say on it shall ye live and on it shall ye die and from it shall ye be take forth . o child of adam ! now have we send down to you raiment to hide your nakedness and splendid garment but the raiment of piety this be best . this be one of the sign of god that man haply may reflect . o child of adam ! let not satan bring you into trouble a he drive forth your parent from the garden by despoil them of their raiment that he might cause them to see their nakedness he truly seeth you he and his comrade whence ye see not them . verily we have make the satan tutelars of those who believe not . and when the wicked commit some filthy deed they say we find our father practise it and to u hath god command it say god enjoineth not filthy deed . will ye speak of god ye know not what ? say my lord hath enjoin what be right . turn your face therefore towards every place where he be worship and call upon him with sincere religion . a he create you to him shall ye return some hath he guide and some hath he justly leave in error because they have take the satan a their tutelars beside god and have deem that they be guide aright . o child of adam ! wear your goodly apparel when ye repair to any mosque and eat ye and drink but exceed not for he loveth not those who exceed . say who hath prohibit god 's goodly raiment and the healthful viand which he hath provide for his servant ? say these be for the faithful in this present life but above all on the day of the resurrection . thus make we our sign plain for people of knowledge . say truly my lord hath forbidden filthy action whether open or secret and iniquity and unjust violence and to associate with god that for which he hath send down no warranty and to speak of god that ye know not . every nation hath it set time . and when their time be come they shall not retard it an hour and they shall not advance it . o child of adam ! there shall come to you apostle from among yourselves rehearse my sign to you and whoso shall fear god and do good work no fear shall be upon them neither shall they be put to grief . but they who charge our sign with falsehood and turn away from them in their pride shall be inmate of the fire for ever shall they abide therein . and who be bad than he who deviseth a lie of god or treateth our sign a lie ? to them shall a portion here below be assign in accordance with the book of our decree until the time when our messenger a they receive their souls shall say where be they on whom ye call beside god ? they shall say go from u . and they shall witness against themselves that they be infidel . he shall say enter ye into the fire with the generation of djinn and men who have precede you . so oft a a fresh generation entereth it shall curse it sister until when they have all reach it the last comer shall say to the former ' o our lord ! these be they who lead u astray assign them therefore a double torment of the fire ' he will say ye shall all have double . but of this be ye ignorant . and the former of them shall say to the latter what advantage have ye over u ? taste ye therefore the torment for that which ye have do . verily they who have charge our sign with falsehood and have turn away from them in their pride heaven 's gate shall not be open to them nor shall they enter paradise until the camel passeth through the eye of the needle . after this sort will we recompense the transgressor . they shall make their bed in hell and above them shall be covering of fire ! after this sort will we recompense the evil doer . but a to those who have believe and do the thing which be right we will lay on no one a burden beyond his power these shall be inmate of paradise for ever shall they abide therein and we will remove whatever rancour be in their bosom river shall roll at their foot and they shall say praise be to god who hath guide u hither ! we have not be guide have not god guide u ! of a surety the apostle of our lord come to u with truth . and a voice shall cry to them this be paradise of which a the meed of your work ye be make heir . and the inmate of paradise shall cry to the inmate of the fire now have we find what our lord promise u to be true . have ye too find what your lord promise you to be true ? and they shall answer yes . and a herald shall proclaim between them the curse of god be upon the evil doer who turn men aside from the way of god and seek to make it crooked and who believe not in the life to come ! and between them shall be a partition and on the wall al araf shall be men who will know all by their token and they shall cry to the inmate of paradise peace be on you ! but they shall not yet enter it although they long to do so . and when their eye be turned towards the inmate of the fire they shall say o our lord ! place u not with the offend people . and they who be upon al araf shall cry to those whom they shall know by their token your amassings and your pride have avail you nothing . be these they on whom ye sware god would not bestow mercy ? enter ye into paradise ! where no fear shall be upon you neither shall ye be put to grief . and the inmate of the fire shall cry to the inmate of paradise pour upon u some water or of the refreshment god hath give you ? they shall say truly god hath forbidden both to unbeliever who make their religion a sport and pastime and whom the life of the world hath deceive . this day therefore will we forget them a they forget the meeting of this their day and a they do deny our sign . and now have we bring them the book with knowledge have we explain it a guidance and a mercy to them that believe . what have they to wait for now but it interpretation ? when it interpretation shall come they who aforetime be oblivious of it shall say the prophet of our lord do indeed bring the truth shall we have any intercessor to intercede for u ? or could we not be send back ? then would we act otherwise than we have act . but they have ruin themselves and the deity of their own devising have flee from them ! your lord be god who in six day create the heaven and the earth and then mount the throne he throweth the veil of night over the day it pursueth it swiftly and he create the sun and the moon and the star subject to law by his behest be not all creation and it empire his ? bless be god the lord of the world ! call upon your lord with lowliness and in secret for he loveth not transgressor . and commit not disorder on the earth after it hath be well order and call on him with fear and longing desire verily the mercy of god be nigh unto the righteous . and he it be who sendeth forth the wind a the herald of his compassion until they bring up the laden cloud which we drive along to some dead land and send down water thereon by which we cause an upgrowth of all kind of fruit . thus will we bring forth the dead . haply ye will reflect . in a rich soil it plant spring forth abundantly by the will of it lord and in that which be bad they spring forth but scantily . thus do we diversify our sign for those who be thankful . of old sent we noah to his people and he say o my people ! worship god . ye have no god but him indeed i fear for you the chastisement of the great day . the chief of his people say we clearly see that thou art in a palpable error . he say there be no error in me o my people ! but i be a messenger from the lord of the world . i bring to you the message of my lord and i give you friendly counsel for i know from god what ye know not . marvel ye that a warning should come to you from your lord through one of yourselves that he may warn you and that ye may fear for yourselves and that haply ye may find mercy ? but they treat him a a liar so we deliver him and those who be with him in the ark and we drown those who charge our sign with falsehood for they be a blind people . and to ad we send their brother houd . o my people ! say he worship god ye have no other god than him will ye not then fear him ? say the unbelieving chief among his people we certainly perceive that thou art unsound of mind and we surely deem thee an impostor . he say o my people ! it be not unsoundness of mind in me but i be an apostle from the lord of the world . the message of my lord do i announce to you and i be your faithful counsellor . marvel ye that a warning hath come to you from your lord through one of yourselves that he may warn you ? remember how he hath make you the successor of the people of noah and increase you in tallness of stature . remember then the favour of god that it may haply be well with you . they say art thou come to u in order that we may worship one god alone and leave what our father worship ? then bring that upon u with which thou threatenest u if thou be a man of truth . he say vengeance and wrath shall suddenly light on you from your lord . do ye dispute with me about name that you and your father have give your idol and for which god hath sent you down no warranty ? wait ye then and i too will wait with you . and we deliver him and those who be on his side by our mercy and we cut off to the last man those who have treat our sign a lie and who be not believer . and to themoud we send their brother saleh . he say o my people ! worship god ye have no other god than him now hath a clear proof of my mission come to you from your lord this she camel of god be a sign to you therefore let her go at large to pasture on god 's earth and touch her not to harm her l a grievous chastisement seize you . and remember how he hath make you successor to the adites and give you dwelling on the earth so that on it plain ye build castle and hew out house in the hill . and bear in mind the benefit of god and lay not the earth waste with deed of licence . say the chief of his people puff up with pride to those who be esteem weak even to those of them who believe what ! know ye for certain that saleh be send by his lord ? they say truly we believe in that with which he hath be send . then say those proud men verily we reject that in which ye believe . and they ham strung the she camel and rebel against their lord 's command and say o saleh let thy menace be accomplish upon u if thou art one of the sent one . then the earthquake surprise them and in the morning they be find dead on their face in their dwelling . so he turn away from them and say o my people ! i do indeed announce to you the message of my lord and i give you faithful counsel but ye love not faithful counsellor . we also send lot when he say to his people commit ye this filthy deed in which no creature hath go before you ? come ye to men instead of woman lustfully ? ye be indeed a people give up to excess . but the only answer of his people be to say turn them out of your city for they be men who vaunt them pure . and we deliver him and his family except his wife she be of those who linger and we rain a rain upon them and see what be the end of the wicked ! and we send to madian their brother shoaib . he say o my people ! worship god ye have no other god than him now hath a clear sign come to you from your lord give therefore the full in measure and weight take from no man his chattel and commit no disorder on the earth after it have be make so good . this will be good for you if you will believe it . and lay not in ambush by every road in menace sort nor mislead him who believeth in god from his way nor seek to make it crooked and remember when ye be few and that he multiply you and behold what hath be the end of the author of disorder ! and if a part of you believe in that with which i be send and a part of you believe not then wait steadfastly until god shall judge between u for he be the best of judge . say the chief of his people puff up with pride we will surely banish thee o shoaib and thy fellow believer from our city unless indeed ye shall come back to our religion . what ! say he though we abhor it ? now shall we have devise a lie concern god if after he hath deliver u from your religion we shall return to it nor can we return to it unless by the will of god our lord our lord embraceth all thing in his ken . in god have we put our trust o our lord ! decide between u and between our people with truth for the best to decide art thou . and the chief of his people who believe not say if ye follow shoaib ye shall then surely perish . an earthquake therefore surprise them and they be find in the morning dead on their face in their dwelling . those who have treat shoaib a an impostor become a though they have never dwell in them they who treat shoaib a an impostor be they that perish . so he turn away from them and say o my people ! i proclaim to you the message of my lord and i counsel you aright but how should i be grieve for a people who do not believe ? nor do we ever send a prophet to any city without afflict it people with adversity and trouble that haply they might humble them . then change we their ill for good until they wax wealthy and say of old do trouble and blessing befall our father therefore do we seize upon them suddenly when they be unaware . but if that the people of these city have believe and fear u we would surely have lay open to them blessing out of the heaven and the earth but they treat our sign a lie and we take vengeance on them for their deed . be the people therefore of those city secure that our wrath would not light on them by night while they be slumber ? be the people of those city secure that our wrath would not light on them in broad day while they be disport themselves ? do they therefore deem themselves secure from the deep counsel of god ? but none deem themselves secure from the deep counsel of god save those who perish . be it not prove to those who inherit this land after it ancient occupant that if we please we can smite them for their sin and put a seal upon their heart that they hearken not ? we will tell thee the story of these city . their apostle come to them with clear proof of their mission but they would not believe in what they have before treat a imposture . thus doth god seal up the heart of the unbeliever and we find not of their covenant in most of them but we find most of them to be perverse . then after them we send moses with our sign to pharaoh and his noble who act unjustly in their regard . but see what be the end of the corrupt doer ! and moses say o pharaoh ! verily i be an apostle from the lord of the world . nothing but truth be it right for me to speak of god . now be i come to you from your lord with a proof of my mission send away therefore the child of israel with me . he say if thou comest with a sign shew it if thou art a man of truth . so he throw down his rod and lo ! it distinctly become a serpent . then draw he forth his hand and lo ! it be white to the beholder . the noble of pharaoh 's people say verily this be an expert enchanter fain would he expel you from your land what then do ye order to be do ? they say put him and his brother off awhile and send round men to your city who shall muster and bring to thee every skilled enchanter . and the enchanter come to pharaoh . say they shall we surely be reward if we prevail ? he say yes and ye certainly shall be near my person . they say o moses ! either cast thou down thy rod first or we will cast down ours . he say cast ye down . and when they have cast them down they enchant the people 's eye and make them afraid for they have display a great enchantment . then spake we unto moses throw down thy rod and lo ! it devour their lying wonder . so the truth be make strong and that which they have work prove vain and they be vanquish on the spot and draw back humiliate . but the other enchanter prostrate themselves adore say they we believe on the lord of the world the lord of moses and aaron . say pharaoh have ye believe on him ere i have give you leave ? this truly be a plot which ye have plot in this my city in order to drive out it people . but ye shall see in the end what shall happen . i will surely cut off your hand and foot on opposite side then will i have you all crucify . they say verily to our lord do we return and thou takest vengeance on u only because we have believe on the sign of our lord when they come to u . lord ! pour out constancy upon u and cause u to die muslim . then say the chief of pharaoh 's people wilt thou let moses and his people go to spread disorder in our land and desert thee and thy god ? he say we will cause their male child to be slay and preserve their female alive and verily we shall be master over them . say moses to his people cry unto god for help and bear up patiently for the earth be god 's to such of his servant a he pleaseth doth he give it a a heritage and for those that fear him be a happy issue . we have be oppress they say before thou camest to u and since thou hast be with u perhaps say he your lord will destroy your enemy and will make you his successor in the land and he will see how ye will act therein . already have we chastise the people of pharaoh with dearth and scarcity of fruit that haply they might take warning and when good fell to their lot they say this be our due . but if ill befel them they regard moses and his partisan a the bird of evil omen . yet be not their evil omen from god ? but most of them know it not . and they say whatever sign thou bring u for our enchantment we will not believe on thee . and we send upon them the flood and the locust and the kummal louse and the frog and the blood clear sign but they behave proudly and be a sinful people . and when any plague fell upon them they say o moses ! pray for u to thy lord accord to that which he hath covenant with thee truly if thou take off the plague from u we will surely believe thee and will surely send the child of israel with thee . but when we have take off the plague from them and the time which god have grant them have expire behold ! they break their promise . therefore we take vengeance on them and drown them in the sea because they treat our sign a falsehood and be heedless of them . and we give to the people who have be bring so low the eastern and the western land which we have bless a an heritage and the good word of thy lord be fulfil on the child of israel because they have bear up with patience and we destroy the work and the structure of pharaoh and his people and we bring the child of israel across the sea and they come to a people who give themselves up to their idol . they say o moses ! make u a god a they have god . he say verily ye be an ignorant people for the worship they practise will be destroy and that which they do be vain . he say shall i seek any other god for you than god when it be he who hath prefer you above all other people ? and remember when we rescue you from the people of pharaoh they have lay on you a cruel affliction they slew your son and let only your daughter live and in this be a great trial from your lord . and we appoint a meeting with moses for thirty night which we complete with ten other night so that his whole time with his lord amount to forty night . then say moses to his brother aaron take thou my place among my people and act rightly and follow not the way of the corrupt doer . and when moses come at our set time and his lord spake with him he say o lord shew thyself to me that i may look upon thee . he say thou shalt not see me but look towards the mount and if it abide firm in it place then shalt thou see me . and when god manifest himself to the mountain he turn it to dust ! and moses fell in a swoon . and when he come to himself he say glory be to thee ! to thee do i turn in penitence and i be the first of them that believe . he say o moses ! thee above all men have i choose by my commission and by my speaking to thee . take therefore what i have bring thee and be one of those who render thanks . and we write for him upon the table a monition concern every matter and say receive them thyself with steadfastness and command thy people to receive them for the observance of it most goodly precept i will shew you the abode of the wicked . the unjustly proud one of the earth will i turn aside from my sign for even if they see every sign they will not believe them and if they see the path of uprightness they will not take it for their path but if they see the path of error for their path will they take it . this for that they treat our sign a lie and be heedless of them . vain will be the work of those who treat our sign and the meeting of the life to come a lie ! shall they be reward but a they have work ? and the people of moses take during his absence a calf make of their ornament and ruddy like gold and lowing . saw they not that it could not speak to them nor guide them in the way ? yet they take if for a god and become offender ! but when they repent and saw that they have err they say truly if our lord have not mercy on u and forgive u we shall surely be of those who perish . and when moses return to his people wrathful anger he say evil be it that ye have do next upon my departure . would ye hasten on the judgment of your lord ? and he throw down the table and seize his brother by the head and drag him unto him . say he son of my mother ! the people think me weak and have well nigh slain me . make not mine enemy to rejoice over me and place me not among the wrong doer . he say o lord forgive me and my brother and bring u into thy mercy for of those who shew mercy thou art the most merciful . verily a to those who take the calf a a god wrath from their lord shall overtake them and shame in this present life for thus recompense we the deviser of a lie . but to those who have do evil then afterwards repent and believe thy lord will thereafter be lenient merciful . and when the anger of moses be still he take up the table and in their writing be guidance and mercy for those who dread their lord . and moses choose seventy men of his people for a meeting appoint by u . and when the earthquake overtake them he say o my lord ! if it have be thy pleasure thou hadst destroy them and me ere this ! wilt thou destroy u for what our foolish one have do ? it be nought but thy trial thou wilt mislead by it whom thou wilt and guide whom thou wilt . our guardian thou ! forgive u then and have mercy on u for of those who forgive art thou the best and write down for u what be good in this world as well a in the world to come for to thee be we guide . he say my chastisement shall fall on whom i will and my mercy embraceth all thing and i write it down for those who shall fear me and pay the alms and believe in our sign who shall follow the apostle the unlettered prophet whom they shall find described with them in the law and evangel . what be right will he enjoin them and forbid them what be wrong and will allow them healthful viand and prohibit the impure and will ease them of their burden and of the yoke which be upon them and those who shall believe in him and strengthen him and help him and follow the light which hath be send down with him these be they with whom it shall be well . say to them o men ! verily i be god 's apostle to you all whose be the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth ! therefore believe on god but he ! he maketh alive and killeth ! therefore believe on god and his apostle the unlettered prophet who believeth in god and his word . and follow him that ye may be guide aright . and among the people of moses there be a certain number who guide others with truth and practise what be right accord to it . and we divide the israelite into twelve tribe a nation and we reveal unto moses when the people ask drink of him strike the rock with thy staff and there gush forth from it twelve fountains the men all know their drinking place . and we cause cloud to overshadow them and send down upon them the manna and the quail . . . . eat of the good thing with which we have supply you . but it be not u whom they injure but they injure their own self and when it be say to them dwell in this city and eat therefrom what ye will and say 'hittat ' forgiveness and enter the gate with prostration then will we pardon your offence we will give increase to the doer of good but the ungodly one among them change that word into another than that which have be tell them therefore send we forth wrath out of heaven upon them for their wrong doings . and ask them about the city that stand by the sea when it inhabitant break the sabbath when their fish come to them on their sabbath day appear openly but come not to them on the day when they keep no sabbath . thus do we make trial of them for that they be evildoer . and when some of them say why warn ye those whom god would destroy or chastise with terrible chastisement ? they say for our own excuse with your lord and that they may fear him . and when they forget their warning we deliver those who have forbid evil and we inflict a severe chastisement on those who have do wrong for that they be evil doer . but when they proudly persist in that which be forbid we say to them become scouted ape and then thy lord declare that until the day of the resurrection he would surely send against them the jew those who should evil entreat and chastise them for prompt be thy lord to punish and he be forgive merciful . and we have divide them upon the earth a people some of them be upright and some be otherwise and by good thing and by evil thing have we prove them to the intent that they might return to u . and they have have successor to succeed them they have inherit the book they have receive the passing good thing of this low world and say it will be forgive u . yet if the like good thing come to them again they would again receive them . but hath there not be receive on their part a covenant through the scripture that they should speak nought of god but the truth ? and yet they study it content . but the mansion of the next world hath more value for those who fear god do ye not then comprehend ? and who hold fast the book and observe prayer verily we will not suffer the reward of the righteous to perish . and when we shake the mount over them a if it have be a shadow and they think it fall upon them . . . receive say we with steadfastness what we have bring you and remember what be therein to the end that ye may fear god . and when thy lord bring forth their descendant from the rein of the son of adam and take them to witness against themselves be i not say he your lord ? they say yes we witness it . this we do l ye should say on the day of resurrection truly of this be we heedless because uninformed or l ye should say our father indeed aforetime join other god with our god and we be their seed after them wilt thou destroy u for the doings of vain men ? thus make we our sign clear that haply they may return to god . recite to them the history of him to whom we vouchsafe our sign and who depart from them so that satan follow him and he become one of the seduce . have we please we have certainly thereby exalt him but he crouch to the earth and follow his own lust his likeness therefore be a that of the dog which loll out his tongue whether thou chase him away or leave him alone ! such be the likeness of those who treat our sign a lie . tell them this tale then that they may consider . evil the likeness of those who treat our sign a lie ! and it be themselves they injure . he whom god guideth be the guided and they whom he misleadeth shall be the lose . many moreover of the djinn and men have we create for hell . heart have they with which they understand not and eye have they with which they see not and ear have they with which they hearken not . they be like the brute yea they go more astray these be the heedless . most excellent title hath god by these call ye on him and stand aloof from those who pervert his title . for what they have do shall they be repay ! and among those whom we have create be a people who guide others with truth and in accordance therewith act justly . but a for those who treat our sign a lie we will gradually bring them down by mean of which they know not and though i lengthen their day verily my stratagem shall prove effectual . will they not bethink them that their companion muhammad be not djinn possess ? yes his office be only that of plain warner . will they not look forth on the realm of the heaven and of the earth and on all thing which god hath make to see whether haply their end be not draw on ? and in what other book will they believe who reject the koran ? no other guide for him whom god shall mislead ! he will leave them distraught in their wandering . they will ask thee of the hour for what time be it come fix ? say the knowledge of it be only with my lord none shall manifest it in it time but he it be the burden of the heaven and of the earth not otherwise than on a sudden will it come on you . they will ask thee a if thou wast privy to it say the knowledge of it be with none but god . but most men know not this . say i have no control over what may be helpful or hurtful to me but a god willeth . have i the knowledge of his secret i should revel in the good and evil should not touch me . but i be only a warner and an announcer of good tidings to those who believe . he it be who hath create you from a single person and from him bring forth his wife that he might dwell with her and when he have know her she bore a light burden and go about with it and when it become heavy they both cry to god their lord if thou give u a perfect child we will surely be of the thankful . yet when god have give them a perfect child they join partner with him in return for what he have give them . but high be god above the partner they join with him ! what ! will they join those with him who can not create anything and be themselves create and have no power to help them or to help themselves ? and if ye summon them to the guidance they will not follow you ! it be the same to them whether ye summon them or whether ye hold your peace ! truly they whom ye call on beside god be like yourselves his servant ! call on them then and let them answer you if what ye say of them be true ! have they foot to walk with ? have they hand to hold with ? have they eye to see with ? have they ears to hear with ? say call on these joint god of yours then make your plot against me and delay it not . verily my lord be god who hath send down the book and he be the protector of the righteous . but they whom ye call on beside him can lend you no help nor can they help themselves and if ye summon them to the guidance they hear you not thou seest them look towards thee but they do not see ! make the best of thing and enjoin what be just and withdraw from the ignorant and if stirring to evil from satan stir thee fly thou for refuge to god he verily heareth knoweth ! verily they who fear god when some phantom from satan toucheth them remember him and lo ! they see clearly . their brother will only continue them in error and can not preserve themselves from it . and when thou bringest not a verse sign of the koran to them they say hast thou not yet patch it up ? say i only follow my lord 's utterance to me . this be a clear proof on the part of your lord and a guidance and a mercy for those who believe . and when the koran be read then listen ye to it and keep silence that haply ye may obtain mercy . and think within thine own self on god with lowliness and with fear and without loud spoken word at even and at morn and be not one of the heedless . verily they who be round about thy lord disdain not his service . they praise him and prostrate themselves before him . the initial letter it have be conjecture of amara li muhammad sahdiq thus spake to me muhammad the truthful . but see sura xviii . p. . the first part of this sura be perhaps reveal when the arabian be assemble at the pilgrimage . see verse . a figure of frequent occurence in the talmud . see tr . rosh . haschana a. comp . sura xx . p. . gen. iii . . lit . towards each mosque i.e . towards the kibla of each mosque . the word mosque mesjid however be usually apply only to that of mecca . the common term in use for large place of worship be djami a word unknown in that sense to the koran . for full information a to the clothing of the ancient arabian see freyt . einl . pp . . the koreisch we be tell in sirat arrasul fol . and beidh . in order to instil a deep respect for the caaba and other holy place into the mind of the arabian have forbid all food during the procession and require that no clothes except those borrow from meccans should be wear or that those who wear their own should devote them to god a holy vestment . the consequence be that most of the pilgrim visit the holy place in perfect nudity . hence the precept in the text . the angel of death . comp . matth . xix . mark x. luke xviii . . by the change of a single vowel in the arabic word for camel we obtain the rendering cable . in the rabbinic form of the proverb however the elephant be substitute for the camel which confirm the usual rendering and reading . on this wall the name of which be derive from arafa 'to know ' with allusion to the employment of those upon it will stand those whose good and evil work be equal and be not therefore deserve of either paradise or gehenna . the idea which be analogous to that of purgatory may be derive from the talmud . thus in the midrasch on eccl . vii . 'how much space be there between the two ' paradise and hell ? r. jochanan saith a wall r. acha a span others hold them to be so close that a person may see from one into the other . see plato 's phaed . . that be they will know the inmate of paradise by their whiteness and the people of hell by the blackness of their face . that be ye believer to whom the speaker on al araf be suppose to turn . the fruit of paradise . comp . luke xvi . . the fulfilment of it promise and threat . the rain . thus the rabbins call the rain the might and power of god comp . tract tanith fol . i and connect it with the resurrection tract berachoth fol . . the rabbins in like manner describe the mission of noah . comp . sanhedr . . midr . rabbah on gen. par . and on eccl . . see sura lxxv . xi . . the two tribe of ad and themoud the latter of whom be mention by diod . sic . and ptolemy lay to the north of mecca in the direct line of traffic between the country to the north and to the south and both probably disappear with it cessation when the arab be no longer hold in check by the roman . the tradition adopt by muhammad attribute this to the divine vengeance throughout the koran and be derive by him from the popular legend of arabia . see freyt . einl . p. . on houd see geiger pp . . he suppose him to be the eber of the bible . but mr. muir suggest that both houd and saleh may have be persecute jewish or christian emissary and teacher whose rejection be thus recast by muhammad . see note on verse . or entrusted i.e . with the office of apostle . saleh accord to bochart the peleg of gen. xi . . 'herbelot b. o. make him the schelah of gen. xi . . see v. n. and p. n. it be just possible that the act of koleib chief of the banu taghlib tribe in kill the milch camel of ba s a female relative of his wife of ban bakr lineage which lead to a forty year ' war between these two tribe a. . may have be work up by muhammad into this account of the persecution of saleh . see sura xxiv . p. . this verse may contain an implied reference to the famine with which mecca have be visit and fix the date of this part of the sura . comp . verse . lit . plot stratagem . comp . the passage from pirke r. eliezer c. who make moses perform this miracle in the presence of pharaoh which the scripture ex . vii . account do not . the muhammadan tradition be that moses be a black . lit . cause him to hope temporise with him . lit . male ominati sunt . mar . they trace their calamity to moses . so sale . ka . but ullmann . render they attribute their misfortune to the prediction of moses . in suras lxvii . xvii . and lxviii . muhammad speaks of nine plague . the flood be not mention in the scripture . lit . when we remove from them the plague until a period at which they should arrive . lit . that in which these be . lit . the set time of his lord be fulfil in forty night . sale and others render have a body corporeal of which the commentator give no satisfactory explanation . i have adopt that give by freytag in v. that the calf low in consequence of sama l have enter into it be one of the tradition of the talmud . pirke r. eliezer c. . compare sura lxxxi . xxix . xciv . lxxii . xci . ii . . the word ummyy be derive from ummah a nation and mean gentile it here refer to muhammad 's ignorance previous to the revelation of islam of the ancient scripture . it be equivalent to the gr . laic ethnic and to the term gojim a apply by the jew to those unacquainted with the scripture . there can however be no doubt that muhammad in spite of his assertion to the contrary with the view of prove his inspiration be well acquaint with the bible history . he wish to appear ignorant in order to raise the elegance of the koran into a miracle . for the passage of scripture say to foretel muhammad see pocock 's sp . hist . ar . p. ed . white . if these word a n ldeke supposes contain an allusion to the ansars it be likely that this verse be add at medina . the epithet al ummy the unlettered do not thus occur in meccan sura . the koran . pirke r. eliezer explain ex . xxxii . of the tribe of levi a not have be implicate with the other tribe in the sin of the golden calf . the jew change hittat absolution indulgence into habbat corn . this and the next six verse be suppose to have be add at medina . comp . sura xci . ii . . no trace of this legend be to be find in the talmudists . the city be say to have be aila elath on the red sea . perhaps in allusion to deut . xxviii . . a bribe to pervert scripture etc . sinai which however be not mention in the koran a the place where the law be give . comp . i will cover you with the mountain like a roof . abodah sar . . thus also in tract sabbath f. r. avdimi . . . saith these word teach u that the holy one bless be he turn the mountain over them like a vessel and say to them if ye will receive the law well but if not there shall be your grave . this tradition be still hold by the jew . see . lewis pent . prayer fol . . it origin be a misunderstanding of ex . xix . rightly render in the e. version at the nether part of the mountain . to the jew . balaam . but accord to others a jew who renounce his faith in muhammad . the title of god take from the koran be to be find in maracci vol . p. or in macbride 's religion of the mohammedan p. . to facilitate the repetition of these name the muslim use a rosary . in alter the name of god change allah into allat elaziz into alozza mennan into menat etc . lit . and in what declaration after it will they believe ? that be it weigh heavily on the hope and fear of men djinn and angel . probably the usual final clause whence ye look not for it should here be add to make good the rhyme which be otherwise interrupt in the original . some render salihan well make rightly shaped others virtuous morally perfect . and their idolatrous posterity . beidh . take or use indulgence i.e . take men and their action a they be and make all due allowance . some understand it of muhammad 's accepting such voluntary and superfluous alms a the people could spare . that be those under satanic influence . collect or seek it out . beidh . sura xlvi . al ahkaf lxxxviii . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful ha . mim . the revelation send down of this book be from the mighty the wise ! we have not create the heaven and the earth and all that be between them otherwise than in truth and for a settled term . but they who believe not turn away from their warning . say what think ye ? a for those whom ye invoke beside god shew me what part of the earth it be which they have create ? have they a share in the heaven ? bring me a book send down by them before this koran or trace of their knowledge if ye be men of truth . and who erreth more than he who beside god calleth upon that which shall not answer him until the day of resurrection ? yes they regard not their invocation and when mankind shall be assemble together they will become their enemy and ungratefully disown their worship . and when our clear sign be recite to them they who believe not say of the truth when it cometh to them this be plain sorcery . will they say he hath devise it ? say if i have devise the koran then not one single thing shall ye ever obtain for me from god ! he best knoweth what ye utter in it regard ! witness enough be he between me and you ! and he be the gracious the merciful . say i be no apostle of new doctrine neither know i what will be do with me or you . only what be reveal to me do i follow and i be only charge to warn openly . say what think ye ? if this book be from god and ye believe it not and a witness of the child of israel witness to it conformity with the law and believe while ye proudly disdain it . . . ? ah ! god guideth not the people guilty of such a wrong ! but the infidel say of the believer if it be a good book they would not have be before u in believe it and not have submit to guidance they proceed to say it be an old lying legend ! but before the koran be the book of moses a rule and a mercy and this book confirmeth it the pentateuch in the arabic tongue that those who be guilty of that wrong may be warn and a glad tidings to the doer of good . assuredly they who say our lord be god and take the straight way to him no fear shall come on them neither shall they be put to grief these shall be the inmate of paradise to remain therein for ever the recompense of their deed ! moreover we have enjoin on man to shew kindness to his parent . with pain his mother beareth him with pain she bringeth him forth and his bearing and his weaning be thirty month until when he attaineth his strength and attaineth to forty year he saith o my lord ! stir me up to be grateful for thy favour wherewith thou hast favour me and my parent and to do good work which shall please thee and prosper me in my offspring for to thee be i turn and be resign to thy will be a muslim . these be they from whom we will accept their best work and whose evil work we will pass by among the inmate shall they be of paradise a true promise which they be promise . but he who saith to his parent fie on you both ! promise ye me that i shall be take forth from the grave alive when whole generation have already pass away before me ? but they both will implore the help of god and say ala for thee ! believe for the promise of god be true . but he saith it be no more than a fable of the ancient . these be they in whom the sentence pass on the nation djinn and men who flourish before them be make good . they shall surely perish . and there be grade for all accord to their work that god may repay them for their work and they shall not be deal with unfairly . and they who believe not shall one day be set before the fire . ye make away your precious gift during your life on earth and ye take your fill of pleasure in them this day therefore with punishment of shame shall ye be reward for that ye behave you proudly and unjustly on the earth and for that ye be give to excess . remember too the brother of ad when he warn his people in al ahkaf and before and since his time there have be warner worship none but god verily i fear for you the punishment of the great day . they say art thou come to u to turn u away from our god ? bring on u now the woe which thou threatenest if thou speakest truth . that knowledge say he be with god alone i only proclaim to you the message with which i be send . but i perceive that ye be a people sunk in ignorance . so when they saw a cloud come straight for their valley they say it be a passing cloud that shall give u rain . nay it be that whose speedy come ye challenge a blast wherein be an afflictive punishment it will destroy everything at the bidding of it lord ! and at morn nought be to be see but their empty dwelling ! thus repay we a wicked people . with power have we endue them even a with power have we endue you and we have give them ear and eye and heart yet neither their eye nor their ear nor their heart aid them at all when once they gainsay the sign of god but that punishment which they have mock at envelop them on all side . of old too do we destroy the city which be round about you and in order that they might return to u we vary our sign before them . but do those whom they take for god beside god a his kindred deity help them ? nay they withdraw from them . such be their delusion and their device ! and remember when we turn aside a company of the djinn to thee that they might hearken to the koran and no sooner be they present at it read than they say to each other hist and when it be end they return to their people with warning . they say o our people ! verily we have be listen to a book send down since the day of moses affirm the previous scripture it guideth to the truth and to the right way . o our people ! obey the summoner of god and believe in him that he may forgive your sin and rescue you from an afflictive punishment . and he who shall not respond to god 's preacher yet can not weaken god 's power on earth nor shall he have protector beside him . these be in obvious error . see they not that god who create the heaven and the earth and be not weary with their creation be of power to quicken the dead ? yea he be for all thing potent . and a day be come when the infidel shall be set before the fire . be not this it in truth ? they shall say aye by our lord . he say taste then the punishment for that ye would not believe . bear thou up then with patience a do the apostle endue with firmness and seek not to accelerate their doom . for on the day when they shall see that with which they have be menace it shall be a though they have wait but an hour of the day . enough ! shall any perish save they who transgress ? see sura lxviii . p. . of a divine revelation authorise the worship of other god than god abdallah bin salma say the commentator . comp . john vii . . thus mischn . aboth v. at forty year of age a man come to intelligence . this verse refer it be say by the sonnites to abu bekr afterwards chalif who embrace islam in his th year . but this interpretation be probably invent after his accession to power . lit . suffer loss . the prophet houd . that be sandhills at taief to which muhammad have retire in consequence of the opposition etc . of the meccans . verse be probably misplace a they interrupt the connection between and but appear to belong to the same period a the rest of the sura . thus ullm . al naheverwandte g tter . but wahl denen sie sich mit gottesdienstlichen opfer n herten . ad appropinquandum magi ipsi deo by intercession . mar . beidh . sura vi . cattle lxxxix . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful praise be to god who hath create the heaven and the earth and ordain the darkness and the light ! yet unto their lord do the infidel give peer ! he it be who create you of clay then decree the term of your life and with him be another prefixed term for the resurrection . yet have ye doubt thereof ! and he be god in the heaven and on the earth ! he knoweth your secret and your disclosure ! and he knoweth what ye deserve . never do one single sign from among the sign of their lord come to them but they turn away from it and now after it hath reach them have they treat the truth itself a a lie . but in the end a message a to that which they have mock shall reach them . see they not how many generation we have destroy before them ? we have settle them on the earth a we have not settle you and we send down the very heavens upon them in copious rain and we make the river to flow beneath their foot yet we destroy them in their sin and raise up other generation to succeed them . and have we send down to thee a book write on parchment and they have touch it with their hand the infidel have surely say this be nought but plain sorcery . they say too unless an angel be send down to him . . . . but if we have send down an angel their judgment would have come on them at once and they would have have no respite and if we have appoint an angel we should certainly have appoint one in the form of a man and we should have clothe him before them in garment like their own . moreover apostle before thee have be laugh to scorn but that which they laugh to scorn encompass the mocker among them ! say go through the land then see what hath be the end of those who treat them a liar . say whose be all that be in the heaven and the earth ? say god 's . he have impose mercy on himself a a law . he will surely assemble you on the resurrection day there be no doubt of it . they who be the author of their own ruin be they who will not believe . his whatsoever hath it dwelling in the night and in the day ! and he the hear the knowing ! say other than god shall i take a lord maker of the heaven and of the earth who nourisheth all and of none be nourish ? say verily i be bid to be the first of those who surrender them to god profess islam and be not thou of those who join god with god . say verily i fear should i rebel against my lord the punishment of the great day . from whomsoever it shall be avert on that day he will have have mercy on him and this will be the manifest bliss . if god touch thee with trouble none can take it off but he and if he visit thee with good it be he whose power be over all thing and he be the supreme over his servant and he be the wise the cognisant ! say what thing be weighty in bear witness ? say god be witness between me and you and this koran hath be reveal to me that i should warn you by it and all whom it shall reach . what ! will ye really bear witness that there be other god with god ? say i bear no such witness . say verily he be one god and truly be guiltless of what ye join with him . they to whom we have give the book recognise him muhammad a they do their own child but they who be the author of their own perdition be they who will not believe . and who more wicked than he who inventeth a lie concern god or who treateth our sign a lie ? verily those wicked one shall not prosper . and on the day we will gather them all together then will we say to those who join god with god where be those companion god of yours a ye suppose them ? then shall they find no other excuse than to say by god our lord ! we join not companion with him . behold ! how they lie against themselves and the god of their own inventing desert them ! some among them hearken unto thee but we have cast veil over their heart that they should not understand the koran and a weight into their ear and though they should see all kind of sign they will refuse all faith in them until when they come to thee to dispute with thee the infidel say verily this be nothing but fable of the ancient . and they will forbid it and depart from it but they be only the author of their own perdition and know it not . if thou couldst see when they shall be set over the fire and shall say oh ! would we might be send back ! we would not treat the sign of our lord a lie ! we would be of the believer . aye ! that hath become clear to them which they before conceal but though they should return they would surely go back to that which be forbid them for they be surely liars ! and they say there be no other than our life in this world neither shall we be raise again . but if thou couldest see when they shall be set before their lord ! he shall say to them be not this it in truth ? they shall say yea by our lord ! taste then saith he the torment for that ye believe not ! lose be they who deny the meeting with god until the hour cometh suddenly upon them ! then will they say oh our sigh for past negligence of this hour ! and they shall bear their burden on their back ! will not that be evil with which they shall be burden ? the life in this world be but a play and pastime and well surely for men of godly fear will be the future mansion ! will ye not then comprehend ? now know we that what they speak vexeth thee but it be not merely thee whom they charge with falsehood but the ungodly gainsay the sign of god . before thee have apostle already be charge with falsehood but they bore the charge and the wrong with constancy till our help come to them for none can change the word of god . but this history of his sent one hath already reach thee . but if their estrangement be grievous to thee and if thou art able to seek out an opening into the earth or a ladder into heaven that thou mightest bring them a sign . . . . yes ! but if god please he would surely bring them one and all to the guidance ! therefore be not thou one of the ignorant . to those only who shall lend an ear will he make answer a for the dead god will raise them up then unto him shall they return . they say unless a sign be send down to him from his lord . . . . say verily god be able to send down a sign but the great part of them know it not . no kind of beast be there on earth nor fowl that flieth with it wing but be a folk like you nothing have we pass over in the book then unto their lord shall they be gather . they who gainsay our sign be deaf and dumb in darkness god will mislead whom he pleaseth and whom he pleaseth he will place upon the straight path . say what think ye ? if the punishment of god be to come upon you or the hour be to come upon you will ye cry to any other than god ? tell me if ye speak the truth ? yes ! to him will ye cry and if he please he will deliver you from that ye shall cry to him to avert and ye shall forget the partner ye join with him . already have we send apostle to nation that be before thee and we lay hold on them with trouble and with strait in order that they might humble themselves yet when our trouble come upon them they do not humble themselves but their heart be harden and satan pre arrange for them their course of conduct . and when they have forget their warning we set open to them the gate of all thing until a they be rejoice in our gift we suddenly lay hold upon them and lo ! they be plunge into despair and the uttermost part of that impious people be cut off . all praise be to god the lord of the world ! say what think ye ? if god should take away your hearing and your sight and set a seal upon your heart what god beside god would restore them to you ? see ! how we vary our wondrous verse sign ! yet they turn away from them ! say what think ye ? if the punishment of god come on you suddenly or foreseen shall any perish except the impious ? we send not our sent one but a herald of good news and warner and whoso shall believe and amend on them shall come no fear neither shall they be sorrowful but whoso shall charge our sign with falsehood on them shall fall a punishment for their wicked doings . say i say not to you in my possession be the treasure of god neither say i i know thing secret neither do i say to you verily i be an angel only what be reveal to me do i follow . say shall the blind and the seeing be esteem alike ? will ye not then reflect ? and warn those who dread their be gather to their lord that patron or intercessor they shall have none but him to the intent that they may fear him ! and thrust not thou away those who cry to their lord at morn and even crave to behold his face . it be not for thee in anything to judge of their motif nor for them in anything to judge of thee . if thou thrust them away thou wilt be of the doer of wrong . thus have we make proof of some of them by others that they may say be these they among u to whom god hath be gracious ? doth not god best know the thankful ? and when they who believe in our sign come to thee say peace be upon you ! your lord hath lay down for himself a law of mercy so that if any one of you commit a fault through ignorance and afterwards turn and amend he surely will be gracious merciful . thus have we distinctly set forth our sign that the way of the wicked might be make known . say forbidden be i to worship those whom ye call on beside god . say i will not follow your wish for then should i have go astray and should not be of the guided . say i act upon proof from my lord but ye treat them a falsehood . that punishment which ye desire to be hasten be not in my power judgment be with god only he will declare the truth and he be the best settler of dispute . say if what ye would hasten on be in my power the matter between me and you have be decide but god best knoweth the impious . and with him be the key of the secret thing none knoweth them but he he knoweth whatever be on the land and in the sea and no leaf falleth but he knoweth it neither be there a grain in the darkness of the earth nor a thing green or sere but it be note in a distinct writing . it be he who taketh your soul at night and knoweth what ye have merit in the day then he awaketh you therein that the set life term may be fulfil then unto him shall ye return and then shall be declare to you that which ye have work . supreme over his servant he sendeth forth guardian who watch over you until when death overtaketh any one of you our messenger take his soul and fail not then be they return to god their lord the true . be not judgment his ? swift he of those who take account ! say who rescueth you from the darkness of the land and of the sea when humbly and secretly ye cry to him if thou rescue u from this we will surely be of the thankful ? say god rescueth you from them and from every strait yet afterwards ye give him companion ! say it be he who hath power to send on you a punishment from above you or from beneath your foot or to clothe you with discord and to make some of you to taste the violence of others . see how variously we handle the wondrous verse that haply they may become wise ! but thy people hath accuse the koran of falsehood though it be the truth say i be not in charge of you to every prophecy be it set time and bye and bye ye shall know it ! and when thou seest those who busy themselves with cavil at our sign withdraw from them till they busy themselves in some other subject and if satan cause thee to forget this sit not after recollection with the ungodly people not that they who fear god be to pass any judgment upon them but the object of recollection be that they may continue to fear him . and quit those who make their religion a sport and a pastime and whom this present life hath deceive warn them hereby that every soul will be consign to doom for it own work patron or intercessor beside god shall it have none and could it compensate with full compensation it would not be accept from it . they who for their deed shall be consign to doom for them be draught of boil water and a grievous torment for that they believe not ! say shall we beside god call upon those who can neither help nor hurt u ? shall we turn upon our heel after that god hath guide u ? like some bewilder man whom the satan have spell bind in the desert though his companion call him to the true guidance with come to u ! say verily guidance from god that be the true guidance and we be command to surrender ourselves to the lord of the world . and observe ye the time of prayer and fear ye god for it be he to whom ye shall be gather . and it be he who hath create the heaven and the earth in truth and when he saith to a thing be it be . his word be the truth and his the kingdom on the day when there shall be a blast on the trumpet he knoweth alike the unseen and the see and he be the wise the cognisant . and remember when abraham say to his father azar takest thou image a god ? verily i see that thou and thy people be in manifest error . and thus do we shew abraham the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth that he might be stablished in knowledge . and when the night overshadow him he behold a star . this say he be my lord but when it set he say i love not god which set . and when he behold the moon uprising this say he be my lord but when it set he say surely if my lord guide me not i shall surely be of those who go astray . and when he behold the sun uprise he say this be my lord this be great . but when it set he say o my people ! i share not with you the guilt of join god with god i turn my face to him who hath create the heaven and the earth follow the right religion i be not one of those who add god to god . and his people dispute with him . he say dispute ye with me about god when he hath guide me ? and i fear not the deity whom ye join with him for only by the will of my lord have they any power my lord embraceth all thing in his knowledge . will ye not then consider ? and how should i fear what ye have join with god since ye fear not for have join with him that for which he hath sent you down no warranty ? which therefore of the two party be more worthy of safety ? know ye that ? they who believe and who clothe not their faith with error . theirs be safety and they be guided aright . this be our reason with which we furnish abraham against his people we uplift to grade of wisdom whom we will verily thy lord be wise knowing . and we give him isaac and jacob and guide both aright and we have before guide noah and among the descendant of abraham david and solomon and job and joseph and moses and aaron thus do we recompense the righteous and zachariah john jesus and elias all be just person and ismael and elisha and jonas and lot all these have we favour above mankind and some of their father and of their offspring and of their brother and we choose them and guide them into the straight way . this be god 's guidance he guideth by it such of his servant a he will but if they join others god with him vain assuredly shall be all their work . these be they to whom we give the scripture and wisdom and prophecy but if these their posterity believe not therein we will entrust these gift to a people who will not disbelieve therein . these be they whom god hath guide follow therefore their guidance . say no pay do i ask of you for this verily it be no other than the teaching for all creature . no just estimate do they form of god when they say nothing hath god send down to man . say who send down the book which moses bring a light and guidance to man which ye set down on paper publishing part but conceal most though ye have now be teach that which neither ye nor your father know ? say it be god then leave them in their pastime of cavillings . and this book which we have send down be blessed confirm that which be before it and in order that thou mightest warn the mother city and those who dwell round about it . they who believe in the next life will believe in it and will keep strictly to their prayer . but be any more wicked than he who deviseth a lie of god or saith i have have a revelation when nothing be reveal to him ? and who saith i can bring down a book like that which god hath send down ? but couldst thou see when the ungodly be in the flood of death and the angel reach forth their hand say yield up your soul this day shall ye be recompense with a humiliating punishment for your untrue saying about god and for proudly reject his sign ! and now be ye come back to u alone a we create you at first and ye leave behind you the good thing which we have give you and we see not with you your intercessor whom ye regard a the companion of god among you . there be a severance between you now and those whom ye regard a partner with god have desert you . verily god causeth the grain and the date stone to put forth he bringeth forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living ! this be god ! why then be ye turn aside from him ? he causeth the dawn to appear and hath ordain the night for rest and the sun and the moon for compute time ! the ordinance of the mighty the wise ! and it be he who hath ordain the star for you that ye may be guide thereby in the darkness of the land and of the sea ! clear have we make our sign to men of knowledge . and it be he who hath produce you from one man and hath provide for you an abode and rest place ! clear have we make our sign for men of insight . and it be he who sendeth down rain from heaven and we bring forth by it the bud of all the plant and from them bring we forth the green foliage and the close grow grain and palm tree with sheath of cluster date and garden of grape and the olive and the pomegranate like and unlike . look ye on their fruit when they fruit and ripen . truly herein be sign unto people who believe . yet have they assign the djinn to god a his associate though he create them and in their ignorance have they falsely ascribe to him son and daughter . glory be to him ! and high let him be exalt above that which they attribute to him ! sole maker of the heaven and of the earth ! how when he hath no consort should he have a son ? he hath create everything and he knoweth everything ! this be god your lord . there be no god but he the creator of all thing therefore worship him alone and he watcheth over all thing . no vision taketh in him but he taketh in all vision and he be the subtile the all inform . now have proof that may be see come to you from your lord whoso seeth them the advantage will be his own and whoso be blind to them his own will be the loss i be not make a keeper over you . thus variously do we apply our sign that they may say thou hast study deep and that to people of understand we may make them clear . follow thou that which hath be reveal to thee by thy lord there be no god but he ! and withdraw from those who join other god with him . have god please they have not join other god with him and we have not make thee keeper over them neither art thou a guardian over them . revile not those whom they call on beside god l they in their ignorance despitefully revile him . thus have we plan out their action for every people then shall they return to their lord and he will declare to them what those action have be . with their most solemn oath have they swear by god that if a sign come unto them they will certainly believe it say sign be in the power of god alone and he teacheth you not thereby only because when they be wrought ye do not believe . and we will turn their heart and their eye away from the truth because they do not believe therein at first and we will leave them in their transgression wander in perplexity . and though we have send down the angel to them and the dead have speak to them and we have gather all thing about them in tribe they have not believe unless god have will it ! but most of them do not know it . thus have we give an enemy to every prophet satans among men and among djinn tinsel discourse do they suggest the one to the other in order to deceive and have thy lord will it they would not have do it . therefore leave them and their vain imaginings and let the heart of those who believe not in the life to come incline thereto and let them find their content in this and let them gain what they be gain . what ! shall i seek other judge than god when it be he who hath send down to you the distinguish book ? they to whom we have give the book know that it be send down from thy lord with truth . be not thou then of those who doubt . and the word of thy lord be perfect in truth and in justice none can change his word he be the hearing knowing . but if thou obey most men in this land from the path of god will they mislead thee they follow but a conceit and they be only liar . thy lord ! he best knoweth those who err from his path and he knoweth the rightly guide . eat of that over which the name of god hath be pronounce if ye believe in his sign . and why eat ye not of that over which the name of god hath be pronounce since he hath make plain to you what he hath forbidden you save a to that which be force upon you ? but indeed many mislead others by their appetite through lack of knowledge . verily thy lord ! he best knoweth the transgressor . and abandon the semblance of wickedness and wickedness itself . they verily whose only acquirement be iniquity shall be reward for what they shall have gain . eat not therefore of that on which the name of god have not be name for that be assuredly a crime the satan will indeed suggest to their votary to wrangle with you but if ye obey them ye will indeed be of those who join god with god . shall the dead whom we have quicken and for whom we have ordain a light whereby he may walk among men be like him whose likeness be in the darkness whence he will not come forth ? thus have the doings of the unbeliever be prepare for them . even so have we place in every city ringleader of it wicked one to scheme therein but only against themselves shall they scheme ! and they know it not . and when a sign cometh to them they say we will not believe till the like of what be accord to the apostle of god be accord to u . god best knoweth where to place his mission . disgrace with god and a vehement punishment shall come on the transgressor for their crafty plottings . and whom god shall please to guide that man 's breast will he open to islam but whom he shall please to mislead strait and narrow will he make his breast a though he be mount up into the very heavens ! thus doth god inflict dire punishment on those who believe not . and this be the right way of thy lord . now have we detail our sign unto those who will consider . for them be a dwelling of peace with their lord ! and in recompense for their work shall he be their protector . on the day whereon god shall gather them all together . . . o race of djinn will he say much do ye exact from mankind . and their votary from among men shall say o our lord ! we render one another mutual service but we have reach our set term which thou hast set for u . he will say your abode the fire ! therein abide ye for ever unless a god shall will . verily thy lord be wise knowing . even thus place we some of the wicked over others a the meed of their doings . o race of djinn and men ! come not apostle to you from among yourselves rehearse my sign to you and warn you of the meeting of this your day ? they shall say we bear witness against ourselves . this world 's life deceive them and they shall bear witness against themselves that they be infidel this because thy lord would not destroy the city in their sin while their people be yet careless . and for all be grade of recompense a the result of their deed and of what they do thy lord be not regardless . and thy lord be the rich one full of compassion ! he can destroy you if he please and cause whom he will to succeed you a he raise you up from the offspring of other people verily that which be threaten you shall surely come to pass neither shall ye weaken it might . say o my people ! act a ye best can i verily will act my part and hereafter shall ye know whose will be the recompense of the abode ! verily the ungodly shall not prosper . moreover they set apart a portion of the fruit and cattle which he hath produce and say this for god so deem they and this for his companion whom we associate with him . but that which be for these companion of theirs cometh not to god yet that which be for god cometh to the companion ! ill do they judge . thus have the companion god induce many of these who join them with god to slay their child that they might ruin them and throw the cloak of confusion over their religion . but if god have pleased they have not do this . therefore leave them and their device . they also say these cattle and fruit be sacred none may taste them but whom we please so deem they and there be cattle whose back should be exempt from labour . and there be cattle over which they do not pronounce the name of god inventing in all this a lie against him . for their invention shall he reward them . and they say that which be in the womb of these cattle be allow to our male and forbidden to our wife but if it prove abortive both partake of it . god shall reward them for their distinction ! know wise be he . lose be they who in their ignorance have foolishly slay their child and have forbid that which god hath give them for food devise an untruth against god ! now have they err and they be not rightly guide . he it be who produceth garden of the vine trellis and untrellised and the palm tree and the corn of various food and olive and pomegranate like and unlike . eat of their fruit when they bear fruit and pay the due thereof on the day of it ingathering and be not prodigal for god loveth not the prodigal . and there be cattle for burden and for journey . eat of what god hath give you for food and follow not the step of satan for he be your declared enemy . you have four sort of cattle in pair of sheep a pair and of goat a pair . say hath he forbid the two male or the two female or that which the womb of the two female enclose ? tell me with knowledge if ye speak the truth and of camel a pair and of ox a pair . say hath he forbid the two male or the two female or that which the womb of the two female enclose ? be ye witness when god enjoin you this ? who then be more wicked than he who in his ignorance inventeth a lie against god to mislead men ? god truly guideth not the wicked . say i find not in what hath be reveal to me aught forbidden to the eater to eat except it be that which dieth of itself or blood poured forth or swine 's flesh for this be unclean or profane be slay in the name of other than god . but whoso shall be a forced partaker if it be without wilfulness and not in transgression verily thy lord be indulgent merciful ! to the jew do we forbid every beast have an entire hoof and of both bullock and sheep we forbid them the fat save what might be on their back or their entrails and the fat attach to the bone . with this have we recompense them because of their transgression and verily we be indeed equitable . if they treat thee a an impostor then say your lord be of all embrace mercy but his severity shall not be turn aside from the wicked . they who add god to god will say if god have pleased neither we nor our father have give him companion nor should we have interdict anything . thus do they who flourish before them charge with imposture until they have taste our severity ! say have ye any knowledge that ye can produce to u ? verily ye follow only a conceit ye utter only lie ! say peremptory proof be god 's ! have he please he have guide you all aright . say bring hither your witness who can witness that god hath forbidden these animal but if they bear witness witness not thou with them nor witness to the conceit of those who charge our sign with falsehood and who believe not in the life to come and give equal to our lord . say come i will rehearse what your lord hath make bind on you that ye assign not aught to him a partner and that ye be good to your parent and that ye slay not your child because of poverty for them and for you will we provide and that ye come not near to pollution outward or inward and that ye slay not anyone whom god hath forbidden you unless for a just cause . this hath he enjoin on you to the intent that ye may understand . and come not nigh to the substance of the orphan but to improve it until he come of age and use a full measure and a just balance we will not task a soul beyond it ability . and when ye give judgment observe justice even though it be the affair of a kinsman and fulfil the covenant of god . this hath god enjoin you for your monition and this be my right way . follow it then and follow not other path l ye be scatter from his path . this hath he enjoin you that ye may fear him . then give we the book to moses complete for him who should do right and a decision for all matter and a guidance and a mercy that they might believe in the meeting with their lord . bless too this book which we have send down . wherefore follow it and fear god that ye may find mercy l ye should say the scripture be indeed send down only unto two people before u but we be not able to go deep into their study or l ye should say if a book have be send down to u we have surely follow the guidance good than they . but now hath a clear exposition come to you from your lord and a guidance and a mercy . who then be more wicked than he who treateth the sign of god a lie and turneth aside from them ? we will recompense those who turn aside from our sign with an evil punishment because they have turn aside . what wait they for but the come of the angel to them or the come of thy lord himself or that some of the sings of the lord should come to pass ? on the day when some of thy lord 's sign shall come to pass it faith shall not profit a soul which believe not before nor wrought good work in virtue of it faith . say wait ye . verily we will wait also . a to those who split up their religion and become sect have thou nothing to do with them their affair be with god only . hereafter shall he tell them what they have do . he who shall present himself with good work shall receive a tenfold reward but he who shall present himself with evil work shall receive none other than a like punishment and they shall not be treat unjustly . say a for me my lord hath guide me into a straight path a true religion the creed of abraham the sound in faith for he be not of those who join god with god . say my prayer and my worship and my life and my death be unto god lord of the world . he hath no associate . this be i command and i be the first of the muslim . say shall i seek any other lord than god when he be lord of all thing ? no soul shall labour but for itself and no burden one shall bear another 's burden . at last ye shall return to your lord and he will declare that to you about which you differ . and it be he who hath make you the successor of others on the earth and hath raise some of you above others by various grade that he may prove you by his gift . verily thy lord be swift to punish . but he be also gracious merciful ! lit . their affair would have be decide . in that case there would no longer have be an opportunity for the warning of the prophet and for repentance but the angel would at once have execute the divine judgment . see sura xli . p. . see sura xc . xiii . . this denunciation be repeat in eleven other passage of the koran and couple with the known reverence of the early muslim for what they consider a the word of god must have greatly tend to secure the revelation of the prophet from be in any way tamper with and corrupt . they be self convict of their own hypocrisy and of the hollowness of their profession . the resurrection etc . abu jahl have say muhammad speaks truth and he never say a falsehood but if the banu chosai who enjoy already the office of bear the standard of provide the pilgrim with water and of keep the key of the kaaba should also obtain the prophetship what would remain for the other koreisch . kashaf in . see sura lii . p. . these passage may allude to the ladder set up in a tower by wacih ben salamah one of the ancient doorkeeper of the caaba by which he profess to mount up to god and receive divine oracle . freyt . einl . p. . a community . comp . prov . xxx . . animal as well a mankind be under the control of god be hold within the limit of his decree be accountable to him and will stand before him in the judgment . of the eternal decree . or embellish make it fair seem . lit . openly i.e . precede by some sign . the rabbins speak of the three key in the hand of god . tr . tanith fol . x. on the preserved tablet on which be write the decree of god . that be during sleep . see sura xxxix . p. . or layeth to rest . mar . render literally defungi faciet vos id est obdormiscere . thus also beidh . but see the use of the same word in the next verse . or to perplex you by divide you into sect . comp . sura cx . x. . azar . this form be probably borrow from athar a terah be call by eusebius . see maracci prodr . iv . . compare a similar narrative midr . rabbah on gen. par . in which abraham be give over by his idolatrous father zarah to nimrod who say we will adore the fire rather say abraham the water which put out fire . the water then rather the cloud that bear the water . the cloud then rather the wind which scatter the cloud . the wind then rather man who endure the wind . whereupon abraham be throw into the furnace . it be quite possible that in what follow muhammad may have intend to imply that abraham have renounce the sabian starworship of his father and to vindicate him from the habit of consult the star attribute to him by the talmudists . shabbath fol . col. . abraham reply i have consult my astrology . comp . rashi on gen. xv . . see maim . yad hachaz . vii . . comp . gen. xv . . see sura xxi . . lit . unless that my lord shall will anything . or confuse not their faith with wrong injustice i.e . idolatry . koran . this verse and the following be probably add at medina after the hejira at least it be difficult to conceive that muhammad would have venture thus to have write at mecca . this verse be say to have be reveal at medina and to be aim at the false prophet moseilama aswad and amsi also at abdallah ibn saad muhammad 's secretary who for corrupt the sacred text and apostacy be one of the ten proscribe at the taking of mecca . in the womb . of all sort . lit . attaineth to . mr. lane render the eye see not him but he seeth the eye . the verse of the koran . comp . ex . xxii . . notwithstanding this disclaimer the muslim tradition etc . speak of many of their prophet 's miracle . see maracci 's prodr . p. ii . p. and . verse seem misplace and should probably follow . lit . the outside of iniquity and it inside . some understand these word of open sin and secret sin . that be god 's method of deal with the guilty be to send apostle previous to the execution of his judgment . it appear to have be the custom of the idolatrous arab to set apart one portion of their field for the supreme god and the other for the inferior god represent by their idol . if any of the fruit happen to fall from the part consecrate to the idol into that consecrate to god they restore it but if the reverse occur they give it to the idol . god say they be rich and can dispense with it . the secret however be that the idol ' portion be reserve for the priest beidhawi . freytag mention the name of idol worship by the arab tribe previous to islam einl . pp . and and generally with allah a supreme god . comp . sura cxiv . v. . comp . sura xvii . p. . see verse above . this very abrupt transition to jewish history seem to indicate that a passage between this and the precede verse be lose . lit . we be careless of their study sura xiii . thunder . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . ra . these the sign of the book ! and that which hath be send down to thee from thy lord be the very truth but the great part of men will not believe . it be god who hath rear the heaven without pillar thou canst behold then mount his throne and impose law on the sun and moon each travelleth to it appoint goal . he ordereth all thing . he maketh his sign clear that ye may have firm faith in a meeting with your lord . and he it be who hath outstretched the earth and place on it the firm mountains and river and of every fruit he hath place on it two kind he causeth the night to enshroud the day . verily in this be sign for those who reflect . and on the earth hard by each other be it various portion garden of grape and corn and palm tree single or cluster . though water by the same water yet some make we more excellent a food than other verily in all this be sign for those who understand . if ever thou dost marvel marvellous surely be their say what ! when we have become dust shall we be restore in a new creation ? these be they who in their lord believe not these ! the collar shall be on their neck and these shall be inmate of the fire to abide therein for aye . to hasten evil rather than good will they challenge thee but before their time have be like example . full truly of mercy be thy lord unto men despite their sin but verily thy lord be right vehement to punish . and they who believe not say if a sign from his lord be not send down to him . . . ! thou art a warner only . and every people hath it guide . god knoweth the burden of every female and how much their wombs lessen and enlarge with him everything be by measure knower of the hidden and the manifest ! the great ! the most high ! alike to him be that person among you who concealeth his word and he that telleth them abroad he who hideth him in the night and he who cometh forth in the day . each hath a succession of angel before him and behind him who watch over him by god 's behest . verily god will not change his gift to men till they change what be in themselves and when god willeth evil unto men there be none can turn it away nor have they any protector beside him . he it be who maketh the lightning to shine unto you for fear and hope and who bringeth up the laden cloud . and the thunder uttereth his praise and the angel also for awe of him and he sendeth his bolt and smiteth with them whom he will while they be wrangle about god ! mighty be he in prowess . prayer be his of right but these deity to whom they pray beside him give them no answer otherwise than a he be answer who stretcheth forth his hand to the water that it may reach his mouth when it can not reach it ! the prayer of the infidel only wandereth and be lose . and unto god doth all in the heaven and on the earth bow down in worship willingly or by constraint their very shadow also morn and even ! say who be lord of the heaven and of the earth ? say god . say why then have ye take beside him protector who even for their own self have no power for help or harm ? say what ! shall the blind and the seeing be hold equal ? shall the darkness and the light be hold equal ? or have they give associate to god who have create a he hath create so that their creation appear to them like his ? say god be the creator of all thing ! he be the one ! the conquering ! he sendeth down the rain from heaven then flow the torrent in their due measure and the flood beareth along a swell foam . and from the metal which be melt in the fire for the sake of ornament or utensils a like scum ariseth . in this way doth god depict set forth truth and falsehood . a to the foam it be quickly go and a to what be useful to man it remaineth on the earth . thus doth god set forth comparison ! to those who respond to their lord shall be an excellent reward but those who respond not to his call have they all that the earth containeth twice over they would surely give it for their ransom . evil their reckoning ! and hell their home ! and wretched the bed ! shall he then who knoweth that what hath be send down to thee from thy lord be the truth act like him who be blind ? men of insight only will bear this in mind who fulfil their pledge to god and break not their compact and who join together what god hath bidden to be join and who fear their lord and dread an ill reckon and who from desire to see the face of their lord be constant amid trial and observe prayer and give alms in secret and openly out of what we have bestow upon them and turn aside evil by good for these be the recompense of that abode garden of eden into which they shall enter together with the just of their father and their wife and their descendant and the angel shall go in unto them at every portal peace be with you ! say they because ye have endure all thing ! charm the recompense of their abode ! but those who after have contract it break their covenant with god and cut asunder what god hath bidden to be united and commit misdeed on the earth these a curse awaiteth them and an ill abode ! god be open hand with supply to whom he will or be spar . they rejoice in the life that now be but this present life be but a passing good in respect of the life to come ! and they who believe not say unless a sign be send down to him from his lord . . . . say god truly will mislead whom he will and he will guide to himself him who turneth to him those who believe and whose heart rest securely on the thought of god . what ! shall not men 's heart repose in the thought of god ? they who believe and do the thing that be right blessedness awaiteth them and a goodly home . thus have we send thee to a people whom other people have precede that thou mightest rehearse to them our revelation to thee . yet they believe not on the god of mercy . say he be my lord . there be no god but he . in him do i put my trust . to him must i return . if there be a koran by which the mountain could be set in motion or the earth cleave or the dead be make to speak ! but all sovereignty be in the hand of god . do then believers doubt that have he pleased god would certainly have guide all men aright ? misfortune shall not cease to light on the unbeliever for what they have do or to take up it abode hard by their dwelling until the threat of god come to pass . verily god will not fail his plighted word . before thee indeed have apostle be mock at but though i bore long with the unbeliever at last i seize upon them and how severe be my punishment ! who be it then that be stand over every soul to mark it action ? yet have they set up associate with god . say name them . what ! would ye inform god of that which he knoweth not on the earth ? or be they not a mere empty name ? but prepare of old for the infidel be this fraud of theirs and they be turn aside from the path and whom god causeth to err no guide shall there be for him ! chastisement awaiteth them in this present life and more grievous shall be the chastisement of the next and none shall screen them from god . a picture of the paradise which god hath promise to them that fear him . the river flow beneath it bower it food and it shade be perpetual . this be the reward of those who fear god but the reward of the unbeliever be the fire . they to whom we have give the book rejoice in what hath be send down to thee yet some be band together who deny a part of it . say i be command to worship god and not to associate any creature with him . on him do i call and to him shall i return . thus then a a code in the arabic tongue have we send down the koran and truly if after the knowledge that hath reach thee thou follow their desire thou shalt have no guardian nor protector against god . apostle truly have we already send before thee and wife and offspring have we give them . yet no apostle have come with miracle unless by the leave of god . to each age it book . what he pleaseth will god abrogate or confirm for with him be the source of revelation . moreover whether we cause thee to see the fulfilment of part of our menace or whether we take thee hence verily thy work be preach only and ours to take account . see they not that we come into their land and cut short it border ? god pronounceth a doom and there be none to reverse his doom . and swift be he to take account . those who live before them make plot but all plotting be control by god he knoweth the work of every one and the infidel shall know whose will be the recompense of the abode . the infidels moreover will say thou art not send of god . say god be witness enough betwixt me and you and whoever hath knowledge of the book . see sura xviii . p. . this be say by the traditionists and commentator generally to refer to amir and arbad ben kais who in the year or conspire against muhammad 's life and be strike dead by lightning . see the authority in n ld . p. weil caussin iii . . but this explanation may have be suggest by the word of the text which must if the comment be correct have be reveal at medina . thus one hour of bliss in the world to come be good than all life in this world . mischnah aboth iv . . comp . sura cxiii . ix . . see sura xvii . . this verse be say to have be occasion by the refusal of the meccans at hudaibiya to adopt the formula prescribe by muhammad in the name of the god of mercy the merciful declare that they know not who the god of mercy arrahman be . this be in hej . . see n. p. . lit . despair . that be the jew who at this period of muhammad 's prophetic function must have be highly gratify at the strong leaning towards and respect for their scripture and history which shew itself increasingly in the late meccan sura . lit . mother or prototype of the book . either god 's knowledge or prescience or the fabled preserved tablet on which be write the original of the koran and all god 's decree . the jew have a tradition that the law exist before the creation . midr . jalkut . that be the progressive conquest of the muslim trench more and more on the territory of the idolatrous arabian . sura ii . the cow xci . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . no doubt be there about this book it be a guidance to the god fear who believe in the unseen who observe prayer and out of what we have bestow on them expend for god and who believe in what hath be send down to thee and in what hath be send down before thee and full faith have they in the life to come these be guide by their lord and with these it shall be well . a to the infidel alike be it to them whether thou warn them or warn them not they will not believe their heart and their ear hath god seal up and over their eye be a covering . for them a severe chastisement ! and some there be who say we believe in god and in the latter day yet be they not believer ! fain would they deceive god and those who have believe but they deceive themselves only and know it not . diseased be their heart ! and that disease hath god increase crease to them . their 's a sore chastisement for that they treat their prophet a a liar ! and when it be say to them cause not disorder in the earth they say nay rather do we set them right . be it not that they be themselves the author of disorder ? but they perceive it not ! and when it be say to them believe a other men have believe they say shall we believe a the fool have believe ? be it not that they be themselves the fool ? but they know it not ! and when they meet the faithful they say we believe but when they be apart with their satan they say verily we hold with you and at them we only mock . god shall mock at them and keep them long in their rebellion wandering in perplexity . these be they who have purchase error at the price of guidance but their traffic hath not be gainful neither be they guide at all . they be like one who kindleth a fire and when it hath thrown it light on all around him . . . . god taketh away their light and leaveth them in darkness they can not see ! deaf dumb blind therefore they shall not retrace their step from error ! or like those who when there cometh a storm cloud out of the heaven big with darkness thunder and lightning thrust their finger into their ear because of the thunder clap for fear of death ! god be round about the infidel . the lightning almost snatcheth away their eye ! so oft a it gleameth on them they walk on in it but when darkness closeth upon them they stop ! and if god please of their ear and of their eye would he surely deprive them verily god be almighty ! o men of mecca adore your lord who hath create you and those who be before you haply ye will fear him who hath make the earth a bed for you and the heaven a covering and hath cause water to come down from heaven and by it hath brought forth fruit for your sustenance ! do not then wittingly give peer to god . and if ye be in doubt a to that which we have send down to our servant then produce a sura like it and summon your witness beside god if ye be men of truth but if ye do it not and never shall ye do it then fear the fire prepare for the infidel whose fuel be men and stone but announce to those who believe and do the thing that be right that for them be garden 'neath which the river flow ! so oft a they be feed therefrom with fruit for sustenance they shall say this same be our sustenance of old and they shall have it like give to them . therein shall they have wife of perfect purity and therein shall they abide for ever . verily god be not ashamed to set forth a well the instance of a gnat a of any nobler object for a to those who have believe they know it to be the truth from their lord but a to the unbeliever they will say what meaneth god by this comparison ? many will he mislead by such parable and many guide but none will he mislead thereby except the wicked who after it establishment violate the covenant of god and cut in sunder what god hath bidden to be join and act disorderly on the earth . these be they who shall suffer loss ! how can ye withhold faith from god ? ye be dead and he give you life next he will cause you to die next he will restore you to life next shall ye return to him ! he it be who create for you all that be on earth then proceed to the heaven and into seven heaven do he fashion it and he knoweth all thing . when thy lord say to the angel verily i be about to place one in my stead on earth they say wilt thou place there one who will do ill therein and shed blood when we celebrate thy praise and extol thy holiness ? god say verily i know what ye know not . and he teach adam the name of all thing and then set them before the angel and say tell me the name of these if ye be endue with wisdom . they say praise be to thee ! we have no knowledge but what thou hast give u to know . thou ! thou art the know the wise . he say o adam inform them of their name . and when he have inform them of their name he say do i not say to you that i know the hidden thing of the heaven and of the earth and that i know what ye bring to light and what ye hide ? and when we say to the angel bow down and worship adam then worship they all save eblis . he refuse and swell with pride and become one of the unbeliever . and we say o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden and eat ye plentifully therefrom wherever ye list but to this tree come not nigh l ye become of the transgressor . but satan make them slip from it and cause their banishment from the place in which they be . and we say get ye down the one of you an enemy to the other and there shall be for you in the earth a dwelling place and a provision for a time . and word of prayer learn adam from his lord and god turn to him for he loveth to turn the merciful . we say get ye down from it all together and if guidance shall come to you from me whoso shall follow my guidance on them shall come no fear neither shall they be grieve but they who shall not believe and treat our sign a false hood these shall be inmate of the fire in it shall they remain for ever . o child of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i shew favour upon you and be true to your covenant with me i will be true to my covenant with you me therefore revere me ! and believe in what i have send down confirm your scripture and be not the first to disbelieve it neither for a mean price barter my sign me therefore fear ye me ! and clothe not the truth with falsehood and hide not the truth when ye know it and observe prayer and pay the legal impost and bow down with those who bow . will ye enjoin what be right upon others and forget yourselves ? yet ye read the book will ye not understand ? and seek help with patience and prayer a hard duty indeed be this but not to the humble who bear in mind that they shall meet their lord and that unto him shall they return . o child of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i shew favour upon you for verily to you above all human being have i be bounteous . and fear ye the day when soul shall not satisfy for soul at all nor shall any intercession be accept from them nor shall any ransom be take neither shall they be help . and remember when we rescue you from the people of pharaoh who have lay on you a cruel chastisement . they slew your male child and let only your female live and in this be a great trial from your lord and when we part the sea for you and save you and drown the people of pharaoh while ye be look on and when we be in treaty with moses forty night then during his absence take ye the calf and act wickedly yet after this we forgive you that ye might be grateful and when we give moses the book and the illumination in order to your guidance and remember when moses say to his people o my people ! verily ye have sin to your own hurt by your take the calf to worship it be turn then to your creator and slay the guilty among you this will be best for you with your creator then turn he unto you for he be the one who turneth the merciful and when ye say o moses ! we will not believe thee until we see god plainly the thunderbolt fell upon you while ye be look on then we raise you to life after ye have be dead that haply ye might give thanks and we cause the cloud to overshadow you and we send down manna and quail upon you eat of the good thing we have give you for sustenance and they injure not u but they injure themselves . and when we say enter this city and eat therefrom plentifully at your will and enter the gate with prostration and say 'forgiveness ' and we will pardon you your sin and give an increase to the doer of good but the evil doer change that word into another than that spoken to them and we send down upon those evil doer wrath from heaven for that they have do amiss and when moses ask drink for his people we say strike the rock with thy rod and from it there gush twelve fountains each tribe know their drinking place eat and drink say we of what god hath supply and do no wrong on the earth by licentious deed and when ye say o moses ! we will not put up with one sort of food pray therefore thy lord for u that he would bring forth for u of that which the earth groweth it herb and it cucumber and it garlic and it lentil and it onion he say what ! will ye exchange that which be bad for what be good ? get ye down into egypt for ye shall have what ye have ask vileness and poverty be stamp upon them and they return with wrath from god this for that they disbelieve the sign of god and slew the prophet unjustly this for that they rebel and transgress ! verily they who believe muslim and they who follow the jewish religion and the christian and the sabeites whoever of these believeth in god and the last day and doeth that which be right shall have their reward with their lord fear shall not come upon them neither shall they be grieve . call to mind also when we enter into a covenant with you and lift up the mountain over you take hold say we on what we have reveal to you with resolution and remember what be therein that ye may fear but after this ye turn back and but for god 's grace and mercy toward you ye have surely be of the lost ! ye know too those of you who transgress on the sabbath and to whom we say be change into scouted ape and we make them a warning to those of their day and to those who come after them and a caution to the god fearing and when moses say to his people verily god bid you sacrifice a cow they say makest thou a jest of u ? he say god keep me from be one of the foolish . they say call on thy lord for u that he would make plain to u what she be . he say god saith 'she be a cow neither old nor young but of the middle age between the two ' do therefore what ye be bid . they say call on your lord for u that he would make plain to u what be her colour . he say god saith 'she be a fawn colour cow her colour be very bright she rejoiceth the beholder . ' they say call on they lord for u that he would make plain to u what cow it be for to u be cow alike and verily if god please we shall be guide rightly he say god saith 'she be a cow not wear by plough the earth or water the field sound no blemish in her . ' they say now hast thou bring the truth then they sacrifice her yet nearly have they do it not and when ye slew a man and strive among yourselves about him god bring to light what he have hide for we say strike the corpse with part of her . so god giveth life to the dead and sheweth you his sign that haply ye may understand . then after that your heart become hard like rock or hard still for verily from rock have river gush others verily have be cleave and water hath issue from them and others verily have sink down through fear of god and god be not regardless of your action . desire ye then that for your sake the jew should believe ? yet a part of them hear the word of god and then after they have understand it pervert it and know that they do so . and when they fall in with the faithful they say we believe but when they be apart one with another they say will ye acquaint them with what god hath reveal to you that they may dispute with you about it in the presence of your lord ? understand ye their aim ? know they not that god knoweth what they hide as well a what they bring to light ? but there be illiterate among them who be unacquainted with the book but with lie only and have but vague fancy . woe to those who with their own hand transcribe the book corruptly and then say this be from god that they may sell it for some mean price ! woe then to them for that which their hand have write ! and woe to them for the gain which they have make ! and they say hell fire shall not touch u but for a few day say have ye receive such a promise from god ? for god will not revoke his promise or speak ye of god that which ye know not ? but they whose only gain be evil work and who be environ by their sin they shall be inmate of the fire therein to abide for ever but they who have believe and do the thing that be right they shall be the inmate of paradise therein to abide for ever . and when we enter into covenant with the child of israel we say worship none but god and be good to your parent and kindred and to orphan and to the poor and speak with men what be right and observe prayer and pay the stated alms . then turn ye away except a few of you and withdraw afar off . and when we make a covenant with you that ye should not shed your own blood nor expel one another from your abode then ye ratify it and yourselves be witness . then be ye the very person who slew one another and ye drive out a part of your own people from their abode ye lent help against them with wrong and hatred but if they come captive to you ye redeem them ! yet it be forbid you to drive them out . believe ye then part of the book and deny part ? but what shall be the meed of him among you who doth this but shame in this life ? and on the day of the resurrection they shall be send to the most cruel of torment for god be not regardless of what ye do . these be they who purchase this present life at the price of that which be to come their torment shall not be lighten neither shall they be help . moreover to moses give we the book and we raise up apostle after him and to jesus son of mary give we clear proof of his mission and strengthen him by the holy spirit . so oft then a an apostle cometh to you with that which your soul desire not swell ye with pride and treat some a impostor and slay others ? and they say uncircumcised be our heart . nay ! god hath curse them in their infidelity few be they who believe ! and when a book have come to them from god confirm that which they have receive already although they have before pray for victory over those who believe not yet when that koran come to them of which they have knowledge they do not recognise it . the curse of god on the infidel ! for a vile price have they sell themselves by not believe what god hath send down envious of god 's send down his grace on such of his servant a he pleaseth and they have bring on themselves wrath upon wrath . and for the unbeliever be a disgraceful chastisement . and when it be say to them believe in what god hath send down they say in that which hath be send down to u we believe but what hath since be send down they disbelieve although it be the truth confirmatory of their own scripture . say why then have ye of old slain god 's prophet if ye be indeed believer ? moreover moses come unto you with proof of his mission . then in his absence ye take the calf for your god and do wickedly . and when we accept your covenant and uplift the mountain over you we say take firm hold on what we have give you and hearken . they say we have hearken and have rebel then be they make to drink down the calf into their heart for their ingratitude . say a bad thing hath your faith command you if ye be indeed believer . say if the future dwell place with god be specially for you but not for the rest of mankind then wish for death if ye be sincere but never can they wish for it because of that which their own hand have send on before them ! and god knoweth the offender . and thou wilt surely find them of all men most covetous of life beyond even the polytheist . to be keep alive a thousand year might one of them desire but that he may be preserve alive shall no one reprieve himself from the punishment ! and god seeth what they do . say whoso be the enemy of gabriel for he it be who by god 's leave hath cause the koran to descend on thy heart the confirmation of previous revelation and guidance and good tidings to the faithful whoso be an enemy to god or his angel or to gabriel or to michael shall have god a his enemy for verily god be an enemy to the infidel . moreover clear sign have we send down to thee and none will disbelieve them but the perverse . oft a they have form an engagement with thee will some of them set it aside ? but most of them believe not . and when there come to them an apostle from god affirm the previous revelation make to them some of those to whom the scripture be give threw the book of god behind their back a if they know it not and they follow what the satan read in the reign of solomon not that solomon be unbelieving but the satan be unbelieving . sorcery do they teach to men and what have be reveal to the two angel harut and marut at babel . yet no man do these two teach until they have say we be only a temptation . be not then an unbeliever . from these two do men learn how to cause division between man and wife but unless by leave of god no man do they harm thereby . they learn indeed what would harm and not profit them and yet they know that he who buy that art should have no part in the life to come ! and vile the price for which they have sell themselves if they have but know it ! but have they believe and fear god well surely would have be the reward from god if they have but know it ! o ye who believe ! say not to our apostle raina look at u but say ondhorna regard u . and attend to this for the infidel shall suffer a grievous chastisement . the unbeliever among the people of the book and among the idolater desire not that any good should be send down to you from your lord but god will shew his special mercy to whom he will for he be of great bounty . whatever verse we cancel or cause thee to forget we bring a good or it like . knowest thou not that god hath power over all thing ? knowest thou not that the dominion of the heaven and of the earth be god 's ? and that ye have neither patron nor helper save god ? would ye ask of your apostle what of old be ask of moses ? but he who exchangeth faith for unbelief hath already err from the even way . many of the people of the book desire to bring you back to unbelief after ye have believe out of selfish envy even after the truth hath be clearly shewn them . but forgive them and shun them till god shall come in with his work . truly god hath power over all thing . and observe prayer and pay the legal impost and whatever good thing ye have send on before for your soul 's sake ye shall find it with god . verily god seeth what ye do . and they say none but jew or christian shall enter paradise this be their wish . say give your proof if ye speak the truth . but they who set their face with resignation godward and do what be right their reward be with their lord no fear shall come on them neither shall they be grieve . moreover the jew say the christian lean on nought on nought lean the jew say the christian yet both be reader of the book . so with like word say they who have no knowledge . but on the resurrection day god shall judge between them a to that in which they differ . and who committeth a great wrong than he who hindereth god 's name from be remember in his temple and who hasteth to ruin them ? such men can not enter them but with fear . their 's be shame in this world and a severe torment in the next . the east and the west be god 's therefore whichever way ye turn there be the face of god truly god be immense and knoweth all . and they say god hath a son no ! praise be to him ! but his whatever be in the heaven and the earth ! all obeyeth him sole maker of the heaven and of the earth ! and when he decreeth a thing he only saith to it be and it be . and they who have no knowledge say unless god speak to u or thou shew u a sign . . . ! so with like word say those who be before them their heart be alike clear sign have we already shew for those who have firm faith verily with the truth have we send thee a bearer of good tidings and a warner and of the people of hell thou shalt not be question . but until thou follow their religion neither jew nor christian will be satisfy with thee . say verily guidance of god that be the guidance ! and if after the knowledge which hath reach thee thou follow their desire thou shalt find neither helper nor protector against god . they to whom we have give the book and who read it a it ought to be read these believe therein but whoso believeth not therein shall meet with perdition . o child of israel ! remember my favour wherewith i have favour you and that high above all mankind have i raise you and dread the day when not in aught shall soul satisfy for soul nor shall any ransom be take from it nor shall any intercession avail and they shall not be help . when his lord make trial of abraham by command which he fulfil he say i be about to make thee an im m to mankind he say of my offspring also my covenant say god embraceth not the evil doer . and remember when we appoint the holy house a man 's resort and safe retreat and say take ye the station of abraham for a place of prayer and we command abraham and ismael purify my house for those who shall go in procession round it and those who shall abide there for devotion and those who shall bow down and prostrate themselves . and when abraham say lord ! make this secure land and supply it people with fruit such of them a believe in god and in the last day he say and whoso believeth not for a little while will i bestow good thing on him then will i drive him to the torment of the fire ! an ill passage ! and when abraham with ismael raise the foundation of the house they say o our lord ! accept it from u for thou art the hearer the knower . o our lord ! make u also muslims and our posterity a muslim people and teach u our holy rite and be turn towards u for thou art he who turneth the merciful . o our lord ! raise up among them an apostle who may rehearse thy sign unto them and teach them 'the book ' and wisdom and purify them for thou art the mighty the wise . and who but he that hath debase his soul to folly will mislike the faith of abraham when we have choose him in this world and in the world to come he shall be of the just ? when his lord say to him resign thyself to me he say i resign myself to the lord of the world . and this to his child do abraham bequeath and jacob also say o my child ! truly god hath choose a religion for you so die not unless ye be also muslim . be ye present when jacob be at the point of death ? when he say to his son whom will ye worship when i be go ? they say we will worship thy god and the god of thy father abraham and ismael and isaac one god and to him be we surrender muslim . that people have now pass away they have the reward of their deed and ye shall have the meed of yours but of their doings ye shall not be question . they say moreover become jew or christian that ye may have the true guidance . say nay ! the religion of abraham the sound in faith and not one of those who join god with god ! say ye we believe in god and that which hath be send down to u and that which hath be send down to abraham and ismael and isaac and jacob and the tribe and that which hath be give to moses and to jesus and that which be give to the prophet from their lord . no difference do we make between any of them and to god be we resign muslim . if therefore they believe even a ye believe then have they true guidance but if they turn back then do they cut themselves off from you and god will suffice to protect thee against them for he be the hearer the knower . islam be the baptism of god and who be good to baptise than god ? and him do we serve . say will ye dispute with u about god ? when he be our lord and your lord ! we have our work and ye have your work and we be sincerely his . will ye say verily abraham and ismael and isaac and jacob and the tribe be jew or christian ? say who knoweth best ye or god ? and who be more in fault than he who concealeth the witness which he hath from god ? but god be not regardless of what ye do . that people have now pass away they have the reward of their deed and for you be the meed of yours but of their doings ye shall not be question . the foolish one will say what hath turn them from the kebla which they use ? say the east and the west be god 's . he guideth whom he will into the right path . thus have we make you a central people that ye may be witness in regard to mankind and that the apostle may be a witness in regard to you . we appoint the kebla which thou formerly hadst only that we might know him who followeth the apostle from him who turneth on his heel the change be a difficulty but not to those whom god hath guide . but god will not let your faith be fruitless for unto man be god merciful gracious . we have see thee turn thy face towards every part of heaven but we will have thee turn to a kebla which shall please thee . turn then thy face towards the sacred mosque and wherever ye be turn your face towards that part . they verily to whom the book hath be give know this to be the truth from their lord and god be not regardless of what ye do . even though thou shouldest bring every kind of sign to those who have receive the scripture yet thy kebla they will not adopt nor shalt thou adopt their kebla nor will one part of them adopt the kebla of the other . and if after the knowledge which hath come to thee thou follow their wish verily then wilt thou become of the unrighteous . they to whom we have give the scripture know him the apostle even a they know their own child but truly a part of them do conceal the truth though acquaint with it . the truth be from thy lord . be not then of those who doubt . all have a quarter of the heaven to which they turn them but wherever ye be hasten emulously after good god will one day bring you all together verily god be all powerful . and from whatever place thou comest forth turn thy face toward the sacred mosque for this be the truth from thy lord and god be not inattentive to your doings . and from whatever place thou comest forth turn thy face toward the sacred mosque and wherever ye be to that part turn your face l men have cause of dispute against you but a for the impious among them fear them not but fear me that i may perfect my favour on you and that ye may be guide aright . and we send to you an apostle from among yourselves to rehearse our sign unto you and to purify you and to instruct you in the book and in the wisdom and to teach you that which ye know not therefore remember me i will remember you and give me thanks and be not ungrateful . o ye who believe ! seek help with patience and with prayer for god be with the patient . and say not of those who be slay on god 's path that they be dead nay they be live ! but ye understand not . with somewhat of fear and hunger and loss of wealth and life and fruit will we surely prove you but bear good tidings to the patient who when a mischance chanceth them say verily we be god 's and to him shall we return on them shall be blessing from their lord and mercy and these ! they be the rightly guide . verily safa and marwah be among the monument of god whoever then maketh a pilgrimage to the temple or visiteth it shall not be to blame if he go round about them both . and a for him who of his own accord doeth what be good god be grateful know . they who conceal aught that we have send down either of clear proof or of guidance after what we have so clearly shewn to men in the book god shall curse them and they who curse shall curse them . but a for those who turn to me and amend and make know the truth even unto them will i turn me for i be he who turneth the merciful . verily they who be infidel and die infidel these ! upon them shall be the malison of god and of angel and of all men under it shall they remain for ever their torment shall not be lighten and god will not even look upon them ! your god be one god there be no god but he the compassionate the merciful . assuredly in the creation of the heaven and of the earth and in the alternation of night and day and in the ship which pass through the sea with what be useful to man and in the rain which god sendeth down from heaven give life by it to the earth after it death and by scatter over it all kind of cattle and in the change of the wind and in the cloud that be make to do service between the heaven and the earth be sign for those who understand . yet there be men who take to them idol along with god and love them with the love of god but strong in the faithful be the love of god . oh ! the impious will see when they see their chastisement that all power be god 's and that god be severe in chastise . when those who have have follower shall declare themselves clear from their follower after that they have see the chastisement and when the tie between them shall be cut asunder the follower shall say could we but return to life we would keep ourselves clear from them a they have declare themselves clear of u . so will god shew them their work ! sighing be upon them ! but forth from the fire they come not . oh men ! eat of that which be lawful and good on the earth but follow not the step of satan for he be your avowed enemy he only enjoineth you evil and wickedness and that ye should aver of god that which ye know not . and when it be say to them follow ye that which god hath send down they say nay we follow the usage which we find with our father . what ! though their father be utterly ignorant and devoid of guidance ? the infidel resemble him who shouteth aloud to one who heareth no more than a call and cry ! deaf dumb blind therefore they have no understanding . o ye who believe ! eat of the good thing with which we have supply you and give god thanks if ye be his worshipper . but that which dieth of itself and blood and swine 's flesh and that over which any other name than that of god hath be invoke be forbidden you . but he who shall partake of them by constraint without lust or wilfulness no sin shall be upon him . verily god be indulgent merciful . they truly who hide the scripture which god hath send down and barter them for a mean price these shall swallow into their belly nought but fire . god will not speak to them or assoil them on the day of the resurrection and theirs shall be a grievous torment . these be they who have barter guidance for error and pardon for torment but how great their endurance in fire ! this shall be their doom because god have send down the book with the very truth . and verily they who dispute about that book be in a far go severance from it . there be no piety in turn your face toward the east or the west but he be pious who believeth in god and the last day and the angle and the scripture and the prophet who for the love of god disburseth his wealth to his kindred and to the orphan and the needy and the wayfarer and those who ask and for ransom who observeth prayer and payeth the legal alms and who be of those who be faithful to their engagement when they have engage in them and patient under ill and hardship and in time of trouble these be they who be just and these be they who fear the lord . o believer ! retaliation for bloodshedding be prescribe to you the free man for the free and the slave for the slave and the woman for the woman but he to whom his brother shall make any remission be to be deal with equitably and to him should he pay a fine with liberality . this be a relaxation from your lord and a mercy . for him who after his shall transgress a sore punishment ! but in this law of retaliation be your security for life o men of understand ! to the intent that ye may fear god . it be prescribe to you when any one of you be at the point of death if he leave good that he bequeath equitably to his parent and kindred . this be bind on those who fear god . but a for him who after he hath heard the bequest shall change it surely the wrong of this shall be on those who change it verily god heareth knoweth . but he who feareth from the testator any mistake or wrong and shall make a settlement between the party that shall be no wrong in him verily god be lenient merciful . o believer ! a fast be prescribe to you a it be prescribe to those before you that ye may fear god for certain day . but he among you who shall be sick or on a journey shall fast that same number of other day and a for those who be able to keep it and yet break it the expiation of this shall be the maintenance of a poor man . and he who of his own accord performeth a good work shall derive good from it and good shall it be for you to fast if ye know it . a to the month ramadhan in which the koran be send down to be man 's guidance and an explanation of that guidance and of that illumination as soon a any one of you observeth the moon let him set about the fast but he who be sick or upon a journey shall fast a like number of other day . god wisheth you ease but wisheth not your discomfort and that you fulfil the number of day and that you glorify god for his guidance and that you be thankful . and when my servant ask thee concern me then will i be nigh unto them . i will answer the cry of him that crieth when he crieth unto me but let them hearken unto me and believe in me that they may proceed aright . you be allow on the night of the fast to approach your wife they be your garment and ye be their garment . god knoweth that ye defraud yourselves therein so he turneth unto you and forgiveth you ! now therefore go in unto them with full desire for that which god hath ordain for you and eat and drink until ye can discern a white thread from a black thread by the daybreak then fast strictly till night and go not in unto them but rather pass the time in the mosque . these be the bound set up by god therefore come not near them . thus god maketh his sign clear to men that they may fear him . consume not your wealth among yourselves in vain thing nor present it to judge that ye may consume a part of other men 's wealth unjustly while ye know the sin which ye commit . they will ask thee of the new moon . say they be period fix for man 's service and for the pilgrimage . there be no piety in enter your house at the back but piety consist in the fear of god . enter your house then by their door and fear god that it may be well with you . and fight for the cause of god against those who fight against you but commit not the injustice of attack them first god loveth not such injustice and kill them wherever ye shall find them and eject them from whatever place they have eject you for civil discord be bad than carnage yet attack them not at the sacred mosque unless they attack you therein but if they attack you slay them . such the reward of the infidel . but if they desist then verily god be gracious merciful . fight therefore against them until there be no more civil discord and the only worship be that of god but if they desist then let there be no hostility save against the wicked . the sacred month and the sacred precinct be under the safeguard of reprisal whoever offereth violence to you offer ye the like violence to him and fear god and know that god be with those who fear him . give freely for the cause of god and throw not yourselves with your own hand into ruin and do good for god loveth those who do good . accomplish the pilgrimage and the visitation of the holy place in honour of god and if ye be hem in by foe send whatever offer shall be the easy and shave not your head until the offering reach the place of sacrifice . but whoever among you be sick or hath an ailment of the head must satisfy by fast or alms or an offering . and when ye be safe from foe he who content himself with the visitation of the holy place until the pilgrimage shall bring whatever offer shall be the easy . but he who findeth nothing to offer shall fast three day in the pilgrimage itself and seven day when ye return they shall be ten day in all . this be bind on him whose family shall not be present at the sacred mosque . and fear god and know that god be terrible in punish . let the pilgrimage be make in the month already know whoever therefore undertaketh the pilgrimage therein let him not know a woman nor transgress nor wrangle in the pilgrimage . the good which ye do god knoweth it . and provide for your journey but the best provision be the fear of god fear me then o men of understand ! it shall be no crime in you if ye seek an increase from your lord and when ye pour swiftly on from arafat then remember god near the holy monument and remember him because he hath guide you who before this be of those who go astray then pas on quickly where the people quickly pas and ask pardon of god for god be forgive merciful . and when ye have finish your holy rites remember god a ye remember your own father or with a yet more intense remembrance ! some men there be who say o our lord ! give u our portion in this world but such shall have no portion in the next life and some say o our lord ! give u good in this world and good in the next and keep u from the torment of the fire . they shall have the lot which they have merit and god be swift to reckon . bear god in mind during the stated day but if any haste away in two day it shall be no fault in him and if any tarry longer it shall be no fault in him if he fear god . fear god then and know that to him shall ye be gather . a man there be who surpriseth thee by his discourse concern this life present . he taketh god to witness what be in his heart yet be he the most zealous in oppose thee and when he turneth his back on thee he runneth through the land to enact disorder therein and layeth waste the field and flock but god loveth not the disorder . and when it be say to him fear god the pride of sin seizeth him but he shall have his fill of hell and right wretched the couch ! a man too there be who selleth his very self out of desire to please god and god be good to his servant . o believer ! enter completely into the true religion and follow not the step of satan for he be your declared enemy . but if ye lapse after that our clear sign have come to you know that god be mighty wise . what can such expect but that god should come down to them overshadowed with cloud and the angel also and their doom be seal ? and to god shall all thing return . ask the child of isreal how many clear sign we have give them . but if any man shall alter the boon of god after it shall have reach him assuredly god will be vehement in punish him . this present life be prepared for those who believe not and who mock at the faithful . but they who fear god shall be above them on the day of resurrection and god be bounteous without measure to whom he will . mankind be but one people and god sent prophet to announce glad tidings and to warn and he send down with them the book of truth that it might decide the dispute of men and none dispute but those to whom the book have be give after the clear token have reach them be full of mutual jealousy . and god guide those who believe to the truth of that about which by his permission they have dispute for god guideth whom he pleaseth into the straight path . think ye to enter paradise when no such thing have come upon you a on those who flourish before you ? ill and trouble try them and so tossed be they by trial that the apostle and they who share his faith say when will the help of god come ? be not the help of god nigh ? they will ask thee what they shall bestow in alms . say let the good which ye bestow be for parent and kindred and orphan and the poor and the wayfarer and whatever good ye do of a truth god knoweth . war be prescribe to you but from this ye be averse . yet haply ye be averse from a thing though it be good for you and haply ye love a thing though it be bad for you and god knoweth but ye ye know not . they will ask thee concern war in the sacred month . say to war therein be bad but to turn aside from the cause of god and to have no faith in him and in the sacred temple and to drive out it people be bad in the sight of god and civil strife be bad than bloodshed . they will not cease to war against you until they turn you from your religion if they be able but whoever of you shall turn from his religion and die an infidel their work shall be fruitless in this world and in the next they shall be consign to the fire therein to abide for aye . but they who believe and who fly their country and fight in the cause of god may hope for god 's mercy and god be gracious merciful . they will ask thee concern wine and game of chance . say in both be great sin and advantage also to men but their sin be great than their advantage . they will ask thee also what they shall bestow in alms say what ye can spare . thus god sheweth you his sign that ye may ponder on this present world and on the next . they will also ask thee concern orphan . say fair deal with them be best but if ye mix yourselves up in their affair they be your brother god knoweth the foul dealer from the fair and if god please he could indeed afflict you ! verily god be mighty wise . marry not idolatresses until they believe a slave who believeth be good than an idolatress though she please you more . and wed not your daughter to idolater until they believe for a slave who be a believer be than good an idolater though he please you . they invite to the fire but god inviteth to paradise and to pardon if he so will and maketh clear his sign to men that they may remember . they will also question thee a to the course of woman . say they be a pollution . separate yourselves therefore from woman and approach them not until they be cleanse . but when they be cleanse go in unto them a god hath ordain for you . verily god loveth those who turn to him and loveth those who seek to be clean . your wife be your field go in therefore to your field a ye will but do first some act for your soul ' good and fear ye god and know that ye must meet him and bear these good tidings to the faithful . swear not by god when ye make oath that ye will be virtuous and fear god and promote peace among men for god be he who heareth knoweth . god will not punish you for a mistake in your oath but he will punish you for that which your heart have do . god be gracious merciful . they who intend to abstain from their wife shall wait four month but if they go back from their purpose then verily god be gracious merciful and if they resolve on a divorce then verily god be he who heareth knoweth . the divorced shall wait the result until they have have their course thrice nor ought they to conceal what god hath create in their womb if they believe in god and the last day and it will be more just in their husband to bring them back when in this state if they desire what be right . and it be for the woman to act a they the husband act by them in all fairness but the men be a step above them . god be mighty wise . ye may divorce your wife twice keep them honourably or put them away with kindness . but it be not allow you to appropriate to yourselves aught of what ye have give to them unless both fear that they can not keep within the bound set up by god . and if ye fear that they can not observe the ordinance of god no blame shall attach to either of you for what the wife shall herself give for her redemption . these be the bound of god therefore overstep them not for whoever oversteppeth the bound of god they be evil doer . but if the husband divorce her a third time it be not lawful for him to take her again until she shall have marry another husband and if he also divorce her then shall no blame attach to them if they return to each other think that they can keep within the bound fix by god . and these be the bound of god he maketh them clear to those who have knowledge . but when ye divorce woman and the time for send them away be come either retain them with generosity or put them away with generosity but retain them not by constraint so a to be unjust towards them . he who doth so doth in fact injure himself . and make not the sign of god a jest but remember god 's favour toward you and the book and the wisdom which he hath send down to you for your warning and fear god and know that god 's knowledge embraceth everything . and when ye divorce your wife and they have wait the prescribed time hinder them not from marry their husband when they have agree among themselves in an honourable way . this warning be for him among you who believeth in god and in the last day . this be most pure for you and most decent . god knoweth but ye know not . mother when divorce shall give suck to their child two full year if the father desire that the suckling be complete and such maintenance and clothing a be fair for them shall devolve on the father . no person shall be charge beyond his mean . a mother shall not be press unfairly for her child nor a father for his child and the same with the father 's heir . but if they choose to wean the child by consent and by bargain it shall be no fault in them . and if ye choose to have a nurse for your child it shall be no fault in you in case ye pay what ye promise her accord to that which be fair . fear god and know that god seeth what ye do . if those of you who die leave wife they must await their state during four month and ten day and when this their term be expire you shall not be answerable for the way in which they shall dispose of themselves fairly . and god be cognisant of what ye do . and then shall no blame attach to you in make proposal of marriage to such woman or in keep such intention to yourselves ? god knoweth that ye will not forget them . but promise them not in secret unless ye speak honourable word and resolve not on the marriage tie until the prescribed time be reach and know that god knoweth what be in your mind therefore beware of him and know that god be gracious mild ! it shall be no crime in you if ye divorce your wife so long a ye have not consummate the marriage nor settle any dowry on them . and provide what be needful for them he who be in ample circumstance accord to his mean and he who be straiten accord to his mean with fairness this be bind on those who do what be right . but if ye divorce them before consummation and have already settle a dowry on them ye shall give them half of what ye have settle unless they make a release or he make a release in whose hand be the marriage tie . but if ye make a release it will be near to piety . and forget not generosity in your relation one towards another for god beholdeth your doings . observe strictly the prayer and the middle prayer and stand up full of devotion towards god . and if you have any alarm then pray on foot or rid but when you be safe then remember god how he hath make you to know what ye know not . and such of you a shall die and leave wife shall bequeath their wife a year 's maintenance without cause them to quit their home but if they quit them of their own accord then no blame shall attach to you for any disposition they may make of themselves in a fair way . and god be mighty wise . and for the divorced let there be a fair provision . this be a duty in those who fear god . thus god maketh his sign clear to you that ye may understand . hast thou not think on those who quit their dwelling and they be thousand for fear of death ? god say to them die then he restore them to life for full of bounty towards man be god . but most men give not thanks ! fight for the cause of god and know that god be he who heareth knoweth . who be he that will lend to god a goodly loan ? he will double it to him again and again god be close but open hand also and to him shall ye return . hast thou not consider the assembly of the child of israel after the death of moses when they say to a prophet of theirs set up for u a king we will do battle for the cause of god ? he say may it not be that if to fight be ordain you ye would not fight ? they say and why should we not fight in the cause of god since we and our child be drive forth from our dwelling ? but when fighting be command them they turn back save a few of them but god know the offender ! and their prophet say to them now hath god set talout saul king over you . they say how shall he reign over u when we be more worthy of the kingdom than he and of wealth he hath no abundance ? he say verily god hath choose him to be over you and hath give him increase in knowledge and stature god giveth his kingdom to whom he pleaseth and god be liberal know ! and their prophet say to them verily the sign of his kingship shall be that the ark shall come to you in it be a pledge of security from your lord and the relic leave by the family of moses and the family of aaron the angel shall bear it truly herein shall be a sign indeed to you if ye be believer . and when saul march forth with his force he say god will test you by a river he who drinketh of it shall not be of my band but he who shall not taste it drink a drink out of the hand except shall be of my band . and except a few of them they drink of it . and when they have pass it he and those who believe with him the former say we have no strength this day against djalout goliath and his force but they who hold it a certain that they must meet god say how oft by god 's will hath a small host vanquish a numerous host ! and god be with the steadfastly endure . and when they go forth against goliath and his force they say o our lord ! pour out steadfastness upon u and set our foot firm and help u against the infidel ! and by the will of god they rout them and daood david slew goliath and god give him the kingship and wisdom and teach him accord to his will and be it not for the restraint of one by mean of the other impose on men by god verily the earth have be utterly corrupt . but god be bounteous to his creature . such be the sign of god with truth do we rehearse them to thee for one of the sent one art thou . some of the apostle we have endow more highly than others those to whom god hath spoken he hath raise to the lofty grade and to jesus the son of mary we give manifest sign and we strengthen him with the holy spirit . and if god have please they who come after them would not have wrangle after the clear sign have reach them . but into dispute they fell some of them believe and some be infidel yet if god have please they would not have thus wrangle but god doth what he will . o believer ! give alms of that with which we have supply you before the day cometh when there shall be no traffic nor friendship nor intercession . and the infidel be the wrong doer . god ! there be no god but he the live the eternal nor slumber seizeth him nor sleep his whatsoever be in the heaven and whatsoever be in the earth ! who be he that can intercede with him but by his own permission ? he knoweth what hath be before them and what shall be after them yet nought of his knowledge shall they grasp save what he willeth . his throne reacheth over the heaven and the earth and the upholding of both burdeneth him not and he be the high the great ! let there be no compulsion in religion . now be the right way make distinct from error . whoever therefore shall deny thagout and believe in god he will have take hold on a strong handle that shall not be break and god be he who heareth knoweth . god be the patron of believer he shall bring them out of darkness into light a to those who believe not their patron be thagout they shall bring them out of light into darkness they shall be give over to the fire they shall abide therein for ever . hast thou not think on him who dispute with abraham about his lord because god have give him the kingdom ? when abraham say my lord be he who maketh alive and cause to die he say it be i who make alive and cause to die ! abraham say since god bringeth the sun from the east do thou then bring it from the west . the infidel be confound for god guideth not the evil doer or how he demean him who pass by a city which have be lay in ruin . how say he shall god give life to this city after she hath be dead ? and god cause him to die for an hundred year and then raise him to life . and god say how long hast thou wait ? he say i have wait a day or part of a day . he say nay thou hast wait an hundred year . look on thy food and thy drink they be not corrupt and look on thine as we would make thee a sign unto men and look on the bone of thine as how we will raise them then clothe them with flesh . and when this be shew to him he say i acknowledge that god hath power to do all thing . when abraham say o lord shew me how thou wilt give life to the dead ! he say hast thou not believe ? he say yes but i have ask thee that my heart may be well assure . he say take then four bird and draw them towards thee and cut them in piece then place a part of them on every mountain then call them and they shall come swiftly to thee and know thou that god be might wise ! the likeness of those who expend their wealth for the cause of god be that of a grain of corn which produceth seven ear and in each ear a hundred grain and god will multiply to whom he pleaseth god be liberal know ! they who expend their wealth for the cause of god and never follow what they have lay out with reproach or harm shall have their reward with their lord no fear shall come upon them neither shall they be put to grief . a kind speech and forgiveness be good than alms follow by injury . god be rich clement . o ye who believe ! make not your alms void by reproach and injury like him who spendeth his substance to be see of men and believeth not in god and in the latter day . the likeness of such an one be that of a rock with a thin soil upon it on which a heavy rain falleth but leaveth it hard no profit from their work shall they be able to gain for god guideth not the unbelieving people . and the likeness of those who expend their substance from a desire to please god and for the stablishing of their soul be a a garden on a hill on which the heavy rain falleth and it yieldeth it fruit twofold and even if a heavy rain fall not on it yet be there a dew god beholdeth your action . desireth any one of you a garden of palm and vine through which river flow in which he may have every fruit and that old age should surprise him there and that his offspring should be weakly and that then a fiery violent wind shall strike it so that it shall be burn ? thus god maketh plain his sign to you that ye may reflect . o ye who believe ! bestow alms of the good thing which ye have acquire and of that which we have bring forth for you out of the earth and choose not the bad for almsgiving such a ye would accept yourselves only by connivance and know that god be rich praiseworthy . satan menaceth you with poverty and enjoineth base action but god promiseth you pardon from himself and abundance god be all bounteous knowing . he giveth wisdom to whom he will and he to whom wisdom be give hath have much good give him but none will bear it in mind except the wise of heart . and whatever alms ye shall give or whatever vow ye shall vow of a truth god knoweth it but they who act unjustly shall have no helper . give ye your alms openly ? it be well . do ye conceal them and give them to the poor ? this too will be of advantage to you and will do away your sin and god be cognisant of your action . their guidance be not thine affair o muhammad but god guideth whom he pleaseth . and the good that ye shall give in alms shall redound unto yourselves and ye shall not give but a seek the face of god and whatever good thing ye shall have give in alms shall be repay you and ye shall not be wrong . there be among you the poor who be shut up to fight for the cause of god have it not in their power to strike out into the earth for rich . those who know them not think them rich because of their modesty . by this their token thou shalt know them they ask not of men with importunity and of whatever good thing ye shall give them in alms of a truth god will take knowledge . they who give away their substance in alms by night and day in private and in public shall have their reward with their lord no fear shall come on them neither shall they be put to grief . they who swallow down usury shall arise in the resurrection only a he ariseth whom satan hath infect by his touch . this for that they say sell be only the like of usury and yet god hath allow selling and forbidden usury . he then who when this warn shall come to him from his lord abstaineth shall have pardon for the past and his lot shall be with god . but they who return to usury shall be give over to the fire therein shall they abide for ever . god will bring usury to nought but will increase alms with usury and god loveth no infidel or evil person . but they who believe and do the thing that be right and observe the prayer and pay the legal impost they shall have their reward with their lord no fear shall come on them neither shall they be put to grief . o believer ! fear god and abandon your remain usury if ye be indeed believer . but if ye do it not then hearken for war on the part of god and his apostle yet if ye repent ye shall have the principal of your money . wrong not and ye shall not be wrong . if any one find difficulty in discharge a debt then let there be a delay until it be easy for him but if ye remit it a alms it will be good for you if ye know it . fear the day wherein ye shall return to god then shall every soul be reward accord to it desert and none shall have injustice do to them . o ye who believe ! when ye contract a debt payable at a fixed date write it down and let the notary faithfully note between you and let not the notary refuse to note even a god hath teach him but let him note it down and let him who oweth the debt dictate and let him fear god his lord and not diminish aught thereof . but if he who oweth the debt be foolish or weak or be not able to dictate himself let his friend dictate for him with fairness and call to witness two witness of your people but if there be not two men let there be a man and two woman of those whom ye shall judge fit for witness if the one of them should mistake the other may cause her to recollect . and the witness shall not refuse whenever they shall be summon . and disdain not to put the debt in write be it large or small with it time of payment this will be more just for you in the sight of god good suit for witness and the best for avoid doubt . but if the good be there present and ye pas them from hand to hand then it shall be no fault in you not to write it down . and have witness when ye sell and harm not writer or witness it will be a crime in you to do this . but fear god and god will give you knowledge for god hath knowledge of all thing . and if ye be on a journey and shall find no notary let pledge be take but if one of you trust the other let him who be trust restore what he be trust with and fear god his lord . and refuse not to give evidence . he who refuseth be surely wicked at heart and god knoweth your deed . whatever be in the heaven and in the earth be god 's and whether ye bring forth to light what be in your mind or conceal it god will reckon with you for it and whom he pleaseth will he forgive and whom he pleaseth will he punish for god be all powerful . the apostle believeth in that which hath be send down from his lord a do the faithful also . each one believeth in god and his angel and his book and his apostle we make no distinction between any of his apostle . and they say we have hear and we obey . thy mercy lord ! for unto thee must we return . god will not burden any soul beyond it power . it shall enjoy the good which it hath acquire and shall bear the evil for the acquirement of which it labour . o our lord ! punish u not if we forget or fall into sin o our lord ! and lay not on u a load like that which thou hast laid on those who have be before u o our lord ! and lay not on u that for which we have not strength but blot out our sin and forgive u and have pity on u . thou art our protector give u victory therefore over the infidel nation . the great part of this the old of the medina sura be reveal in the early part of the second year of the hejira and previously to the battle of bedr . the hejira take place in the beginning of muharram or middle of april a. . . the number who emigrate with muhammad at first be about person . medina be mile north of mecca and ten day ' journey . say to mean a mara li muhammad i.e . at the command of muhammad but see sura xviii . p. . death resurrection judgment etc . the jew . the jew and christian hostile to the mission of muhammad . lit . the similitude of them be a the similitude of etc . the people of medina be generally address with o ye who believe the meccans with o men . hence it have be infer that from verse o men to inclusively be of the meccan period . the subject treat of also lead to this conclusion . the statue of false god . it will be an agreeable surprise to the bless to have fruit which at first sight resemble those of earth but be infinitely more delicious . muhammad have be reproach for have draw illustration from the ant bee spider etc . concern faith in muhammad . see verse below note . the number of the heaven be borrow from the talmud or tradition base upon it but the idea probably have it root in the scriptural expression heaven of heaven . lit . a caliph vicegerent . when the holy one bless be he would create man he take counsel with the angel and say to them we will make man in our image . midr . rabbah on numb . iv . par . . comp . midr . on gen. par . . sanhedr . . god say to the angel 'his wisdom be great than yours . ' then bring he before them beasts cattle and bird and ask for their name but they know them not . but when he have create man etc . midr . a above . or if ye be truthful or can make good a good claim to the vicegerency . in the name eblis diabolos and in the honour claim for adam a a kind of godman there be trace of a christian original as well a in the identification of the serpent with satan . comp . p . civ . heb . i. . the talmudists also enlarge on the honour pay to adam . adam sat in the garden and the angel bring him flesh and cool wine . sanhedr . . in the hour when the holy one bless be he create man the angel go astray in regard to him and essay to say before him ' o holy one ! ' then god permitted sleep to fall on him and all know that he be of earth . midr . rabbah on gen. par . . it be possible that the arabic word balas a profligate wicked person may have influence muhammad in the formation of the word eblis . see note p. . eblis be use in the arabic version of the new testament for the probable date of which see tischendorf prol . p. . observe the change from eblis the calumniator to satan the hater . muhammad rarely accuse the jew and christian of corrupt but often of misinterpret their sacred book in order to evade his claim . his charge however be always very vaguely word and his utterance upon this subject be tantamount to a strong testimony in favour of the unimpeachable integrity of the sacred book both of the jew and christian so far a he know them . see sura lxxxvii . vii . and v. below . see sura lxv . xxi . . lit . slay one another . the talmudists relate how the israelite who have die on hear the divine voice etc . be restore by the intercession of the law itself . sanh . . by store them up in violation of god 's command . jericho accord to some commentator jerusalem accord to others but see verse . see sura lxxxvii . vii . . lit . all men . this incident be perhaps inadvertently borrow from ex . xv . . this passage comp . xxvi . be one of the numerous anachronism which abound in the koran and prove the gross ignorance of the arabian prophet . the sabeites be identical with the mendaites or so called christian of s. john reside in the marshy district at the mouth of the euphrates but be not the same with the star worship sabians of harran in mesopotamia . see 'herbelot bibl . or . under the word sabi assemani bibl . or . iii . . for curious detail a to the element of the sabeite religion see chwolson 's ssabier and ssabaismus i. see sura lxxxvii . vii . . see sura lxxxvii . vii . . compare numb . xix . deut . xxii . . the cow be to be sacrifice in order that a murderer might be discover through the miracle to be work on the corpse by a piece of her flesh . to please you o muslim . this be one of the passage which shew great familiarity with the habit of the jew on the part of muhammad . see maracci 's prodr . i. . wahl 's einleitung xxx . xxxv . the pentateuch . this passage shew that the art of writing be know in medina shortly after the hejira . forty day the period during which they worship the calf . the blood of those who be a your own flesh . two jewish tribe koreidha and nadhir in alliance with certain arab tribe who be at war destroy one another 's abode but redeem the jewish captive profess that they be command to do this by the law . so the commentator . gabriel . muhammad either knowingly reject the divinity of the holy ghost or confound gabriel announce the conception with the holy spirit that overshadow mary . it be probable that muhammad 's idea of the spirit be at first indefinite but that the two expression gabriel and the holy spirit become ultimately synonymous . see note on sura lxvii . xvii . . geiger p. quote an instance in which the jewish expositor understand the distinctly speak spirit sanhedr . of gabriel . the gift of the prophetic office etc . to a pagan arab and not to a jew . matt . xxiii . . see sura vii . p. . comp . tim . v. . in solomon 's book of magic . this story have be suppose to be of persian origin . see hyde de rel . vet . pers . ch . xii . but from a passage in the midr . abhkhir quote in the midr . jalkut ch . and from a quotation in maracci 's prodr . iv . geiger infers that muhammad have transfer to the time of solomon the rabbinic tradition concern the influence of angel upon men at the time of the deluge . p. . babel be regard by the muslim a the fountain head of the science of magic . they suppose haroot and maroot to be two angel who in consequence of their want of compassion for the frailty of mankind be send down to earth to be tempt . they both sin and be permit to choose whether they would be punish now or hereafter choose the former and be still suspend by the foot at babel in a rocky pit and be the great teacher of magic . lane on ch . iii . note of the night . raina a pronounce in hebrew our bad one but in arabic look upon u a kind of salutation of the same signification a ondhorna which however do not admit of any secondary bad sense like raina . comp . sura xvi . iv . . the muslims admit that there be verse cancel by late one . the doctrine of abrogation be teach in the talmud . thus hilchoth mamrim ii . etc . that be do not weigh the evidence for muhammad 's mission already give but demand a the jew do to see god himself . in all muhammadan country the first time of prayer be the moghreb or sunset or rather four minute later the second the eshe when it have become quite dark the third the soobh or fegr the daybreak the fourth doohr or a little after noon when the sun have begin to decline the fifth the asr midway between noon and nightfall . the obligatory legal alms or impost be call a here zekah lit . purity the voluntary sudackah . it be however leave to the conscience of individual to give and to apply them a they think fit . the idolatrous arab . if this verse be aim at the meccans who in the th year of the hejira forbad muhammad and his follower to enter the temple of mecca in the expedition of hodeibiya it be misplace here . abrogate by verse below . the caaba . freytag einl . p. say that there be no good reason for doubt that the caaba be found a state in this passage . see note on sura xcvii . iii . . deut . xviii . . at the time when our father jacob quit this world be summon his twelve son and say to them hearken to your father israel gen. xlix . . have ye any doubt in your heart concern the holy one bless be he ! they say hear o israel our father . a there be no doubt in thy heart so neither be there in ours . for the lord be our god and he be one . midr . rabbah on gen. par . and on deut . par . . comp . also targ . jer . on deut . vi . . tract . pesachim . see sura lxxiii . xvi . n. p. . ibn batutah assure u vol . ii . that when in the th century he visit basra he saw in the mosque the copy of the koran which the caliph othman have in his hand when murder and that the mark of his blood be still visible at the word of this verse . othman 's original be also say to be preserve in egypt morocco damascus mecca and medina . see . quatremere in journ . asiatique juillet . the original simply have baptism of god . this may be understood either of islam generally or with ullmann in the more restricted sense of circumcision . perhaps muhammad use the word advisedly a a hint to the christian of his land that in the reception of his religion consist the true new birth . or intermediate i.e . accord to the commentator not addict to excess just . ullm . ein vermittelndes volk zwischen juden und christen die mitte haltend . in have pray towards jerusalem . of mecca . this change of the kebla from jerusalem to mecca show that this part of the sura be reveal at a time when the breach between muhammad and the jew be past healing i.c . in the first half of the second year of the hejira . see thilo 's . cod . apoc . p. n. that be the jew be really convince of the truth of muhammad 's mission . that be war with the infidel . the precise date of verse depend upon whether this passage refer to the battle of bedr or ohod . these word be constantly use by the pious muslim when in any trouble . hill in the sacred territory of mecca which have long be object of superstitious reverence to the idolatrous arab on which account the muslim be at first unwilling to include them among the sacred place . the pentateuch . see verse . this and the three follow verse be probably meccan a also verse . the ringleader of infidelity and idolatrous faith . freyt . lex . vol . ii . p. quid eos agere coegit quemadmodum damnati agunt ? but mar . quanta erit sustinentia corum ! to whom his brother that be any arab or believer shall remit the penalty of death . of the stricter mosaic lex talionis a well of the ante islamitic arabian custom by which the killing of a slave be avenge by the death of a free man and the killing of a woman by take the life of a man . see freyt . einl . p. . comp . ex . xxi . . that be by kill the manslayer . on the word furquan see sura xv . xxi . . a mutual comfort to each other . thus misch . berachoth prayer be to be say as soon a one can distinguish between a blue and white thread . judging from the minuteness of the precept lay down in this and the following verse to it would appear that they be add at a late period of muhammad 's residence at medina . such appear to have be the superstitious custom of the arab after their return from pilgrimage to mecca . their driving you out of mecca or the temptation to idolatry . lit . the sacred month for the sacred month and the sacred precinct or thing for reprisal . the meaning of this difficult passage be that in war for the cause of religion the sacred month and the temple of mecca may be make the time and scene of contest which then and there be usually prohibit . for the most accurate information a to the pilgrimage see freytag einl . . this show that muhammad inculcate the doctrine of entire freedom of the will . the great pilgrimage which every muslim be bind to perform once in his life be the hadjat el farz the one obligatory pilgrimage or the hadjat el islam . the umrah or little pilgrimage may be perform at any time except the pilgrimage season and it ceremony be much few . they be describe by lieut . burton in his pilgrimage vol . iii . ch . xxviii . namely shaw l dhu'lkaada and dhu'lhajja . by trade during the hadj . the pilgrim move on very rapidly when in the immediate neighbourhood of the holy place . from the valley of mina . say to have be one al akhnas ibn shoraik a dissembler with muhammad . sohaib when he join the standard of muhammad leave all his property in the hand of the infidel . verse be probably addressed to those muslim who be desirous to observe certain part of the jewish law . the koran . that be there be originally but one religion in the world . comp . sura c. iv . and cxiv . v. . limit fence . the word be talmudic . thus pirke aboth i. the men of the great synagogue say . . . make a fence for the law and iii . tradition be a fence to the law . comp . sura lxxxii . xxxi . . within the four month and ten day . either the asr midway between noon and nightfall see verse above or the prayer immediately after midday . see note on sura c. iv . . this verse be certainly old than the commencement of sura iv . which alter the law here lay down . comp . ezek . xxxvii . . these jew be say by some commentator to have abandon their dwelling through fear of a pestilence comp . talmud sanhed . by others for fear of be compel to serve in the war of god . this and the seven follow verse shew that muhammad foresee an open rupture with the people of medina at no distant period felt it necessary to stimulate the zeal and courage of his partisan by example from jewish history . ar . shechinah . see freytag lex . in v. this word as well a the arabic word for ark p. n. betray in their form a rabbinic origin . the shoe and rod of moses the mitre of aaron the vase of manna the fragment of the two table of the law . observe the confusion between gideon and saul . see verse . the drift of these word which be of such frequent recurrence in the koran be that the former revelation have be abuse and instead of lead them to islam break them up into sect and dissentient party . this verse must have be reveal before muhammad felt himself secure in his new position at medina . a name apply to an idol or idol especially allat and ozza the ancient idol of the meccans . the termination of the word thagout be more hebraic than pure arabic and literally mean error . nimrod . ozair or esdras doubt whether jerusalem could be rebuild after it destruction by nebuchadnezzar and the miracle here narrate be work for his assurance . the fable have it origin in the circuit make by nehemiah around the ruined city . neh . ii . . lit . it be fall on it roof . comp . gen. xv . . that be satan would dissuade you from liberal contribution by instill the fear of poverty . comp . matt . vi . . this contradict verse as well a several verse in sura viii . xix . sura xcviii . clear evidence xcii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful the unbeliever among the people of the book and the polytheist do not waver until the clear evidence have come to them a messenger from god recite to them the pure page wherein be true scripture ! neither be they to whom the scripture be give divide into sect till after this clear evidence have reach them ! yet be not aught enjoin on them but to worship god with sincere religion sound in faith and to observe prayer and pay the stated alms . for this be true religion . but the unbeliever among the people of the book and among the polytheist shall go into the fire of gehenna to abide therein for aye . of all creature be they the bad ! but they who believe and do the thing that be right these of all creature be the best ! their recompense with their lord shall be garden of eden 'neath which the river flow in which they shall abide for evermore . god be well pleased in them and they in him ! this for him who feareth his lord . sura lxiv . mutual deceit xciii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful all that be in the heaven and all that be in the earth praiseth god his the kingdom and his the glory ! and he hath power over all thing ! it be he who hath create you all yet some of you be infidel and others believer but god beholdeth all your action . he hath create the heaven and the earth in truth and he hath fashion you and give you goodly form and to him must ye all return . he knoweth all that passeth in the heaven and in the earth and he knoweth what ye hide and what ye bring to light and god knoweth the very secret of men 's breast . hath not the story reach you of those who disbelieve of yore and therefore taste the evil consequence of their doings ? and a sore punishment doth await them . this for that when their apostle come to them with the clear token they say what ! shall men be our guide ? and they believe not and turn their back . but god can dispense with them for god be the rich the praiseworthy ! the infidel pretend that they shall not be raise from the dead . say yea by my lord ye shall surely be raise then shall ye surely be tell of your deed ! and easy be this for god . believe then in god and his apostle and in the light which we have send down for god be fully aware of all ye do . the day when he shall gather you together for the day of mutual gathering will be the day of mutual deceit and whoso shall have believe in god and do what be right for him will he cancel his deed of evil and he will bring him into the garden beneath whose shade the river flow to abide therein for evermore . this will be the great bliss ! but the unbelieving those who give the lie to our sign shall be the inmate of the fire wherein they shall remain for ever . and a wretched passage thither ! no mischance chanceth but by god 's permission and whoso believeth in god that man 's heart will he guide and god knoweth all thing . obey god then and obey the apostle but if ye turn away our apostle be not to blame for he be only charge with plain preaching . god ! there be no god but he ! on god then let the faithful trust . o ye who believe ! verily in your wife and your child ye have an enemy wherefore beware of them . but if ye pas it over and pardon and be lenient then god too be lenient merciful . your wealth and your child be only a source of trial ! but god ! with him be the great recompense . fear god then with all your might and hear and obey and give alms for your own weal for such a be save from their own greed shall prosper . if ye lend god a generous loan he will double it to you and will forgive you for god be grateful long suffering . he knoweth alike the hidden and the manifest the mighty the wise ! the first verse of this sura and the phrase obey god and the apostle verse which usually occur only in medina suras the phrase in verse compare with sura cii . lix . as well a the subject matter incline me to follow those muslim commentator who be of opinion that the whole sura be reveal at medina . weil and muir suppose it to be meccan . that be the day on which it will be find that if the just have be wicked they would have take the place of the reprobate while the reprobate will see that if they have be just person they would have go to paradise . their occasionally beguile you from your duty especially that of contend for the faith . comp . cor . vii . . sura lxii . the assembly xciv . medina . ii verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth uttereth the praise of god the king ! the holy ! the mighty ! the wise ! it be he who hath sent to the pagan folk arab an apostle from among themselves to rehearse his sign to them and to purify them and to impart to them a knowledge of the book and wisdom for aforetime be they in manifest error . and others among them have not yet overtake those who precede them in the faith . but he be the mighty the wise ! this be the goodness of god he bestoweth it on whom he will god be of immense goodness ! they on whom the burden of the law be lay and would not bear it be like an as beneath a load of book . a sorry likeness this for the people who give the lie to the sign of god ! god guideth not the people who do this wrong ! say o ye jew if ye profess that ye rather than other men be the friend of god then wish for death if ye be men of truth . but never on account of their previous handywork will they wish for it and god knoweth the wrong doer . say verily the death from which ye flee will surely meet you . then shall ye be bring back to him who knoweth alike the thing do in secret and openly and he will tell you of your action . o ye who believe ! when ye be summon to prayer on the day of the assembly haste to the commemoration of god and quit your traffic . this if ye know it will be best for you . and when the prayer be end then disperse yourselves abroad and go in quest of the bounty of god and that it may be well with you oft remember god . but when they get a sight of merchandise or sport they disperse after it and leave thee stand alone . say god hath in reserve what be good than sport or ware . and god be the best provider ! friday the day on which muhammad make his first entry into medina and the day on which creation be finish . it be say that when muhammad be preach dahya alkalbi while yet a heathen come on a friday into medina at the head of a caravan and that all the congregation attract by the music of the tambour which precede it leave the sermon for the spectacle . muqu til ap . alfarr . if this account be accurate we may approximate to the date of this sura a in hej . towards the close . dahya be know to have fight in the rank of the muslim at the battle of the ditch . and a the former part be aim at the jew it be probably of the same period a sura xci . ii . sura viii . the spoil . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful they will question thee about the spoil . say the spoil be god 's and the apostle 's . therefore fear god and settle this among yourselves and obey god and his apostle if you be believer . believer be they only whose heart thrill with fear when god be name and whose faith increaseth at each recital of his sign and who put their trust in their lord who observe the prayer and give alms out of that with which we have supply them these be the believer their due grade awaiteth them in the presence of their lord and forgiveness and a generous provision . remember how thy lord cause thee to go forth from thy home on a mission of truth and part of the believer be quite averse to it they dispute with thee about the truth which have be make so clear a if they be be lead forth to death and saw it before them and remember when god promise you that one of the two troop should fall to you and ye desire that they who have no arm should fall to you but god purpose to prove true the truth of his word and to cut off the uttermost part ofthe infidel that he might prove his truth to be the truth and bring to nought that which be nought though the impious be averse to it when ye seek succour of your lord and he answer you i will verily aid you with a thousand angel rank on rank and god make this promise a pure good tidings and to assure your heart by it for succour cometh from god alone ! verily god be mighty wise . recollect when sleep a sign of security from him fell upon you and he send down upon you water from heaven that he might thereby cleanse you and cause the pollution of satan to pass from you and that he might gird up your heart and stablish your foot by it when thy lord spake unto the angel i will be with you therefore stablish ye the faithful . i will cast a dread into the heart of the infidel . strike off their head then and strike off from them every finger tip . this because they have oppose god and his apostle and whoso shall oppose god and his apostle . . . . verily god will be severe in punishment . this for you ! taste it then ! and for the infidel be the torture of the fire ! o ye who believe ! when ye meet the marshalled host of the infidel turn not your back to them whoso shall turn his back to them on that day unless he turn aside to fight or to rally to some other troop shall incur wrath from god hell shall be his abode and wretched the journey thither ! so it be not ye who slew them but god slew them and those shaft be god 's not thine ! he would make trial of the faithful by a gracious trial from himself verily god heareth knoweth . this befel that god might also bring to nought the craft of the infidel . o meccans ! if ye desire a decision now hath the decision come to you . it will be good for you if ye give over the struggle . if ye return to it we will return and your force though they be many shall never avail you aught for god be with the faithful . o ye faithful ! obey god and his apostle and turn not away from him now that ye hear the truth and be not like those who say we hear when they hear not for the vile beast in god 's sight be the deaf the dumb who understand not . have god know any good in them he would certainly have make them hear . but even if he have make them hear they would certainly have turn back and withdrawn afar . o ye faithful ! make answer to the appeal of god and his apostle when he calleth you to that which giveth you life . know that god cometh in between a man and his own heart and that to him shall ye be gather . and be afraid of temptation the evil doer among you will not be the only one on whom it will light and know ye that god be severe in punishment . and remember when ye be few and reputed weak in the land ye fear l men should pluck you away then be it that he take you in and strengthen you with his help and supply you with good thing that haply ye might give thanks . o ye who believe ! deal not falsely with god and his apostle and be not false in your engagement with your own knowledge and know that your wealth and your child be a temptation and that god ! with him be a glorious recompense . o ye who believe ! if ye fear god he will make good your deliverance and will put away your sin from you and will forgive you . god be of great bounteousness ! and call to mind when the unbeliever plot against thee to detain thee prisoner or to kill thee or to banish thee they plot but god plot and of plotter be god the best ! and oft a our sign be rehearse to them they say now have we hear if we please we could certainly utter it like ! yes it be mere tale of the ancient . and when they say god ! if this be the very truth from before thee rain down stone upon u from heaven or lay on u some grievous chastisement . but god choose not to chastise them while thou wast with them nor would god chastise them when they sue for pardon . but because they debar the faithful from the holy temple albeit they be not it guardian nothing be there on their part why god should not chastise them . the godfearing only be it guardian but most of them know it not . and their prayer at the house of god be no other than whistle through the finger and clapping of the hand taste then the torment for that ye have be unbeliever . the infidel spend their rich with intent to turn men aside from the way of god spend it they shall then shall sigh be upon them and then shall they be overcome . and the infidel shall be gather together into hell that god may separate the bad from the good and put the bad one upon the other and heap them all up and put them into hell ! these be they who shall be lose . say to the infidel if they desist from their unbelief what be now past shall be forgive them but if they return to it they have already before them the doom of the ancient ! fight then against them till strife be at an end and the religion be all of it god 's . if they desist verily god beholdeth what they do but if they turn their back know ye that god be your protector excellent protector ! excellent helper ! and know ye that when ye have take any booty a fifth part belongeth to god and to the apostle and to the near of kin and to orphan and to the poor and to the wayfarer if ye believe in god and in that which we have send down to our servant on the day of the victory the day of the meeting of the host . over all thing be god potent . when ye be encamp on the near side of the valley and they be on the further side and the caravan be below you if ye have make an engagement to attack ye would have fail the engagement but ye be lead into action notwithstanding that god might accomplish the thing destine to be do that he who should perish might perish with a clear token before him and that he who liveth might live with it . and verily god heareth knoweth . remember when god shew them to thee in thy dream a few have he show them numerous ye would certainly have become fainthearted and would certainly have dispute about the matter but from this god keep you he knoweth the very secret of the breast and when on your meeting he make them to appear to your eye a few and diminish you in their eye that god might carry out the thing that be to be do . to god do all thing return . believer ! when ye confront a troop stand firm and make frequent mention of the name of god that it may fare well with you and obey god and his apostle and dispute not l ye become fainthearted and your success go from you but endure with steadfastness for god be with the steadfastly endure . and be not like those meccans who come out of their house insolently and to be see of men and who turn others from the way of god god be round about their action . when satan prepare their work for them and say no man shall conquer you this day and verily i will be near to help you but when the two army come in sight he turn on his heel and say ay i be clear of you ay i see what ye see not ay i fear god for god be severe in punish . when the hypocrite and the diseased of heart say their religion hath mislead the muslim but whoso putteth his trust in god . yes verily god be mighty wise ! if thou didst see when the angel cause the infidel to die ! they smite their face and their back and taste ye the torture of the burning this for what your hand have send on before you and god be not unjust to his servant . their state be like that of the people of pharaoh and of those before them who believe not in the sign of god therefore god seize upon them in their sin ! god be mighty severe in punish . this because god changeth not the favour with which he favoureth a people so long a they change not what be in their heart and for that god heareth knoweth . their state be like that of the people of pharaoh and of those before them who treat their lord 's sign a lie . we therefore destroy them in their sin and we drown the people of pharaoh for they be all doer of wrong . the bad beast truly in the sight of god be the thankless who will not believe they with whom thou hast league and who be ever break their league and who fear not god ! if thou take them in war then by the example of their fate scatter those who shall follow them that they may be warn or if thou fear treachery from any people throw back their treaty to them a thou fairly mayest for god loveth not the treacherous . and think not that the infidel shall escape u ! they shall not weaken god . make ready then against them what force ye can and strong squadron whereby ye may strike terror into the enemy of god and your enemy and into others beside them whom ye know not but whom god knoweth . all that you shall expend for the cause of god shall be repay you and ye shall not be wrong . and if they lean to peace lean thou also to it and put thy trust in god for he be the hear the knowing . but if they seek to betray thee god will be all sufficient for thee . he it be who hath strengthen thee with his help and with the faithful and hath make their heart one . hadst thou spent all the rich of the earth thou couldst not have unite their heart but god hath unite them for he be mighty wise . o prophet ! god and such of the faithful a follow thee will be all sufficient for thee . o prophet ! stir up the faithful to the fight . twenty of you who stand firm shall vanquish two hundred and if there be a hundred of you they shall vanquish a thousand of the infidel for they be a people devoid of understand . now hath god make your work easy for he knoweth how weak ye be . if there be an hundred of you who endure resolutely they shall vanquish two hundred and if there be a thousand of you they shall vanquish two thousand by god 's permission for god be with those who be resolute to endure . no prophet hath be enable to take captive until he have make great slaughter in the earth . ye desire the passing fruition of this world but god desireth the next life for you . and god be mighty wise . have there not be a previous ordinance from god a severe chastisement have befall you for the ransom which ye take . eat therefore of the spoil ye have take what be lawful and good and fear god god be gracious merciful . o prophet ! say to the captive who be in your hand if god shall know good to be in your heart he will give you good beyond all that hath be take from you and will forgive you for god be forgive merciful . but if they seek to deal treacherously with you they have already deal treacherously with god before ! therefore hath he give you power over them . god be know wise . verily they who have believe and flee their home and spend their substance for the cause of god and they who have take in the prophet and be helpful to him shall be near of kin the one to the other . and they who have believe but have not flee their home shall have no right of kindred with you at all until they too fly their country . yet if they seek aid from you on account of the faith your part it be to give them aid except against a people between whom and yourselves there shall be a treaty . and god beholdeth your action . the infidels lend one another mutual help . unless ye do the same there will be discord in the land and great corruption . but a for those who have believe and flee their country and fight on the path of god and give the prophet an asylum and be helpful to him these be the faithful mercy be their due and a noble provision . and they who have believe and flee their country since and have fight at your side these also be of you . those who be unite by tie of blood be the near of kin to each other . this be in the book of god . verily god knoweth all thing . on this sura which relate mainly to the battle of bedr see weil 's . der prophet p. . at medina . the necessity for the combat and it probable result . muhammad have conceive the design of attack an unarmed caravan belonging to the koreisch on it way from syria to mecca . abu sofian who have charge of it send to mecca for succour whence a body of nearly arm men at once set out to his assistance . some of the muslim be anxious to attack the caravan others notwithstanding the disparity of number propose to throw themselves upon the succour . idolatry . in sura xcvii . iii . the angel be say to be . lit . thou didst not cast when thou didst cast but god cast . this be explain of the miracle of the gravelstones and sand cast by god into the eye of the meccans at bedr . that be by our victory over you . muhammad specially address the mohadjers in this verse i.e . those who have flee with him to medin . twelve of the koreisch have give camel and a large sum of money in aid of the meccan succour . lit . hath precede . before islam it have be the custom among the arabian to assign a fourth part of the booty to the leader of an expedition . see freyt . einl . p. . that be on the day of the battle of bedr . see sura xxi . p. . the mission of gabriel to muhammad with the promise of victory . compare the different account in sura xcvii . iii . ii . the commentator however get over the discropancy by explain the apparent diminution of the muslim at the commencement only of the battle which have the effect of draw on the enemy in self confidence . the angel fight for the muslim . by induce them to attack so greatly superior a force . thus beidh . or more simply render them the like . comp . lev . xxvi . josh . xxiii . . authorise the ransom of captive . that be a disposition to become muslim . that be on account of their infidelity . see weil . life of . p. n. sura xlvii . muhammad xcvi . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful whoso believe not and prevent others from the way of god their work will he cause to miscarry but whoso believe and do thing that be right and believe in what hath be send down to muhammad for it be the truth from their lord their sin will he cancel and dispose their heart aright . this because the infidel follow vanity while those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus to men doth god set forth their likeness . when ye encounter the infidel strike off their head till ye have make a great slaughter among them and of the rest make fast the fetter . and afterwards let there either be free dismissal or ransomings till the war hath lay down it burden . thus do . be such the pleasure of god he could himself take vengeance upon them but he would rather prove the one of you by the other . and whoso fight for the cause of god their work he will not suffer to miscarry he will vouchsafe them guidance and dispose their heart aright and he will bring them into the paradise of which he hath tell them . believer ! if ye help god god will help you and will set your foot firm but a for the infidel let them perish and their work shall god bring to nought this because they be averse from the command which god send down fruitless therefore shall their work become ! have they not journey through the land and see what hath be the end of those who flourish before them ? god brought destruction on them and the like of this doth await the infidel . this because god be the protector of those who believe and because the infidel have no protector . verily god will bring those who believe and do the thing that be right into the garden beneath whose shade the river flow but they who believe not take their fill and eat a the beast eat ! and their dwelling place the fire ! and how many city be mighty in strength than thy city which hath thrust thee forth ! we destroy them and there be none to help them . shall he who followeth the clear teaching of his lord be a he the evil of whose doings hath be make to seem good to him or like those who follow their own lust ? a picture of the paradise which be promise to the god fearing ! therein be river of water which corrupt not river of milk whose taste changeth not and river of wine delicious to those who quaff it and river of honey clarify and therein be all kind of fruit for them from their lord ! be this like the lot of those who must dwell for ever in the fire ? and shall have draught of boil water force on them which will rend their bowel asunder ? some of them indeed hearken to thee until when they go out from thee they say with sneer to those to whom the knowledge hath be give what be this he say ? these be they whose heart god hath seal up and who follow their own lust . but a to those who have the guidance he will increase their guidance and he will teach them what to fear . for what do the infidel wait but that the hour come suddenly on them ? already be it sign come and when it hath come on them indeed how can they be warn then ? know then that there be no god but god and ask pardon for thy sin and for believer both men and woman . god knoweth your busy movement and your final resting place . the believer say oh would that a sura be send down ! but when a peremptory sura be reveal whose burden be war thou mayest see the diseased of heart look toward thee with a look of one on whom the shadow of death have fall ! but good in them would be obedience and become language . and if when the command for war be issue they be true to god it will be assuredly best for them . be ye not ready if ye have turn back from him to spread disorder in the land and violate the tie of blood ? these be they whom god hath curse and make deaf and blind their eye ! will they not then meditate on the koran ? be lock upon their heart ? but a to those who return to their error after the guidance hath be make plain to them satan shall beguile them and fill them with his suggestion . this because they say to those who abhor what god hath send down we will comply with you in part of what ye enjoin . but god knoweth their secret reservation . but how ? when the angel in cause them to die shall smite them on the face and back ! this because they follow that which angereth god and abhor what pleaseth him therefore will he make their work fruitless . think these men of diseased heart that god will not bring out their malice to light ? if such be our pleasure we could point them out to thee and thou surely know them by their token and know them thou shalt by the strangeness of their word . god knoweth your doings . and we will surely test you until we know the valiant and the steadfast among you and we will test the report of your conduct . verily they who believe not and turn others from the way of god and separate from the apostle after that the guidance hath be clearly shew them shall in no way injure god but their work shall he bring to nought . believer ! obey god and the apostle and render not your work vain . verily those who believe not and who pervert others from the way of god and then die in unbelief god will not forgive . be not fainthearted then and invite not the infidel to peace when ye have the upper hand for god be with you and will not defraud you of the recompense of your work . surely this present life be only a play and pastime ! but if ye believe fear god he will give you your reward but he will not ask all your rich of you . should he ask them of you and urge you ye would shew yourself niggard and he would bring your grudge to light . lo ! ye be they who be call to expend for the cause of god and some of you be niggard but whoso be niggardly shall be niggard only to his own loss for god be the rich and ye be the poor and if ye turn back he will change you for another people and they shall not be your like ! this sura be reveal at a period after the victory at bedr when there be still some hesitation on the part of muhammad 's follower to take decided step for secure their position . see . lit . will he cause to wander that be from their proper aim and end the reward of paradise . see verse ad f. the meccans and other unbeliever of muhammad 's time . the hanefites suppose this law to apply only to the battle of bedr . the shiite take it a of universal obligation . this verse be say by omar b. muhammad and itq . to be the expression of muhammad 's feeling at the injury inflict on mecca . he be report to have weep over it . the first sign be the mission of muhammad the second the splitting of the moon the third the smoke mention in sura xliv . p. . that be command war against the infidel . unintelligible or affected word apply to the new religion in contempt . see sura xci . ii . p. . matt . xxi . . sura iii . the family of imran xcvii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful elif . lam . mim . god ! there be no god but he the live the merciful ! in truth hath he send down to thee the book which confirmeth those which precede it for he have send down the law and the evangel aforetime a man 's guidance and now hath he send down the illumination . furkan . verily for those who believe not in the sign of god be a severe chastisement ! and god be mighty the avenger ! god ! nought that be in earth or that be in heaven be hide unto him . he it be who formeth you in your mother ' womb . there be no god but he the mighty the wise ! he it be who hath send down to thee the book . some of it sign be of themselves perspicuous these be the basis of the book and others be figurative . but they whose heart be give to err follow it figure crave discord crave an interpretation yet none knoweth it interpretation but god . and the stable in knowledge say we believe in it it be all from our lord . but none will bear this in mind save men endue with understanding . o our lord ! suffer not our heart to go astray after that thou hast once guide u and give u mercy from before thee for verily thou art he who giveth . o our lord ! for the day of whose come there be not a doubt thou wilt surely gather mankind together . verily god will not fail the promise . a for the infidel their wealth and their child shall avail them nothing against god . they shall be fuel for the fire . after the wont of the people of pharaoh and of those who go before them they treat our sign a falsehood . therefore god lay hold of them in their sin and god be severe in punish ! say to the infidel ye shall be worst and to hell shall ye be gather together and wretched the couch ! ye have already have a sign in the meeting of the two host . the one host fought in the cause of god and the other be infidel . to their own eyesight the infidel saw you twice as many a themselves and god aid with his succour whom he would and in this truly be a lesson for men endue with discernment . fair seem to men be the love of pleasure from woman and child and the treasured treasure of gold and silver and horse of mark and flock and cornfield ! such the enjoyment of this world 's life . but god ! goodly the home with him . say shall i tell you of good thing than these prepared for those who fear god in his presence ? theirs shall be gardens beneath whose pavilion the river flow and in which shall they abide for aye and wife of stainless purity and acceptance with god for god regardeth his servant who say o our lord ! we have indeed believe pardon u our sin and keep u from the torment of the fire the patient and the truthful the lowly and the charitable and they who seek pardon at each daybreak . god witnesseth that there be no god but he and the angel and men endue with knowledge stablished in righteousness proclaim there be no god but he the mighty the wise ! the true religion with god be islam and they to whom the scripture have be give differ not till after the knowledge have come to them and through mutual jealousy . but a for him who shall not believe in the sign of god god will be prompt to reckon with him ! if they shall dispute with thee then say i have surrender myself to god as have they who follow me . say to those who have receive the book and to the common folk do ye surrender yourselves unto god ? if they become muslim then be they guide aright but if they turn away thy duty be only preach and god 's eye be on his servant . but to those who believe not in the sign of god and unjustly slay the prophet and slay those men who enjoin uprightness announce an afflictive chastisement . these be they whose work come to nought in this world and in the next and none shall they have to help them ! hast thou not mark those who have receive a portion of the scripture when they be summon to the book of god that it may settle their difference ? then do a part of them turn back and withdraw far off . this because they say the fire shall by no mean touch u but for certain day their own device have deceive them in their religion . but how when we shall assemble them together for the day of which whose come there be no doubt and when every soul shall be pay what it hath earn and they shall not be wrong ? say o god possessor of all power thou givest power to whom thou wilt and from whom thou wilt thou takest it away ! thou raisest up whom thou wilt and whom thou wilt thou dost abase ! in thy hand be good for thou art over all thing potent . thou causest the night to pass into the day and thou causest the day to pass into the night . thou bringest the live out of the dead and thou bringest the dead out of the living and thou givest sustenance to whom thou wilt without measure . let not believer take infidel for their friend rather than believer whoso shall do this hath nothing to hope from god unless indeed ye fear a fear from them but god would have you beware of himself for to god ye return . say whether ye hide what be in your breast or whether ye publish it abroad god knoweth it he knoweth what be in the heaven and what be in the earth and over all thing be god potent . on that day shall every soul find present to it whatever it hath wrought of good and a to what it hath wrought of evil it will wish that wide be the space between itself and it ! but god would have you beware of himself for god be kind to his servant . say if ye love god then follow me god will love you and forgive your sin for god be forgive merciful . say obey god and the apostle but if ye turn away then verily god loveth not the unbeliever . verily above all human being do god choose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of imran the one the posterity of the other and god heareth knoweth . remember when the wife of imran say o my lord ! i vow to thee what be in my womb for thy special service . accept it from me for thou hearest knowest ! and when she have give birth to it she say o my lord ! verily i have bring forth a female god know what she have bring forth a male be not a a female and i have name her mary and i take refuge with thee for her and for her offspring from satan the stone . so with goodly acceptance do her lord accept her and with goodly growth do he make her grow . zacharias rear her . so oft a zacharias go in to mary at the sanctuary he find her supplied with food . oh mary ! say he whence hast thou this ? she say it be from god for god supplieth whom he will without reckon ! there do zacharias call upon his lord o my lord ! say he vouchsafe me from thyself good descendant for thou art the hearer of prayer . then do the angel call to him a he stand pray in the sanctuary god announceth john yahia to thee who shall be a verifier of the word from god and a great one chaste and a prophet of the number of the just . he say o my lord ! how shall i have a son now that old age hath come upon me and my wife be barren ? he say thus will god do his pleasure . he say lord ! give me a token . he say thy token shall be that for three day thou shalt speak to no man but by sign but remember thy lord often and praise him at even and at morn and remember when the angel say o mary ! verily hath god choose thee and purified thee and choose thee above the woman of the world ! o mary ! be devout towards thy lord and prostrate thyself and bow down with those who bow . this be one of the announcement of thing unseen by thee to thee o muhammad ! do we reveal it for thou wast not with them when they cast lot with reed which of them should rear mary nor wast thou with them when they dispute about it . remember when the angel say o mary ! verily god announceth to thee the word from him his name shall be messiah jesus the son of mary illustrious in this world and in the next and one of those who have near access to god and he shall speak to men alike when in the cradle and when grow up and he shall be one of the just . she say how o my lord ! shall i have a son when man hath not touch me ? he say thus god will create what he will when he decreeth a thing he only saith 'be ' and it be . and he will teach him the book and the wisdom and the law and the evangel and he shall be an apostle to the child of israel . now have i come he will say to you with a sign from your lord out of clay will i make for you a it be the figure of a bird and i will breathe into it and it shall become by god 's leave a bird . and i will heal the blind and the leper and by god 's leave will i quicken the dead and i will tell you what ye eat and what ye store up in your house ! truly in this will be a sign for you if ye be believer . and i have come to attest the law which be before me and to allow you part of that which have be forbid you and i come to you with a sign from your lord fear god then and obey me of a truth god be my lord and your lord therefore worship him . this be a right way . and when jesus perceive unbelief on their part he say who my helper with god ? the apostle say we will be god 's helper ! we believe in god and bear thou witness that we be muslim . o our lord ! we believe in what thou hast send down and we follow the apostle write u up then with those who bear witness to him . and the jew plot and god plot but of those who plot be god the best . remember when god say o jesus ! verily i will cause thee to die and will take thee up to myself and deliver thee from those who believe not and i will place those who follow thee above those who believe not until the day of resurrection . then to me be your return and wherein ye differ will i decide between you . and a to those who believe not i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and in the next and none shall they have to help them . but a to those who believe and do the thing that be right he will pay them their recompense . god loveth not the doer of evil . these sign and this wise warn do we rehearse to thee . verily jesus be a adam in the sight of god . he create him of dust he then say to him be and he be . the truth from thy lord ! be not thou therefore of those who doubt . a for those who dispute with thee about him after theknowledge hath come to thee say come let u summon our son and your son our wife and your wife and ourselves and yourselves . then will we invoke and lay the malison of god on those that lie ! this recital be very truth and there be no god but god and verily god be the mighty the wise . but if they turn away then verily god hath knowledge of the corrupt doer . say o people of the book ! come ye to a just judgment between u and you that we worship not aught but god and that we join no other god with him and that the one of u take not the other for lord beside god . then if they turn their back say bear ye witness that we be muslim . o people of the book ! why dispute about abraham when the law and the evangel be not send down till after him ? do ye not then understand ? lo ! ye be they who dispute about that in which ye have knowledge but why dispute ye about that of which ye have no knowledge ? god hath knowledge but ye know nothing . abraham be neither jew nor christian but he be sound in the faith a muslim and not of those who add god to god . they among men who be near of kin to abraham be surely those who follow him and this prophet muhammad and they who believe on him . and god be the protector of the faithful . a party among the people of the book would fain mislead you but they only mislead themselves and perceive it not . o people of the book ! why disbelieve the sign of god of which yourselves have be witness ? o people of the book ! why clothe ye the truth with falsehood ? why wittingly hide the truth ? others of the people of the book say believe in what hath be send down to the believer at daybreak and deny it at it close thus do they go back and believe in those only who follow your religion . say true guidance be guidance from god that to others may be impart the like of what hath be impart to you . will they wrangle then with you in the presence of their lord ? say plenteous gift be in the hand of god he imparteth them unto whom he will and god be bounteous wise . he will vouchsafe his mercy to whom he will for god be of great bounteousness . among the people of the book be some to one of whom if thou entrust a thousand dinars he will restore them to thee and there be of them to whom if thou entrust a dinar he will not restore it to thee unless thou be ever instant with him . this because they say we be not bind to keep faith with the ignorant pagan folk and they utter a lie against god and know they do so but whoso be true to his engagement and feareth god verily god loveth those that fear him . verily they who barter their engagement with god and their oath for some paltry price these ! no portion for them in the world to come ! and god will not speak to them and will not look on them on the day of resurrection and will not assoil them ! for them a grievous chastisement ! and some truly be there among them who torture the scripture with their tongue in order that ye may suppose it to be from the scripture yet it be not from the scripture . and they say this be from god yet it be not from god and they utter a lie against god and they know they do so . it beseemeth not a man that god should give him the scripture and the wisdom and the gift of prophecy and that then he should say to his follower be ye worshipper of me as well a of god but rather be ye perfect in thing pertain to god since ye know the scripture and have study deep . god doth not command you to take the angel or the prophet a lord . what ! would he command you to become infidel after ye have be muslim ? when god enter into covenant with the prophet he say this be the book and the wisdom which i give you . hereafter shall a prophet come unto you to confirm the scripture already with you . ye shall surely believe on him and ye shall surely aid him . be ye resolve ? say he and do ye accept the covenant on these term ? they say we be resolve be ye then the witness say he and i will be a witness as well a you . and whoever turneth back after this these be surely the perverse . other religion than that of god desire they ? to him doth everything that be in the heaven and in the earth submit in willing or force obedience ! and to him do they return . say we believe in god and in what hath be send down to u and what hath be send down to abraham and ismael and isaac and jacob and the tribe and in what be give to moses and jesus and the prophet from their lord . we make no difference between them . and to him be we resign muslim . whoso desireth any other religion than islam that religion shall never be accept from him and in the next world he shall be among the lose . how shall god guide a people who after they have believe and bore witness that the apostle be true and after that clear proof of his mission have reach them disbelieve ? god guideth not the people who transgress . these ! their recompense that the curse of god and of angel and of all men be on them ! under it shall they abide for ever their torment shall not be assuage ! nor shall god even look upon them ! save those who after this repent and amend for verily god be gracious merciful ! a for those who become infidel after have believe and then increase their infidelity their repentance shall never be accept . these ! they be the err one . a for those who be infidel and die infidel from no one of them shall as much gold a the earth could contain be accept though he should offer it in ransom . these ! a grievous punishment awaiteth them and they shall have none to help them . ye shall never attain to goodness till ye give alms of that which ye love and whatever ye give of a truth god knoweth it . all food be allow to the child of israel except what jacob forbad himself ere the law be send down say bring ye then the law and read it if ye be men of truth . and whoso after this inventeth the lie about god these be evil doer . say god speaketh truth . follow therefore the religion of abraham the sound in faith who be not one of those who join other god to god . the first temple that be found for mankind be that in becca bless and a guidance to human being . in it be evident sign even the stand place of abraham and he who entereth it be safe . and the pilgrimage to the temple be a service due to god from those who be able to journey thither . and a to him who believeth not verily god can afford to dispense with all creature ! say o people of the book ! why disbelieve ye the sign of god ? but god be witness of your doings . say o people of the book ! why repel believer from the way of god ? ye fain would make it crooked and yet ye be it witness ! but god be not regardless of what ye do . o believer ! if ye obey some amongst those who have receive the scripture after your very faith will they make you infidels ! but how can ye become infidel when the sign of god be recite to you and his prophet be among you ? whoever holdeth fast by god be already guide to a straight path . o ye believer ! fear god a he deserveth to be fear ! and die not till ye have become muslim . and hold ye fast by the cord of god all of you and break not loose from it and remember god 's goodness towards you how that when ye be enemy he unite your heart and by his favour ye become brother and when ye be on the brink of the pit of fire he draw you back from it . thus god clearly sheweth you his sign that ye may be guide and that there may be among you a people who invite to the good and enjoin the just and forbid the wrong . these be they with whom it shall be well . and be ye not like those who have form division and fall to variance after the clear proof have come to them . these ! a terrible chastisement doth await them on the day when face shall turn white and face shall turn black ! and a to those whose face shall have turn black . . . .what ! after your belief have ye become infidel ? taste then the chastisement for that ye have be unbeliever . and a to those whose face shall have become white they shall be within the mercy of god therein shall they abide for ever . these be the sign of god we recite them to thee in truth and god willeth not injustice to mankind . whatever be in the heaven and whatever be on the earth be god 's . and to god shall all thing return . ye be the best folk that hath be raise up unto mankind . ye enjoin the just and ye forbid the evil and ye believe in god and if the people of the book have believe it have surely be good for them ! believer there be among them but most of them be perverse . they will never inflict on you but a trifling damage and if they do battle with you they shall turn their back to you then they shall not be succour . shame shall be stamp upon them wherever find unless they ally them with god and men ! and the wrath of god will they incur and poverty shall be stamp upon them ! this for that they believe not in the sign of god and slew the prophet unjustly this because they rebel and become transgressor . yet all be not alike among the people of the book be an upright folk who recite the sign of god in the night season and adore they believe in god and in the latter day and enjoin justice and forbid evil and speed on in good work . these be of the righteous . and of whatever good ye do ye shall not be deny the meed . god knoweth those who fear him . but a for the infidel their wealth and their child shall avail them nothing against god . they shall be the inmate of the fire to abide therein eternally . the alms which they bestow in this present life be like a freezing wind which falleth upon and destroyeth the cornfield of a people who have be to themselves unjust . god doeth them no injustice but to themselves be they unjust . o ye who have believe ! form not intimacy among others than yourselves . they will not fail to corrupt you . they long for your ruin . hatred hath already shew itself out of their mouth but more grievous be what their breast conceal . the token thereof we have already make plain to you if ye will comprehend . see now ! ye love them but they love not you . ye believe the entire book . and when they meet you they say we believe but when they be apart they bite their finger ' end at you out of wrath . say die in your wrath ! god truly knoweth the very recess of your breast . if good befalleth you it grieveth them and when ill lighteth on you they rejoice in it . but if ye be steadfast and fear god their craft shall in no way harm you . for god be round about their doings . and remember when thou didst leave thy household at early morn that thou mightest prepare the faithful a camp for the war god hear know it when two troop of you become full of anxious thought and lose heart and when god become the protector of both ! in god then let the faithful trust . god have already succour you at bedr when ye be the weaker ! fear god then that ye may be thankful . then thou didst say to the faithful be it not enough for you that your lord aideth you with three thousand angel send down from on high ? aye but ye if be steadfast and fear god and the foe come upon you in hot haste your lord will help you with five thousand angel in their cognisance ! this a pure good tidings for you do god appoint that your heart might be assure for only from god the mighty the wise cometh the victory and that he might cut off the uttermost part of those who believe not or cast them down so that they should be overthrow defeat without resource . it be none of thy concern whether he be turn unto them in kindness or chastise them for verily they be wrongful doer . whatever be in the heaven and the earth be god 's ! he forgiveth whom he will and whom he will chastiseth for god be forgive merciful . o ye who believe ! devour not usury double it again and again ! but fear god that ye may prosper . and fear the fire which be prepare for them that believe not and obey god and the apostle that ye may find mercy and vie in haste for pardon from your lord and a paradise vast a the heaven and the earth prepare for the god fearing . who give alms alike in prosperity and in success and who master their anger and forgive others ! god loveth the doer of good . they who after they have do a base deed or commit a wrong against their own self remember god and implore forgiveness of their sin and who will forgive sin but god only ? and persevere not in what they have wittingly do amiss . a for these ! pardon from their lord shall be their recompense and garden 'neath which the river flow for ever shall they abide therein and goodly the reward of those who labour ! already before your time have example be make ! traverse the earth then and see what hath be the end of those who treat prophet a liar . this koran be a manifest to man and a guidance and a warning to the god fearing ! and be not fainthearted and be not sorrowful for ye shall gain the upper hand if ye be believer . if a wound hath befallen you a wound like it hath already befall others we alternate these day of success and revers among men that god may know those who have believe and that he may take martyr from among you but god loveth not the wrongful doer and that god may test those who believe and destroy the infidel . think ye that ye should enter paradise ere god have take knowledge of those among you who do valiantly and of those who steadfastly endure ? ye have desire death ere ye meet it . but ye have now see it and ye have behold it and flee from it ! muhammad be no more than an apostle other apostle have already pass away before him if he die therefore or be slay will ye turn upon your heel ? but he who turneth on his heel shall not injure god at all and god will certainly reward the thankful ! no one can die except by god 's permission accord to the book that fixeth the term of life . he who desireth the recompense of this world we will give him thereof and he who desireth the recompense of the next life we will give him thereof ! and we will certainly reward the thankful . how many a prophet hath combat those who have with them many myriad ! yet be they not daunt at what befel them on the path of god nor be they weaken nor do they basely submit ! god loveth those who endure with steadfastness nor say they more than this o our lord ! forgive u our sin and our mistake in this our work and set our foot firm and help u against the unbelieving people . and god give them the recompense of this world and the excellence of the recompense of the next . for god loveth the doer of what be excellent . o ye who have believe ! if ye obey the infidel they will cause you to turn upon your heel and ye will fall back into perdition but god be your liege lord and he be the best of helper . we will cast a dread into heart of the infidel because they have join god with god without warranty send down their abode shall be the fire and wretched shall be the mansion of the evil doer . already have god make good to you his promise when by his permission ye destroy your foe until your courage fail you and ye dispute about the order and disobeyed after that the prophet have bring you within view of that for which ye long . some of you be for this world and some for the next . then in order to make trial of you he turn you to flight from them yet hath he now forgive you for all bounteous be god to the faithful when ye come up the height and take no heed of any one while the prophet in your rear be call you to the fight ! god hath reward you with trouble upon trouble that ye might learn not to be chagrin at your loss of booty or at what befel you ! god be acquaint with your action . then after the trouble god send down security upon you . slumber fell upon a part of you a to the other part their own passion stir them up to think unjustly of god with thought of ignorance ! they say what gain we by this affair ? say verily the affair resteth wholly with god . they hide in their mind what they do not speak out to thee say be we to have gain aught in this affair none of u have be slay at this place . say have ye remain in your home they who be decree to be slay would have go forth to the place where they lie in order that god might make trial of what be in your breast and might discover what be in your heart for god knoweth the very secret of the breast . of a truth it be satan alone who cause those of you to fail in duty who turn back on the day when the host meet for some of their doings ! but now hath god pardon them for god be forgive gracious . o ye who believe ! be not like the infidel who say of their brother when they have travel by land or have go forth to war have they keep with u they have not die and have not be slain ! god purpose that this affair should cause them heart sorrow ! god maketh alive and killeth and god beholdeth your action . and if ye shall be slay or die on the path of god then pardon from god and mercy be good than all your amassings for if ye die or be slay verily unto god shall ye be gather . of the mercy of god thou hast speak to them in gentle term . hadst thou be severe and harsh hearted they would have break away from thee . therefore forgive and ask for pardon for them and consult them in the affair of war and when thou art resolve then put thou thy trust in god for god loveth those who trust in him . if god help you none shall overcome you but if he abandon you who be he that shall help you when he be go ? in god then let the faithful trust . it be not the prophet who will defraud you but he who shall defraud shall come forth with his defraudings on the day of the resurrection then shall every soul be pay what it hath merit and they shall not be treat with injustice . shall he who hath follow the good pleasure of god be a he who hath bring on himself wrath from god and whose abode shall be hell ? and wretched the journey thither ! there be vary grade with god and god beholdeth what ye do . now hath god be gracious to the faithful when he raise up among them an apostle out of their own people to rehearse unto them his sign and to cleanse them and to give them knowledge of the book and of wisdom for before they be in manifest error . when a reverse hath befallen you the like of which ye have before inflict say ye whence be this ? say it be from yourselves . for god hath power over all thing . and that which befel you on the day when the army meet be certainly by the will of god and that he might know the faithful and that he might know the hypocrite ! and when the word be advance fight on the path of god or drive back the foe they say have we know how to fight we would have follow you . nearer be some of them on that day to unbelief than to faith they say with their lip what be not in their heart ! but god know what they conceal who say of their brother while themselves sit at home have they obey u they have not be slay . say keep back death from yourselves if ye speak truth . and repute not those slay on god 's path to be dead . nay alive with their lord be they richly sustain rejoice in what god of his bounty hath vouchsafe them fill with joy for those who follow after them but have not yet overtake them that on them nor fear shall come nor grief fill with joy at the favour of god and at his bounty and that god suffereth not the reward of the faithful to perish . a to those who after the reverse which befel them respond to god and the apostle such of them a do good work and fear god shall have a great reward who when men say to them now be the meccans muster against you therefore fear them ! it only increase their faith and they say our sufficiency be god and he be an excellent protector . they return therefore with the favour of god enrich by him and untouched by harm and they follow what be well please to god . and god be of great munificence . only would that satan instil the fear of his adherent fear them not but fear me if ye be believer . let not those who vie in haste after infidelity grieve thee verily not one whit shall they injure god ! god will refuse them all part in the life to come a severe chastisement shall be their lot . they truly who purchase infidelity at the price of their faith shall not injure god one whit ! and a grievous chastisement shall be their lot . let not the infidel deem that the length of day we give them be good for them ! we only give them length of day that they may increase their sin ! and a shameful chastisement shall be their lot . it be not in god to leave the faithful in the state in which they be until he sever the bad from the good nor be god mind to lay open the secret thing to you but god chooseth whom he will of his apostle to know them . believe therefore in god and his apostle and if ye believe and fear god a great reward awaiteth you . and let not those who be niggard of what god hath vouchsafe them in his bounty think that this will be good for them nay it will be bad for them that of which they have be niggard shall be their collar on the day of the resurrection . god 's the heritage of the heaven and of the earth ! and god be well inform of all ye do . now hath god hear the saying of those who say aye god be poor and we be rich . we will surely write down their saying and their unjust slaughter of the prophet and and we will say taste ye the torment of the burning . this for what your hand have send before you and because god will not inflict a wrong upon his servant ! to those who say verily god hath enjoin u that we be not to credit an apostle until he present u a sacrifice which fire out of heaven shall devour say already have apostle before me come to you with miracle and with that of which ye speak . wherefore slew ye them ? tell me if ye be men of truth . and if they treat thee a a liar then verily apostle have be treat a liar before thee though they come with clear proof of their mission and with scripture and with the light give book . every soul shall taste of death and ye shall only receive your recompense on the day of resurrection . and whoso shall scape the fire and be bring into paradise shall be happy . and the life of this world be but a cheating fruition ! ye shall assuredly be try in your possession and in yourselves . and many hurtful thing shall ye assuredly hear from those to whom the scripture be give before you and from those who join other god with god . but if ye be steadfast and fear god this verily be need in the affair of life . moreover when god enter into a convenant with those to whom the scripture have be give and say ye shall surely make it know to mankind and not hide it they cast it behind their back and sell it for a sorry price ! but vile be that for which they have sell it . suppose not that they who rejoice in what they have bring to pas and love to be praise for what they have not do suppose not they shall escape the chastisement . an afflictive chastisement doth await them for the kingdom of the heaven and the earth be god 's and god hath power over all thing . verily in the creation of the heaven and of the earth and in the succession of the night and of the day be sign for men of understanding heart who stand and sit and recline bear god in mind and muse on the creation of the heaven and of the earth . o our lord ! say they thou hast not create this in vain . no . glory be to thee ! keep u then from the torment of the fire . o our lord ! surely thou wilt put him to shame whom thou shalt cause to enter into the fire and the wrong doer shall have none to help them . o our lord ! we have indeed hear the voice of one that call . he call u to the faith believe on your lord and we have believe . o our lord ! forgive u then our sin and hide away from u our evil deed and cause u to die with the righteous . o our lord ! and give u what thou hast promise u by thine apostle and put u not to shame on the day of the resurrection . verily thou wilt not fail thy promise . and their lord answereth them i will not suffer the work of him among you that worketh whether of male or female to be lose . the one of you be the issue of the other . and they who have flee their country and quit their home and suffer in my cause and have fight and fall i will blot out their sin from them and i will bring them into garden beneath which the stream do flow . a recompense from god ! and god ! with his be the perfection of recompense ! let not prosperity in the land on the part of those who believe not deceive thee . 't be but a brief enjoyment ! then shall hell be their abode and wretched the bed ! but a to those who fear their lord for them be the garden 'neath which the river flow therein shall they abide for aye . such their reception with god and that which be with god be best for the righteous . among the people of the book be those who believe in god and in what he hath send down to you and in what he hath send down to them humble themselves before god . they barter not the sign of god for a mean price . these ! their recompense awaiteth them with their lord aye ! god be swift to take account . o ye who believe ! be patient and vie in patience and be firm and fear god that it may be well with you . verse probably belong to the period between the battle of bedr and hej . . muhammad suppose imran or amran to be the father of the virgin mary sura cix . lxvi . mary and elizabeth to be sister who with jesus john and zacharias make up the family of imran . it be difficult to avoid the conclusion that muhammad be guilty of the anachronism of confound miriam with the virgin mary . on the other hand be the difficulty of conceive that a the sequence of time and fact be observe with tolerable accuracy in regard to the main feature of jewish and christian history he should have fall into so serious an error or have so inadvertently adopt a mr. muir suppose the phraseology of his jewish informant amongst whom the only well know mary miriam be the daughter of imran and the sister of moses a to have overlook the discrepancy in their respective date . but it be possible that muhammad believe a some muslim writer assert that miriam 's soul and body be miraculously preserve till the time of jesus in order to become mary his mother . certainly the talmudists fabled that the angel of death and the worm of corruption have no power over miriam . comp . babha bathra . jos . ant . iv . . see note p. . see sura xxi . p. n. lit . mother . in the battle of bedr muhammad with follower rout meccans a.h. . that be knowledge or revelation become the cause of disputings . that be will ye receive islam ? the ummiin or common folk the heathen arabians destitute of revelation . in the early extant biography of muhammad by ibn ishaq we find these word address by zaid previous to the assumption of the prophetic office by muhammad to the koreisch . this be one of the fact which shew that the way be to a great extent prepare for islam . this whole address of zaid 's which contain not less than six passage afterwards repeat in the koran may be see in dr. sprenger 's life of . p. . the instance of others who have learn to disbelieve in idolatry and have either become jew or christian or hold their mind in suspense might easily be multiply . comp . sharastani p. . masudi ch . . the king of the kingdom or lord of might . this verse and the following be either fragment of some lose sura or belonging to one of the meccan sura . at any rate they be misplaced interrupt a they do the connection of the preceding and subsequent verse . the wife of imran be hannah or anne . comp . protev . jac . iv . greek text . evang . de nat . mar . voverunt tamen mari parentes si forte donaret eis deus sobolem eam se dni servitio mancipaturos . although muhammad have no direct access to the apocryphal gospel yet these may have influence or at any rate contain much in common with the ordinary tradition of s. syria . and of this the immaculate conception of the b. . mary suppose by gibbon ch . to have be borrow from the koran probably form a part . that be the female could not become a priest . see note p. . accord to a tradition of muhammad every new bear child be touch by satan with the exception of mary and her son between whom and satan god interpose a veil . djelal . beidh . hence this passage may imply the immaculate conception of the b. . mary . see v. below . evang . de nat . mar . quotidie ab angelis frequentabatur quotidie divin visione fruebatur queam a mali omnibus custodiebat et bonis omnibus redundare faciebat . protev . jac . greek text . hist . nativ . mar . quotidie esc quam de manu angeli accipiebat ip tantum reficiebatur . the word render descendant be a collective noun . gerock p. think that zacharias ' prayer be not for a son of his own but for an adopted son a for instance the future husband of mary who might become his heir and hence account for his surprise and unbelief at the announcement of john . lit . chamber . by this may be mean an greek text of the temple comp . luke i. . luke i. . hist . de nativ . mar . abierunt simul joachim et anna uxor ejus ad templum domini et . . . tradiderunt . . . mariam in contubernio virginum qu die noctuque in dei laudibus manebant . these reed say the commentator be write over with passage from the law and cast into jordan . that of zacharias alone swam and be the token that the charge of mary be to devolve on him . others render their divining arrow . see a detailed account of the manner in which this matter be settle by greek text virgae in protev . jac . thilo . p. . hist . nat . mar . ib . p. sqq . ar . el mesich isa ben mariam illustrious in this world a a prophet in the next a an intercessor . beidh . evang . thom ch . thilo . p. and evang . infanti arab . ch . . thilo . p. . a addenda lit . who my helper unto god ? i.e . helper of his religion beidh . if muhammad have become by any mean acquaint with the use of the th . radeh helper or disciple we have herein a probable interpretation of this passage as well a of the word ansar . see sura cxiv . v. . muhammad probably believe that god take the dead body of jesus to heaven for three hour accord to some while the jew crucify a man who resemble him . sura c. iv . . the word motewaffika comp . sura lxxx . xxxix . mean in speaking of god to cause to die take to himself . it would also seem from sura lviii . xix . that muhammad suppose jesus to have die a natural death though it be nowhere say how long he continue in that state . the muhammadan believe that jesus on his return to earth at the end of the world will slay the antichrist die and be raise again . a vacant place be reserve for his body in the prophet 's tomb at medina . see lieut . burton 's pilgrimage vol . ii . lit . verily the similitude or analogy of isa be a the similitude or analogy of adam i.e . neither of them have a human father . this refer to an embassy from the christian in nedjran in arabia with their bishop abu hareth at their head to muhammad at medina who have now acquire political power . the embassy decline to be party to the strange mode of settle the dispute here propose but consent to pay tribute on condition of not be molest in their religion or land . if this be not a mere figure of speech it must mean let u call over and curse the name the person be at a distance . a the christian do their bishop and priest . whether he be a jew or christian . about moses and jesus and their respective faith . see sura xvi . p. note . muhammad insinuate that the claim to be equal with god could never have be make by jesus himself but by his follower in ignorance of the scripture and of his true nature . that be to call them rabb a title due only to god . assemble on mount sinai . compare the jewish legend that all the prophet even those who be not yet bear be present on mount sinai when god give the law to moses . see shemoth rabba . parashah accord to which not only the prophet but the rabbi of every generation be present at the give of the law . becca place of crowd i.e . mecca . this sentence together with other sura the cave mary imran repentance t h be weave into the kiswah or covering of the caaba which be renew annually . the makam ibrahim pray place of abraham be a small building support by six pillar about ft. high four of which be surround from top to bottom by a fine iron rail while they leave the space between the two hind pillar open within the railing be a frame about ft. square say to contain the sacred stone on which ibrahim stand when he build the caaba . burckhardt . lieut . burton pilgrimage iii . say that a the arab tradition speak clearly and consistently a to the fact of abraham have visit mecca to build the caaba it may be consider an open question . thus also dr. g. w. freytag einl . . the koran . or they be smite with . sale . s'etendra comme une tente . ka . this probably refer to the battle of ohod . the arabic word occur at verse of horse a know by certain mark . so here these angel would be know by their accoutrement etc . this and the following verse to be probably reveal shortly after the reverse of ohod . this verse and xxxix . p. be recite at muhammad 's death by abu bekr in order to convince omar and the other muslim of the possibility of that event . it have be suppose that these passage be invent by abu bekr on this occasion and insert into the koran . but this be more than doubtful . see n ldeke pp . . that be return to idolatry . a report have be spread in the battle of ohod that muhammad have be slay . lit . accord to a writing i.e . of god definite . the rabbins also teach com . tract . rosch . haschanah that there be book in which god have write down the lifetime of every individual . lit . no soul can die . lit . and their saying be no other than that they say . to relapse into infidelity . the koreisch attempt to seduce the muslim to renounce their faith after the battle of ohod . the command to abstain from take the spoil . this disobedience turn the scale of victory against the muslim . victory and plunder . some take to flight others stand firm and be not careful of their life . that be in confused rout . muhammad have be accuse of have secretly appropriate a portion of the spoil . at ohod . see sura xci . ii . . at ohod lit . wound . lit . that satan . say to refer to noaim or abu sofian the leader of the koreisch . this be an answer to the taunt that muhammad could not distinguish true believer from hypocrite . this be the taunt of the jew of the tribe of kainoka when muhammad demand tribute of them in the name of god . that be who rejoice in their successful corruption of their own sacred book especially the testimony of moses to muhammad and in their own fancied righteousness . thus some of the commentator . lit . some of you be from others . these word be occasion by one of the prophet 's wife have tell him that god often praise the men but not the woman who have flee their country for the faith . beidh . lit . their movement their coming and going . hence the success of the meccans in their trading journey . this may point to the comparative freedom from trade and general independence of the meccans after the affair at ohod . sura lxi . battle array xcviii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth praiseth god . he be the mighty the wise ! believer ! why profess ye that which ye practise not ? most hateful be it to god that ye say that which ye do not . verily god loveth those who a though they be a solid wall do battle for his cause in serried line ! and bear in mind when moses say to his people why grieve ye me o my people when ye know that i be god 's apostle unto you ? and when they go astray god lead their heart astray for god guideth not a perverse people and remember when jesus the son of mary say o child of israel ! of a truth i be god 's apostle to you to confirm the law which be give before me and to announce an apostle that shall come after me whose name shall be ahmad ! but when he ahmad present himself with clear proof of his mission they say this be manifest sorcery ! but who more impious than he who when call to islam deviseth a falsehood concern god ? god guideth not the wicked ! fain would they put out the light of god with their mouth ! but though the infidel hate it god will perfect his light . he it be who hath send his apostle with guidance and the religion of truth that though they hate it who join other god with god he may make it victorious over every other religion . o ye who believe ! shall i shew you a merchandise that shall deliver you from the sore torment ? believe in god and his apostle and do valiantly in the cause of god with your wealth and with your person ! this do ye but know it will be best for you . your sin will he forgive you and he will bring you into garden beneath whose shade the river flow into charm abode in the garden of eden this shall be the great bliss . and other thing which ye desire will he bestow help from god and speedy conquest ! bear thou these tidings to the faithful . o ye who believe ! be helper ansars of god a say jesus the son of mary to his apostle who will come to the help of god ? we say the apostle will be helper of god . and a part of the child of israel believe and a part believe not . but to those who believe give we the upperhand over their foe and soon do they prove victorious . address to the muslim who have turn their back to the enemy at ohod . muhammad have no doubt hear that jesus have promise a paracletos john xvi . . this title understood by him probably from the similarity of sound a equivalent to periclytos he apply to himself with reference to his own name muhammad i.e . praise glorify from the same root and of the same meaning a ahmad also one of the prophet 's name . it may be here remark that the name muhammad if pronounce muhammed might be understand by an arab in an active instead of a passive sense . lane kor . p. . other passage of scripture understood by muslim of their prophet be deut . xxxiii . where paran be say to mean islam isai . xxi . where the rider on the as be jesus the rider on the camel muhammad matt . xx . where the morning noon and even be judaism christianity and islam john iv . john iv . where muhammad be say to be the spirit that be of god because he proclaim that jesus be a true man and not god . if this allude to a meditate attack on the banu nadir see sura cii . lix . we have a clue to the probable date of the sura . the promise however may be general . but the tone of verse evidently point to a period when a at medina the prospect of islam be become hopeful . sura lvii . iron xcix . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful all that be in the heaven and in the earth praiseth god and he be the mighty the wise ! his the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth he maketh alive and killeth and he hath power over all thing ! he be the first and the last the see and the hidden and he knoweth all thing ! it be he who in six day create the heaven and the earth then ascend his throne . he knoweth that which entereth the earth and that which goeth forth from it and what cometh down from heaven and what mounteth up to it and wherever ye be he be with you and god beholdeth all your action ! his the kingdom of the heaven and the earth and to god shall all thing return ! he causeth the night to pass into the day and he causeth the day to pass into the night and he knoweth the very secret of the bosom ! believe in god and his apostle and bestow in alms of that whereof god hath make you heirs for whoever among you believe and give alms their 's shall be a great recompense . what hath come to you that ye believe not in god although the apostle exhorteth you to believe in your lord and he hath accept your alliance if ye be true believer ? he it be who hath send down clear token upon his servant that he may bring you out of darkness into light and truly kind merciful to you be god . and what hath come to you that ye expend not for the cause of god ? since the heritage of the heaven and of the earth be god 's only ! those among you who contribute before the victory and fought shall be differently treat from certain others among you ! such shall have a nobler grade than those who contribute and fought after it . but a goodly recompense hath god promise to all and god be fully inform of your action . who be he that will lend a generous loan to god ? so will he double it to him and he shall have a noble reward . one day thou shalt see the believer men and woman with their light run before them and on their right hand . the angels shall say to them good tidings for you this day of garden beneath whose shade the river flow in which ye shall abide for ever ! this the great bliss ! on that day the hypocrite both men and woman shall say to those who believe tarry for u that we may kindle our light at yours . it shall be say return ye back and seek light for yourselves . but between them shall be set a wall with a gateway within which shall be the mercy and in front without it the torment . they shall cry to them be we not with you ? they shall say yes ! but ye lead yourselves into temptation and ye delay and ye doubt and the good thing ye crave deceive you till the doom of god arrive and the deceiver deceive you in regard to god . on that day therefore no ransom shall be take from you or from those who believe not your abode the fire ! this shall be your master ! and wretched the journey thither ! hath not the time come for those who believe to humble their heart at the warning of god and at the truth which he hath send down ? and that they be not a those to whom the scripture be give heretofore whose lifetime be prolong but whose heart be harden and many of them be perverse ? know that god quickeneth the earth after it death ! now have we make these sign clear to you that ye may understand . verily they who give alms both men and woman and they who lend a generous loan to god doubled shall it be to them and they shall have a noble recompense . and they who believe in god and his apostle be the men of truth and the witness in the presence of their lord they shall have their recompense and their light but a for the infidel and those who give the lie to our sign these shall be the inmate of hell . know ye that this world 's life be only a sport and pastime and show and a cause of vainglory among you ! and the multiplying of rich and child be like the plant which spring up after rain their growth rejoiceth the husband man then they wither away and thou seest them all yellow then they become stubble . and in the next life be a severe chastisement or else pardon from god and his satisfaction and this world 's life be but a cheating fruition . vie in hasting after pardon from your lord and paradise whose outspread be a the outspread of the heaven and of the earth prepare be it for those who believe in god and his apostle such be the bounty of god to whom he will he giveth it and of immense bounty be god ! no mischance chanceth either on earth or in your own person but ere we create them it be in the book for easy be this to god l ye distress yourselves if good thing escape you and be over joyous for what falleth to your share . god loveth not the presumptuous the boaster who be covetous themselves and incite others to covetousness . but whose turneth away from almsgiving ah ! god be the rich the praiseworthy . we have send our apostle with the clear token and we have cause the book and the balance to descend with them that men might observe fairness . and we have send down iron . dire evil resideth in it as well a advantage to mankind ! god would know who will assist him and his apostle in secret . verily god be powerful strong . and of old sent we noah and abraham and on their seed confer the gift of prophecy and the book and some of them we guide aright but many be evil doer . then we cause our apostle to follow in their footstep and we cause jesus the son of mary to follow them and we give him the evangel and we put into the heart of those who follow him kindness and compassion but a to the monastic life they invent it themselves . the desire only of please god do we prescribe to them and this they observe not a it ought to have be observe but to such of them a believe give we their reward though many of them be perverse . o ye who believe ! fear god and believe in his apostle two portion of his mercy will he give you . he will bestow on you light to walk in and he will forgive you for god be forgive merciful that the people of the book may know that they have no control over aught of the favour of god and that these gift of grace be in the hand of god and that he vouchsafeth them to whom he will for god be of immense bounty . the general tone of this sura shew it to have be reveal at medina and from verse it may be infer that it true date lie between the battle of ohod and the battle of the ditch . lit . the exterior and the interior . to guide them on their route to paradise . patronus . mar . beschutzer . ullm . or what ye have deserve . against the infidel . supellex deceptionis . mar . of our eternal decree . bring by gabriel to noah who impart it use to his posterity . so say the commentator . but the expression seem rather to be figurative . comp . sura lv . p. . or mighty warlike strength but the antithesis require the render give in the text . comp . gen. iv . and michna tr . aboth . we be not to understand by the word evangel the actual volume of the new testament or any one of it component part but rather the revelation make to jesus by god himself which muhammad may have imagine to have be commit to write subsequently in the same way a his own koran . the word in the original be the same for favours gift of grace bounty . the reference be to the gift of prophecy beidh . mention verse . sura iv . woman . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o men ! fear your lord who hath create you of one man nafs soul and of him create his wife and from these twain hath spread abroad so many men and woman . and fear ye god in whose name ye ask mutual favour and reverence the womb that bare you . verily be god watch over you ! and give to the orphan their property substitute not worthless thing of your own for their valuable one and devour not their property after add it to your own for this be a great crime . and if ye be apprehensive that ye shall not deal fairly with orphan then of other woman who seem good in your eye marry but two or three or four and if ye still fear that ye shall not act equitably then one only or the slave whom ye have acquire this will make justice on your part easier . give woman their dowry freely but if of themselves they give up aught thereof to you then enjoy it a convenient and profitable and entrust not to the incapable the substance which god hath place with you for their support but maintain them therewith and clothe them and speak to them with kindly speech . and make trial of orphan until they reach the age of marriage and if ye perceive in them a sound judgment then hand over their substance to them but consume ye it not wastefully or by hastily entrust it to them because they be grow up . and let the rich guardian not even touch it and let him who be poor use it for his support eat of it with discretion . and when ye make over their substance to them then take witness in their presence god also maketh a sufficient account . men ought to have a part of what their parent and kindred leave and woman a part of what their parent and kindred leave whether it be little or much let them have a state portion . and when they who be of kin be present at the division and the orphan and the poor let them too have a share and speak to them with kindly speech . and let those be afraid to wrong the orphan who should they leave behind them weakly offspring would be solicitous on their account . let them therefore fear god and let them propose what be right . verily they who swallow the substance of the orphan wrongfully shall swallow down only fire into their belly and shall burn in the flame ! with regard to your child god commandeth you to give the male the portion of two female and if they be female more than two then they shall have two third of that which their father hath leave but if she be an only daughter she shall have the half and the father and mother of the deceased shall each of them have a sixth part of what he hath left if he have a child but if he have no child and his parent be his heir then his mother shall have the third and if he have brethren his mother shall have the sixth after pay the bequest he shall have bequeath and his debt . a to your father or your child ye know not which of them be the most advantageous to you . this be the law of god . verily god be know wise ! half of what your wife leave shall be your 's if they have no issue but if they have issue then a fourth of what they leave shall be your 's after pay the bequest they shall bequeath and debts . and your wife shall have a fourth part of what ye leave if ye have no issue but if ye have issue then they shall have an eighth part of what ye leave after pay the bequest ye shall bequeath and debts . if a man or a woman make a distant relation their heir and he or she have a brother or a sister each of these two shall have a sixth but if there be more than this then shall they be sharer in a third after payment of the bequest he shall have bequeath and debt without loss to any one . this be the ordinance of god and god be know gracious ! these be the precept of god and whoso obeyeth god and his prophet him shall god bring into garden beneath whose shade the river flow therein to abide for ever and this the great blessedness ! and whoso shall rebel against god and his apostle and shall break his bound him shall god place in the fire to abide therein for ever and his shall be a shameful torment . if any of your woman be guilty of whoredom then bring four witness against them from among yourselves and if they bear witness to the fact shut them up within their house till death release them or god make some way for them . and if two men among you commit the same crime then punish them both but if they turn and amend then let them be for god be he who turneth merciful ! with god himself will the repentance of those who have do evil ignorantly and then turn speedily unto him be accept . these ! god will turn unto them for god be know wise ! but no place of repentance shall there be for those who do evil until when death be close to one of them he saith now verily be i turn to god nor to those who die unbeliever . these ! we have make ready for them a grievous torment ! o believer ! it be not allow you to be heir of your wife against their will nor to hinder them from marry in order to take from them part of the dowry you have give them unless they have be guilty of undoubted lewdness but associate kindly with them for if ye be estrange from them haply ye be estrange from that in which god hath place abundant good . and if ye be desirous to exchange one wife for another and have give one of them a talent make no deduction from it . would ye take it by slander her and with manifest wrong ? how moreover could ye take it when one of you hath go in unto the other and they have receive from you a strict bond of union ? and marry not woman whom your father have marry for this be a shame and hateful and an evil way though what be past may be allow . forbid to you be your mother and your daughter and your sister and your aunt both on the father and mother 's side and your niece on the brother and sister 's side and your foster mother and your foster sister and the mother of your wife and your step daughter who be your ward bear of your wife to whom ye have go in but if ye have not go in unto them it shall be no sin in you to marry them and the wife of your son who proceed out of your loin and ye may not have two sister except where it be already do . verily god be indulgent merciful ! forbidden to you also be married woman except those who be in your hand a slave this be the law of god for you . and it be allow you beside this to seek out wife by mean of your wealth with modest conduct and without fornication . and give those with whom ye have cohabit their dowry . this be the law . but it shall be no crime in you to make agreement over and above the law . verily god be know wise ! and whoever of you be not rich enough to marry free believe woman then let him marry such of your believe maiden a have fall into your hand a slave god well knoweth your faith . ye be spring the one from the other . marry them then with the leave of their master and give them a fair dower but let them be chaste and free from fornication and not entertainer of lover . if after marriage they commit adultery then inflict upon them half the penalty enact for free married woman . this law be for him among you who be afraid of do wrong but if ye abstain it will be good for you . and god be lenient merciful . god desireth to make this know to you and to guide you into the way of those who have be before you and to turn him unto you in mercy . and god be know wise ! god desireth thus to turn him unto you but they who follow their own lust desire that with great swerve should ye swerve ! god desireth to make your burden light for man hath be create weak . o believer ! devour not each other 's substance in mutual frivolity unless there be a trafficking among you by your own consent and commit not suicide of a truth god be merciful to you . and whoever shall do this maliciously and wrongfully we will in the end cast him into the fire for this be easy with god . if ye avoid the great sin which ye be forbid we will blot out your fault and we will cause you to enter paradise with honourable entry . covet not the gift by which god hath raise some of you above others . the men shall have a portion accord to their desert and the woman a portion accord to their desert . of god therefore ask his gift . verily god hath knowledge of all thing . to every one have we appoint kindred a heir of what parent and relative and those with whom ye have join right hand in contract leave . give therefore to each their portion . verily god witnesseth all thing . men be superior to woman on account of the quality with which god hath gift the one above the other and on account of the outlay they make from their substance for them . virtuous woman be obedient careful during the husband 's absence because god hath of them be careful . but chide those for whose refractoriness ye have cause to fear remove them into bed apart and scourage them but if they be obedient to you then seek not occasion against them verily god be high great ! and if ye fear a breach between man and wife then send a judge chosen from his family and a judge chosen from her family if they be desirous of agreement god will effect a reconciliation between them verily god be know apprise of all ! worship god and join not aught with him in worship . be good to parent and to kindred and to orphan and to the poor and to a neighbour whether kinsman or new comer and to a fellow traveller and to the wayfarer and to the slave whom your right hand hold verily god loveth not the proud the vain boaster who be niggardly themselves and bid others be niggard and hide away what god of his bounty hath give them . we have make ready a shameful chastisement for the unbeliever and for those who bestow their substance in alms to be see of men and believe not in god and in the last day . whoever hath satan for his companion an evil companion hath he ! but what blessedness would be theirs if they should believe in god and in the last day and bestow alms out of what god hath vouchsafe them for god taketh knowledge of them ! god truly will not wrong any one of the weight of a mote and if there be any good deed he will repay it doubly and from his presence shall be give a great recompense . how ! when we shall bring up against them witness from all people and when we shall bring thee up a witness against these ? on that day they who be infidel and rebel against the prophet shall wish that the earth be level with them ! but nothing shall they hide from god . o ye true believer come not to prayer when ye be drunken but wait till ye can understand what ye utter nor when ye be pollute unless ye be travel on the road until ye have wash you . if ye be sick or on a journey or have come from the unclean place or have touch a woman and ye find not water then rub pure sand and bathe your face and your hand with it verily god be lenient merciful . hast thou not remark those to whom a part of the scripture hath be give ? vendor be they of error and be desirous that ye go astray from the way . but god knoweth your enemy and god be a sufficient patron and god be a sufficient helper ! among the jew be those who displace the word of their scripture and say we have hear and we have not obey . hear thou but a one that heareth not and look at u perplex with their tongue and wound the faith by their revilings . but if they would say we have hear and we obey hear thou and regard u it be good for them and more right . but god hath curse them for their unbelief . few only of them be believer ! o ye to whom the scripture have be give ! believe in what we have send down confirmatory of the scripture which be in your hand ere we efface your feature and twist your head round backward or curse you a we curse the sabbath breaker and the command of god be carry into effect . verily god will not forgive the union of other god with himself ! but other than this will forgive to whom he pleaseth . and he who uniteth god with god hath devise a great wickedness . hast thou not mark those who hold themselves to be righteous ? but god holdeth righteous whom he will and they shall not be wrong the husk of a date stone . behold how they devise a lie of god ! therein be wickedness manifest enough ! hast thou not observe those to whom a part of the scripture hath be give ? they believe in djibt and thagout and say of the infidel these be guide in a batter path than those who hold the faith . these be they whom god hath curse and for him whom god hath curse thou shalt by on mean find a helper . shall they have a share in the kingdom who would not bestow on their fellow men even the speck in a date stone ? envy they other men what god of his bounty hath give them ? we give of old the scripture and wisdom to the line of abraham and we give them a grand kingdom some of them believe on the prophet and some turn aside from him the flame of hell be their sufficing punishment ! those who disbelieve our sign we will in the end cast into the fire so oft a their skin shall be well burnt we will change them for fresh skin that they may taste the torment . verily god be mighty wise ! but a for those who have believe and do the thing that be right we will bring be them into garden 'neath which the river flow therein to abide eternally therein shall they have wife of stainless purity and we will bring them into aye shadow shade . verily god enjoineth you to give back your trust to their owner and when ye judge between men to judge with fairness . excellent be the practice to which god exhorteth you . god heareth beholdeth ! o ye who believe ! obey god and obey the apostle and those among you invest with authority and if in aught ye differ bring it before god and the apostle if ye believe in god and in the latter day . this be the best and fair way of settlement . hast thou not mark those who profess that they believe in what hath be send down to thee and what hath be send down before thee ? fain would they be judge before thagout though command not to believe in him and fain would satan make them wander with wandering wide of truth . and when it be say to them accede to that which god hath send down and to the apostle thou seest the hypocrite avert them from thee with utter aversion . but how when some misfortune shall fortune them for their previous handywork ? then will they come to thee swearing by god we desire nothing but to promote good and concord ! these be they whose heart god knoweth . therefore break off from them and warn them speak word that may penetrate their soul . we have not send any apostle but to be obey it god so will but if they after they have sin to their own hurt by unbelief come to thee and ask pardon of god and the apostle ask pardon for them they shall surely find that god be he who turneth unto man merciful . and they will not i swear by thy lord they will not believe until they have set thee up a judge between them on point where they differ . then shall they not find in their own mind any difficulty in thy decision and shall submit with entire submission . have we lay down such a law for them a kill yourselves or abandon your dwelling but few of them would have do it . but have they do that to which they be exhort well and it be for them and strong for the confirmation of their faith . in that case we have surely give them from ourself a great recompense and on the straight path should we surely have guide them . and whoever shall obey god and the apostle these shall be with those of the prophet and of the sincere and of the martyr and of the just to whom god hath be gracious . these be a goodly band ! this be the bounty of god and in knowledge doth god suffice . o ye who believe ! make use of precaution and advance in detachment or advance in a body . there be of you who will be a laggard and if a reverse befall you he saith now hath god deal graciously with me since i be not with you in the fight but if a success from god betide you he will say a if there have never be any friendship between you and him would i have be with them ! a rich prize should i have win ! let those then fight on the path of god who barter this present life for that which be to come for whoever fighteth on god 's path whether he be slay or conquer we will in the end give him a great reward . but what hath come to you that ye fight not on the path of god and for the weak among men woman and child who say o our lord ! bring u forth from this city whose inhabitant be oppressor give u a champion from thy presence and give u from thy presence a defender . they who believe fight on the path of god and they who believe not fight on the path of thagout fight therefore against the friend of satan . verily craft of satan shall be powerless ! hast thou not mark those to whom it be say withhold your hand awhile from war and observe prayer and pay the stated alms . but when war be command them lo ! a portion of them fear men a with the fear of god or with a yet great fear and say o our lord ! why hast thou command u war ? couldst thou not have give u respite till our not distant end ? say small the fruition of this world but the next life be the true good for him who feareth god ! and ye shall not be wrong so much a the skin of a date stone . wherever ye be death will overtake you although ye be in lofty tower ! if good fortune betide them they say this be from god and if evil betide them they say this be from thee . say all be from god but what hath come to these people that they be not near to understand what be tell them ? whatever good betideth thee be from god and whatever betideth thee of evil be from thyself and we have send thee to mankind a an apostle god be thy suffice witness . whoso obeyeth the apostle in so do obeyeth god and a to those who turn back from thee we have not send thee to be their keeper . moreover they say obedience ! but when they come forth from thy presence a party of them brood by night over other than thy word but god writeth down what they brood over therefore separate thyself from them and put thou thy trust in god . be a sufficient protector ! can they not consider the koran ? be it from any other than god they would surely have find in it many contradiction . and when tidings either of security or alarm reach them they tell them abroad but if they would report them to the apostle and to those who be in authority among them those who desire information would learn it from them . but for the goodness and mercy of god towards you ye would have follow satan except a few ! fight therefore on god 's path lay not burden on any but thyself and stir up the faithful . the might of the infidel haply will god restrain for god be the strong in prowess and the strong to punish . he who shall mediate between men for a good purpose shall be the gainer by it . but he who shall mediate with an evil mediation shall reap the fruit of it . and god keepeth watch over everything . if ye be greet with a greet then greet ye with a good greeting or at least return it god taketh count of all thing . god ! there be no god but he ! he will certainly assemble you on the day of resurrection . there be no doubt of it . and whose word be more true than god 's ? why be ye two party on the subject of the hypocrite when god hath cast them off for their doings ? desire ye to guide those whom god hath lead astray ? but for him whom god leadeth astray thou shalt by no mean find a pathway . they desire that ye should be infidel a they be infidel and that ye should be alike . take therefore none of them for friend till they have flee their home for the cause of god . if they turn back then seize them and slay them wherever ye find them but take none of them a friend or helper except those who shall seek and asylum among your ally and those who come over to you their heart forbid them to make war on you or to make war on their own people . have god please he would have give them power against you and they would have make war upon you ! but if they depart from you and make not war against you and offer you peace the god alloweth you no occasion against them . ye will find others who seek to gain your confidence as well a that of their own people so oft a they return to sedition they shall be overthrow in it but if they leave you not nor propose term or peace to you nor withhold their hand then seize them and slay them wherever ye find them . over these have we give you undoubted power . a believer killeth not a believer but by mischance and whoso killeth a believer by mischance shall be bind to free a believer from slavery and the blood money shall be pay to the family of the slain unless they convert it into alms . but if the slain believer be of a hostile people then let him confer freedom on a slave who be a believer and if he be of a people between whom and yourselves there be an alliance then let the blood money be pay to his family and let him set free a slave who be a believer and let him who hath not the mean fast two consecutive month . this be the penance enjoin by god and god be know wise ! but whoever shall kill a believer of set purpose his recompense shall be hell for ever shall he abide in it god shall be wrathful with him and shall curse him and shall get ready for him a great torment . o believer ! when ye go forth to the fight for the cause of god be discern and say not to every one who meeteth you with a greet thou art not a believer in your greed after the chance good thing of this present life ! with god be abundant spoil . such hath be your wont in time past but god hath be gracious to you . be discern then for god well knoweth what ye do . those believer who sit at home free from trouble and those who do valiantly in the cause of god with their substance and their person shall not be treat alike . god hath assign to those who contend earnestly with their person and with their substance a rank above those who sit at home . goodly promise hath he make to all . but god hath assign to the strenuous a rich recompense above those who sit still at home rank of his own bestowal and forgiveness and mercy for god be indulgent merciful . the angel when they take the soul of those who have be unjust to their own weal demand what hath be your state ? they say we be the weak one of the earth . they reply be not god 's earth broad enough for you to flee away in ? these ! their home shall be hell and evil the passage to it except the men and woman and child who be not able through their weakness to find the mean of escape and be not guide on their way . these haply god will forgive for god be forgive gracious . whoever flieth his country for the cause of god will find in the earth many under like compulsion and abundant resource and if any one shall quit his home and fly to god and his apostle and then death overtake him his reward from god be sure for god be gracious merciful ! and when ye go forth to war in the land it shall be no crime in you to cut short your prayer if ye fear lest the infidel come upon you verily the infidel be your undoubted enemy ! and when thou o apostle ! shalt be among them and shalt pray with them then let a party of them rise up with thee but let them take their arm and when they shall have make their prostration let them retire to your rear then let another party that hath not pray come forward and let them pray with you but let them take their precaution and their arm . please would the infidel be for you to neglect your arm and your baggage that they might turn upon you at once ! and it shall be no crime in you to lay down your arm if rain annoy you or if ye be sick . but take your precaution . verily god hath make ready a shameful torment for the infidel . and when ye shall have end the prayer make mention of god standing and sit and recline and as soon a ye be secure observe prayer for to the faithful prayer be a prescribed duty and for stated hour . slacken not in pursuit of the foe . if ye suffer assuredly they suffer also a ye suffer but ye hope from god for what they can not hope ! and god be know wise ! verily we have send down the book to thee with the truth thou that mayest judge between men accord a god hath give thee insight but with the deceitful one dispute not and implore pardon of god . verily god be forgive merciful . and plead not with u for those who be self deceiver for god loveth not him who be deceitful criminal . from men they hide themselves but they can not hide themselves from god and when they hold nightly discourse which please him not he be with them . god be round about their doings ! oh ! ye be they who plead in their favour in this present life but who shall plead with god for them on the day of the resurrection ? who will be the guardian over them ? yet he who doth evil or shall have act against his own weal and then shall ask pardon of god will find god forgive merciful and whoever committeth a crime committeth it to his own hurt . and god be know wise ! and whoever committeth an involuntary fault or a crime and then layeth it on the innocent shall surely bear the guilt of calumny and of a manifest crime . but for the grace and mercy of god upon thee a party among them have resolve to mislead thee but they shall only mislead themselves nor in aught shall they harm thee . god hath cause the book and the wisdom to descend upon thee and what thou knowest not he hath cause thee to know and the grace of god toward thee hath be great . in most of their secret talk be nothing good but only in his who enjoineth almsgiving or that which be right or concord among men . whoso doth this out of desire to please god we will give him at the last a great reward but whoso shall sever himself from the prophet after that the guidance hath be manifest to him and shall follow any other path than that of the faithful we will turn our back on him a he hath turn his back on u and we will cast him into hell an evil journey thither ! god truly will not forgive the joining other god with himself . other sin he will forgive to whom he will but he who joineth god with god hath err with far go error . they call beside him upon mere goddess ! they invoke a rebel satan ! on them be the malison of god . for he say a portion of thy servant will i surely take and will lead them astray and will stir desire within them and will command them and they shall cut the ear of animal and i will command them and they shall alter the creation of god . he who taketh satan rather than god for his patron be ruin with palpable ruin he hath make them promise and he hath stir desire within them but satan promiseth only to beguile ! these ! their dwelling hell ! no escape shall they find from it ! but they who believe and do the thing that be right we will bring them into garden beneath which the river flow for ever shall they abide therein . truly it be the promise of god and whose word be more sure than god 's ? not accord to your wish or the wish of the people of the book shall these thing be . he who doth evil shall be recompense for it . patron or helper beside god shall he find none . but whoso doth the thing that be right whether male or female and he or she a believer these shall enter paradise nor shall they be wrong the skin of a date stone . and who hath a good religion than he who resigneth himself to god who doth what be good and followeth the faith of abraham in all sincerity ? and god take abraham for his friend . all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth be god 's and god encompasseth all thing ! moreover they will consult thee in regard to woman say god hath instruct you about them and his will be rehearse to you in the book concern female orphan to whom ye give not their legal due and whom ye refuse to marry also with regard to weak child and that ye deal with fairness towards orphan . ye can not do a good action but verily god knoweth it . and if a wife fear ill usage or aversion on the part of her husband then shall it be no fault in them if they can agree with mutual agreement for agreement be best . men 's soul be prone to avarice but if ye act kindly and fear god then verily your action be not unnoticed by god ! and ye will not have it at all in your power to treat your wife alike even though you fain would do so but yield not wholly to disinclination so that ye leave one of them a it be in suspense if ye come to an understanding and fear god then verily god be forgive merciful but if they separate god can compensate both out of his abundance for god be vast wise and whatever be in the heaven and in the earth be god 's ! we have already enjoin those to whom the scripture be give before you and yourselves to fear god . but if ye become unbeliever yet know that whatever be in the heaven and in the earth be god 's and god be rich praiseworthy . all that be in heaven and all that be in earth be god 's ! god be a sufficient protector ! if he please he could cause you to pass away o mankind ! and create others in your stead for this hath god power . if any one desire the reward of this world yet with god be the reward of this world and of the next ! and god heareth beholdeth . o ye who believe ! stand fast to justice when ye bear witness before god though it be against yourselves or your parent or your kindred whether the party be rich or poor . god be near than you to both . therefore follow not passion l ye swerve from truth . and if ye wrest your testimony or stand aloof god verily be well aware of what ye do . o ye who believe ! believe in god and his apostle and the book which he hath send down to his apostle and the book which he hath send down aforetime . whoever believeth not on god and his angel and his book and his apostle and in the last day he verily hath err with far go error . verily they who believe then become unbeliever then believe and again become unbeliever and then increase their unbelief it be not god who will forgive them or guide them into the way . announce to the hypocrite that a dolorous torment doth await them . those who take the unbeliever for friend besides the faithful do they seek honour at their hand ? verily all honour belongeth unto god ! and already hath he send this down to you in the book when ye shall hear the sign of god they shall not be believe but shall be mock at . sit ye not therefore with such until they engage in other discourse otherwise ye will become like them . verily god will gather the hypocrite and the infidel all together in hell . they watch you narrowly . then if god grant you a victory they say be we not with you ? and if the infidel meet with a success they say to them be we not superior to you and do we not defend you from those believer ? god shall judge betwixt ye on the day of the resurrection and god will by no mean make a way for the infidel over the believer . the hypocrite would deceive god but he will deceive them ! when they stand up for prayer they stand carelessly to be see of men and they remember god but little wavering between the one and the other belong neither to these nor those ! and by no mean shalt thou find a path for him whom god misleadeth . o believer ! take not infidel for friend rather than believer . would ye furnish god with clear right to punish you ? verily the hypocrite shall be in the low abyss of the fire and by no mean shalt thou find a helper for them save for those who turn and amend and lay fast hold on god and approve the sincerity of their religion to god these shall be number with the faithful and god will at last bestow on the faithful a great reward . why should god inflict a chastisement upon you if ye be grateful and believe ? god be grateful wise ! god loveth not that evil be matter of public talk unless any one hath be wrong god it be who heareth knoweth ! whether ye publish what be good or conceal it or pardon evil verily god be pardon powerful ! of a truth they who believe not on god and his apostle and seek to separate god from his apostle and say some we believe and some we believe not and desire to take a middle way these ! they be veritable infidel ! and for the infidel have we prepare a shameful punishment . and they who believe on god and his apostle and make no difference between them these ! we will bestow on them their reward at last . god be gracious merciful ! the people of the book will ask of thee to cause a book to come down unto them out of heaven . but a great thing than this do they ask of moses ! for they say shew u god plainly ! and for this their wickedness do the fire storm lay hold on them . then take they the calf a the object of their worship after that our clear token have come to them but we forgive them this and confer on moses undoubted power . and we uplift the mountain over them when we make a covenant with them and we say to them enter the gate adoring and we say to them transgress not on the sabbath and we receive from them a strict covenant . so for that they have break their covenant and have reject the sign of god and have put the prophet to death unjustly say the while our heart be uncircumcised nay but god hath seal them up for their unbelief so that but few believe . and for their unbelief and for their have speak against mary a grievous calumny and for their say verily we have slay the messiah jesus the son of mary an apostle of god . yet they slew him not and they crucify him not but they have only his likeness . and they who differ about him be in doubt concern him no sure knowledge have they about him but follow only an opinion and they do not really slay him but god take him up to himself . and god be mighty wise ! there shall not be one of the people of the book but shall believe in him before his death and in the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them . for the wickedness of certain jew and because they turn many from the way of god we have forbid them goodly viands which have be before allow them . and because they have take usury though they be forbid it and have devour men 's substance in frivolity we have get ready for the infidel among them a grievous torment . but their men of solid knowledge and the believer who believe in that which hath be send down to thee and in what hath be send down before thee and who observe prayer and pay the alms of obligation and believe in god and the latter day these ! we will give them a great reward . verily we have reveal to thee a we reveal to noah and the prophet after him and a we reveal to abraham and isma l and isaac and jacob and the tribe and jesus and job and jonah and aaron and solomon and to david give we psalm . of some apostle we have tell thee before of other apostle we have not tell thee and discoursing do god discourse with moses apostle charge to announce and to warn that men after those apostle might have no plea against god . and god be mighty wise ! but god be himself witness of what he hath send down to thee in his knowledge hath he send it down to thee . the angel be also it witness but god be a sufficient witness ! verily they who believe not and pervert from the way of god have indeed err with error wide of truth . verily those who believe not and act wrongfully god will never pardon and never will he guide them on path than the path to hell in which they shall abide for ever ! and this be easy for god . o men ! now hath an apostle come to you with truth from your lord . believe then it will be good for you . but if ye believe not then all that be in the heaven and the earth be god 's and god be know wise ! o ye people of the book ! overstep not bound in your religion and of god speak only truth . the messiah jesus son of mary be only an apostle of god and his word which he convey into mary and a spirit proceed from himself . believe therefore in god and his apostle and say not three there be a trinity forbear it will be good for you . god be only one god ! far be it from his glory that he should have a son ! his whatever be in the heaven and whatever be in the earth ! and god be a sufficient guardian . the messiah disdaineth not to be a servant of god nor do the angel who be nigh unto him . and whoso disdaineth his service and be fill with pride god will gather them all to himself . and to those who believe and do the thing that be right will he pay them their due recompense and out of his bounty will he increase them but a for those who be disdainful and proud with a grievous chastisement will he chastise them and none beside god shall they find to protect or to help them . o men ! now hath a proof come to you from your lord and we have send down to you a clear light . a to those who believe in god and lay fast hold on him these will he cause to enter into his mercy and grace and along the straight way unto himself will he guide them . they will consult thee . say god instructeth you a to distant kindred . if a man die childless but have a sister half what he shall have shall be her 's and if she die childless he shall be her heir . but if there be two sister two third part of what he shall have shall be theirs and if there be both brother and sister the male shall have the portion of two female . god teacheth you plainly that ye err not ! god knoweth all thing . most of the event allude to in this sura fall between the end of the third and the close of the fifth year after the flight to medina . muhammad assume to himself the privilege of have a yet great number of wife . but in do so he be probably actuate by a desire for male offspring . chadijah be his only wife until quite a late period of his career . comp . arbah turim . ev . hazaer a man may marry many wife for rabba saith it be lawful to do so if he can provide for them . nevertheless the wise men have give good advice that a man should not marry more than four wife . see also yad hachazakah hilchoth ishuth . . verse and be say by the commentator to have be reveal in consequence of the complaint of omm kuhha that in accordance with the ante islamitic custom she have be exclude from any portion of her deceased husband 's property . the unsatisfactory nature of the muhammadan tradition may be infer from the fact that no less than six different name be assign to him . it be however probable that these and similar law relative to inheritance be give at a time when many head of family have fall a at ohod in battle . this remark apply to verse . woman find guilty of adultery and fornication be punish at the first rise of islam by be literally immure . but this be exchange in the case of a maiden for one year 's banishment and stripe and in the case of a married woman for stone . what take place in the time of ignorance previous to the revelation of the koran . see freytag 's einl . p. a to the incestuous nature of the ante islamitic arabian marriage . by marry without mean adequate to the support of a free wife or by remain single . from marry slave . game of chance usury etc . by provide for them a home and the protection of a husband . or of that which god would have them care for . an undutiful child be very seldom heard of among the egyptian or the arab in general . son scarcely ever sit or sit or eat or smoke in the presence of the father unless bidden to do so and they often wait upon him and upon his guest at meal and on other occasion they do not cease to act thus when they have become men . lane 's mod . egypt . vol . i. p. . the koranic precept a to prayer savour of jewish origin . thus prayer should be say standing be a rabbinic precept . comp . sura xci . ii . . misch.berachoth may be shorten in dangerous place ib . iv . be forbidden to the drunken ib . . erubin and to the polluted berachoth iii . and be to be precede in this case by washing with water or sand . see sura xvii . note p. . cor . xi . . the jew and their rabbi . see sura xci . ii . . lit . the companion of the sabbath . see xci . ii . . this refers to certain renegade jew who out of hatred against muhammad go over to the koreisch . see n ldeke . p. . lit . ripen . mecca . and therefore a fit subject for plunder . some of the meccans after embrace islam do not thoroughly break with the infidel and fly their country . these person be miraculously slay by angel at bedr . others suppose the angel to be nakir and monkir who examine the dead in the grave . that be to what religion do ye belong ? and therefore could not resist the unbeliever . thus the rabbins tr . berachoth iv . he that goeth in a dangerous place may pray a short prayer . see mischna tr . berachoth . this verse be say to have be reveal when muhammad be about to acquit a muslim who have commit theft and lay the guilt at the door of a jew . but the particular be give in a very contradictory manner . see n ldeke p. . in allusion to an idolatrous and superstitious custom of the old arabian . by the mutilation of slave brand their body file the teeth etc . see sura lxxxiv . p. note . sura vi . see sura xci . ii . . lit . one be make to appear to them like jesus . comp . xcvii . iii . . photius bibl . cod . cxiv.says that the apocr . book greek text this individual accord to the basilidans be simon of cyrene accord to the evang . barnab juda . mani ep . fund . ap . evodium princeps itaque tenebrarum cruci est affixus idemque coronam spineam portavit . by believe too much like the christian who regard jesus a god or too little like the jew who would not believe on muhammad . that be a be possess a spirit . sura . divorce ci . mecca . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o prophet ! when ye divorce woman divorce them at their special time . and reckon those time exactly and fear god your lord . put them not forth from their house nor allow them to depart unless they have commit a proven adultery . this be the precept of god and whoso transgresseth the precept of god assuredly imperilleth his own self . thou knowest not whether after this god may not cause something new to occur which may bring you together again . and when they have reach their set time then either keep them with kindness or in kindness part from them . and take upright witness from among you and bear witness a unto god . this be a caution for him who believeth in god and in the latter day . and whoso feareth god to him will he grant a prosperous issue and will provide for him whence he reckon not upon it . and for him who putteth his trust in him will god be all sufficient . god truly will attain his purpose . for everything hath god assign a period . a to such of your wife a have no hope of the recurrence of their time if ye have doubt in regard to them then reckon three month and let the same be the term of those who have not yet have them . and a to those who be with child their period shall be until they be deliver of their burden . god will make his command easy to him who feareth him . this be god 's command which he hath send down to you whoso feareth god his evil deed will he cancel and will increase his reward . lodge the divorced wherever ye lodge accord to your mean and distress them not by put them to strait . and if they be pregnant then be at charge for the them till they be deliver of their burden and if they suckle your child then pay them their hire and consult among yourselves and act generously and if herin ye meet with obstacle then let another female suckle for him . let him who hath abundance of his abundance let him too whose store be scanty give of what god hath vouchsafed to him . god imposeth burden only accord to the mean which he hath give . god will cause ease to succeed difficulty . how many city have turn aside from the command of their lord and of his apostle ! therefore do we reckon with them in a severe reckoning and chastise them with a stern chastisement and they taste the harmfulness of their own conduct and the end of their conduct be ruin . a vehement chastisement hath god prepare for them ! fear god then o ye men of understand ! believer ! now hath god send down to you a warning ! a prophet who reciteth to you the clear sign of god that he may bring those who believe and do the thing that be right out of the darkness into the light . and whoso believeth in god and doeth the thing that be right god will cause them to enter the garden beneath which the river flow to remain therein for aye ! a goodly provision now hath god make for him . it be god who hath create seven heaven and a many earth . the divine command cometh down through them all that ye may know that god hath power over all thing and that god in his knowledge embraceth all thing ! comp . sura xci . ii . which this sura be perhaps intend to supplement . wahidi and beidhawi state that it be reveal on account of ibn omar who have divorce his wife at improper time and be oblige to take her again . in order to make good the rhyme verse ought to be continue to the end of the first clause of verse ii . lit . and of the earth their like . the style of this verse resemble that of the meccan sura . hence probably a tradition in omar ben muhammad make the whole sura meccan . sura lix . the emigration cii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful all that be in the heaven and all that be on the earth praiseth god ! he the mighty the wise ! he it be who cause the unbeliever among the people of the book to quit their home and join those who have emigrate previously . ye do not think that they would quit them and they on their part think that their fortress would protect them against god but god come upon them whence they look not for him and cast such fear into their heart that by their own hand as well a by the hand of the victorious believer they demolish their house ! profit by this example ye who be men of insight ! and be it not that god have decree their exile surely in this world would he have chastise them but in the world to come the chastisement of the fire awaiteth them . this because they set them against god and his apostle and whoso setteth him against god . . . . ! god truly be vehement in punish . your cut down some of their palm tree and spar others be by god 's permission and to put the wicked to shame . after the spoil of these jew which god hath assign to his apostle ye press not with horse or camel . but god giveth his apostle power over what he will . god be almighty . the spoil take from the people of the town and assign by god to his apostle belongeth to god and to the apostle and to his kindred and to the orphan and to the poor and to the wayfarer that none of it may circulate among such of you only a be rich what the apostle hath give you take what he hath refuse you refuse and fear ye god for god be severe in punish . to the poor refugee mohadjerin also doth a part belong who have be drive from their home and their substance and who seek favour from god and his goodwill and aid god and his apostle . these be the men of genuine virtue . they of medina who have be in possession of their abode and embrace the faith before them cherish those who take refuge with them and they find not in their breast any desire for what hath fall to their share they prefer them before themselves though poverty be their own lot . and with such a be preserve from their own covetousness shall it be well . and they who have come after them into the faith say o our lord ! forgive u and our brother who have precede u in the faith and put not into our heart ill will against those who believe . o our lord ! thou verily art kind merciful . hast thou not observe the disaffected say to their unbelieving brother among the people of the book if ye be drive forth we will go forth with you and in what concerneth you never will we obey any one and if ye be attack we will certainly come to your help . but god be witness that they be liar . no ! if they be drive forth they would not share their banishment if they be attack they would not help them or if they help them they will surely turn their back then would they remain unhelped . assuredly the fear of you be more intense in their heart than the fear of god ! this because they be a people devoid of discernment . they the jew will not fight against you in a body except in fenced town or from behind wall . mighty be their valour among themselves ! thou thinkest them unite but their heart be divide . this for that they be a people who understand not . they act like those who lately precede them who also taste the result of their doings and a grievous chastisement awaiteth them like satan when he saith to a man be an infidel and when he hath become an infidel he saith i share not thy guilt verily i fear god the lord of the world . of both therefore shall the end be that they dwell for ever in the fire this be the recompense of the evil doer . o ye who believe ! fear god . and let every soul look well to what it sendeth on before for the morrow . and fear ye god verily god be cognisant of what ye do . and be ye not like those who forget god and whom he hath therefore cause to forget their proper self . such men be the evil doer . the inmate of the fire and the inmate of paradise be not to be hold equal . the inmate of paradise only shall be the blissful . have we send down this koran on some mountain thou wouldst certainly have see it humble itself and cleave asunder for the fear of god . such be the parable we propose to men in order that they may reflect . he be god beside whom there be no god . he knoweth thing visible and invisible he be the compassionate the merciful . he be god beside whom there be no god he be the king the holy the peaceful the faithful the guardian the mighty the strong the most high ! far be the glory of god from that which they unite with him ! he be god the producer the maker the fashioner ! to him be ascribe excellent title . whatever be in the heaven and in the earth praiseth him . he be the mighty the wise ! the jew of nadhir three mile from medina have break a treaty make with muhammad and in the month rab of the fourth year of the hejira be besiege by him and drive first to the jew of kainoka who have emigrate previously under compulsion after the battle of bedr and subsequently out of arabia . weil life of . p. .n . on which account these spoil be entirely assign to muhammad and not divide in the usual manner . see sura xcv . viii . . weil p. . to the jew of the tribe of nadhir . the idolater slay at bedr djal . or the jew of kainoka who have be plunder previously to those of nadhir . lit . i be clear of thee . this may be derive from the rabbinical idea that mount sinai be choose on account of it lowness to be the scene of the revelation to moses in order to shew that god love the humble . sura xxxiii . the confederate ciii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o prophet fear thou god and obey not the unbeliever and the hypocrite truly god be know wise but follow what be reveal to thee from thy lord cognisant truly be he of all your action and put thou thy trust in god for a sufficient guardian be god . god hath not give a man two heart within him neither hath he make your wife whom ye divorce to be a your mother nor hath he make your adopted son to be a your own son . such word be indeed in your mouth but god speaketh the truth and in the right way he guideth . name them after their father this will be more right before god . but if ye know not who their father be then let them be your brother in the faith and your comrade . and unless make with intent of heart mistake in this matter shall be no crime in you for god be lenient merciful . nearer of kin to the faithful be the prophet than they be to their own self . his wife be their mother . accord to the book of god they who be relate by blood be nearer the one to the other than other believer and than those who have flee their country for the cause of god but whatever kindness ye shew to your kindred shall be note down in the book . and remember that we have enter into covenant with the prophet and with thee and with noah and abraham and moses and jesus son of mary and we form with them a strict covenant that god may question the men of truth a to their truth . but a sore torment hath he prepare for the unbeliever . o believer ! remember the goodness of god towards you when the army come against you and we send against them a blast and host that ye saw not for the eye of god be upon your doings when they assail you from above you and from below you and when your eye become distracted and your heart come up into your throat and ye thought diver thought of god then be the faithful tried and with strong quake do they quake and when the disaffect and the diseased of heart say god and his apostle have make u but a cheating promise and when a party of them say o people of yathrib ! there be no place of safety for you here therefore return into the city . and another party of you ask the prophet 's leave to return say our house be left defenceless . no ! they be not left defenceless but their sole thought be to flee away . if the enemy have effect an entry at all point and they the disaffect have be ask to promote confusion they would have do so but only a short time would they have remain in it . medina . they have before pledge themselves to god that they would not turn their back and a pledge give to god must be enquire of . say flight shall not profit you if ye have flee the death or the slaughter yet even then but a little while shall ye enjoy your good thing ! say who be he that will screen you from god whether he choose to bring evil on you or to shew you mercy ? none beside god shall they find to be their patron or helper . god well knoweth those among you who cause hindrance and those who say to their brother come hither to u and who come not to the fight except a little . it be out of covetousness in your regard for when an alarm cometh thou mayest see them look to thee and roll their eye like him on whom the shadow of death have fall ! yet when the alarm be pass with sharp tongue will they assail you covetous of the best of the spoil . no faith have these ! god will make their doings of no avail ! and easy be this with god . they think that the confederate would never retire and be the confederate to come again they would fain be dwell among the arab of the desert and there ask news about you ! for though they be with you they fight not except a little . a noble pattern have ye in god 's apostle for all who hope in god and in the latter day and oft remember god ! and when the faithful saw the confederate they say this be what god and his apostle promise u and god and his apostle spoke truly and it only increase their faith and self devotion . some be there among the faithful who make good what they have promise to god . some have fulfil their course and others await it fulfilment and have not be changeling who change that god may reward the faithful for their faithfulness and may punish the hypocrite if he so please or be turn unto them for god be forgive merciful . and god drove back the infidel in their wrath they win no advantage god suffice the faithful in the fight for god be strong mighty ! and he cause those of the people of the book the jew who have aid the confederate to come down out of their fortress and cast dismay into their heart some ye slew others ye take prisoner . and he give you their land and their dwelling and their wealth for an heritage even a land on which ye have never set foot for the might of god be equal to all thing . o prophet ! say to thy wife if ye desire this present life and it bravery come then i will provide for you and dismiss you with an honourable dismissal . but if ye desire god and his apostle and a home in the next life then truly hath god prepare for those of you who be virtuous a great reward . o wife of the prophet ! should any of you be guilty of a proven lewdness doubly shall her chastisement be double and with god this be easy . but whoever of you shall obey god and his apostle and shall do that which be right twice over will we give her her reward and we have prepare for her a noble provision . o wife of the prophet ! ye be not a other woman . if ye fear god be not too complaisant of speech lest the man of unhealthy heart should lust after you but speak with discreet speech . and abide still in your house and go not in public deck a in the day of your former ignorance but observe prayer and pay the impost and obey god and the apostle for god only desireth to put away filthiness from you a his household and with cleanse to cleanse you . and recollect what be rehearse to you in your house of the book of god and of wisdom for god be keen sight cognisant of all . truly the men who resign themselves to god muslim and the woman who resign themselves and the believe men and the believing woman and the devout men and the devout woman and the men of truth and the woman of truth and the patient men and the patient woman and the humble men and the humble woman and the men who give alms and the woman who give alms and the men who fast and the woman who fast and the chaste men and the chaste woman and the men and the woman who oft remember god for them hath god prepared forgiveness and a rich recompense . and it be not for a believer man or woman to have any choice in their affair when god and his apostle have decree a matter and whoever disobeyeth god and his apostle erreth with palpable error . and remember when thou saidst to him unto whom god have shew favour and to whom thou also hadst shew favour keep thy wife to thyself and fear god and thou didst hide in thy mind what god would bring to light . and thou didst fear man but more right have it be to fear god . and when zaid have settle concern her to divorce her we marry her to thee that it might not be a crime in the faithful to marry the wife of their adopt son when they have settle the affair concern them . and the behest of god be to be perform . no blame attacheth to the prophet where god hath give him a permission . such be the way of god with those prophet who flourish before thee for god 's behest be a fixed decree who fulfil the mission with which god have charge them and fear him and fear none but god . and god taketh a sufficient account . muhammad be not the father of any man among you but he be the apostle of god and the seal of the prophet and god knoweth all thing . o believer ! remember god with frequent remembrance and praise him morning and evening . he blesseth you and his angel intercede for you that he may bring you forth out of darkness into light and merciful be he to the believer . their greeting on the day when they shall meet him shall be peace ! and he hath get ready for them a noble recompense . o prophet ! we have send thee to be a witness and a herald of glad tidings and a warner and one who through his own permission summoneth to god and a light give torch . announce therefore to believer that great boon do await them from god and obey not the infidel and hypocrite yet abstain from injure them and put thou thy trust in god for god be a sufficient guardian . o believer ! when ye marry believe woman and then divorce them before ye have consummate the marriage ye have no term prescribe you which ye must fulfil towards them provide for them and dismiss them with a reputable dismissal . o prophet ! we allow thee thy wife whom thou hast dower and the slave whom thy right hand possesseth out of the booty which god hath grant thee and the daughter of thy uncle and of thy paternal and maternal aunt who flee with thee to medina and any believing woman who hath give herself up to the prophet if the prophet desire to wed her a privilege for thee above the rest of the faithful . we well know what we have settle for them in regard to their wife and to the slave whom their right hand hold that there may be no fault on thy part and god be indulgent merciful ! thou mayst decline for the present whom thou wilt of them and thou mayest take to thy bed her whom thou wilt and whomsoever thou shalt long for of those thou shalt have before neglect and this shall not be a crime in thee . thus will it be easy to give them the desire of their eye and not to put them to grief and to satisfy them with what thou shalt accord to each of them . god knoweth what be in your heart and god be know gracious . it be not permit thee to take other wife hereafter nor to change thy present wife for other woman though their beauty charm thee except slave whom thy right hand shall possess . and god watcheth all thing . o believer ! enter not into the house of the prophet save by his leave for a meal without wait his time . when ye be invite then enter and when ye have eat then disperse at once . and engage not in familiar talk for this would cause the prophet trouble and he would be ashamed to bid you go but god be not ashamed to say the truth . and when ye would ask any gift of his wife ask it from behind a veil . purer will this be for your heart and for their heart . and ye must not trouble the apostle of god nor marry his wife after him for ever . this would be a grave offence with god . whether ye bring a matter to the light or hide it god truly hath knowledge of all thing . no blame shall attach to them your wife for speak to their father unveil or to their son or to their brother or to their brother ' son or to their sister ' son or to their woman or to the slave whom their right hand hold . and fear ye god for god witnesseth all thing . verily god and his angel bless the prophet ! bless ye him o believer and salute him with salutation of peace . verily they who affront god and his apostle the curse of god be on them in this world and in the world to come and he hath prepared for them a shameful chastisement . and they who shall affront believe men and believe woman for no fault of theirs they shall surely bear the guilt of slander and of a clear wrong . o prophet ! speak to thy wife and to thy daughter and to the wife of the faithful that they let their veil fall low . thus will they more easily be know and they will not be affront . god be indulgent merciful ! if the hypocrite and the men of tainted heart and the stirrer of sedition in medina desist not we will surely stir thee up against them . then shall they not be suffer to dwell near thee therein but a little while curse wherever they be find they shall be seize and slay with slaughter ! such hath be the way of god with those who live before them and no change canst thou find in the way of god . men will ask thee of the hour . say the knowledge of it be with god alone and who can tell thee whether haply the hour be not nigh at hand ? verily god hath curse the infidel and hath get ready for them the flame for aye shall they abide therein none to befriend them no helper shall they find ! on the day when their face shall be roll in the fire they shall cry oh ! would that we have obey god and obey the apostle ! and they shall say oh our lord ! indeed we obey our chief and our great one and they mislead u from the way of god o our lord ! give them a double chastisement and curse them with a heavy curse . o believer ! be not like those who affront moses . but god clear him from what they say of him and of god be he highly esteem . o believer ! fear god and speak with well guide speech . that god may bless your doings for you and forgive you your sin . and whoso obeyeth god and his apostle with great bliss shall be bless . verily we propose to the heaven and to the earth and to the mountain to receive the faith but they refuse the burden and they fear to receive it . man undertook to bear it but hath proved unjust senseless ! therefore will god punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical woman and the men and the woman who join god with god but to the believe men and woman will god turn him for god be indulgent merciful ! medina be besiege when this sura be reveal by certain confederate tribe at the instigation of the jew an . hej . . the first nine verse however have no immediate reference to this event but to muhammad 's cotemporary marriage with zeinab . see below verse . the arabian have be accustom before the time of muhammad to divorce their wife with the word thy back be to me a the back of my mother . the drift and motive of this passage be explain by verse below . it have also be the custom to hold adopted son to be a nearly relate to them a their natural one . see sura lviii . p. . the mohadjers those who have emigrate with muhammad from mecca . this verse abrogate sura xcv . viii . . how they have discharge their prophetic function . verse have reference to the event of the year hej . towards the close . see next note . his . waq . f. in the engagement which take place under the wall of medina some of the enemy be post on a height to the east of the city others in a valley on the west . the besieger be the muslim strong when a violent storm which upset the tent put out the camp fire and blind the eye of the confederate with sand turn the scale of victory against them . muhammad ascribes the storm to angelic agency . that be with infidelity . the ancient name of el medina . in the trench which have be dig around the city by the advice of salm n the persian . they would speedily have quit the city to attack the faithful in the trench . that be raise the siege . that be that through trial we should attain to paradise v. . after the siege of medina have be raise muhammad make a successful expedition against the jew of koreidha for their treason and violation of treaty . muhammad 's wife have cause him much annoyance by demand of rich dress etc . he give them the choice of continue with him a before or of divorce . they choose the former . see abulfeda 's hist . moh . p. and gagnier 's vie de moh . i. chap . ii . that be idolatry . act xvii . . freytag einl . p. think that previous to islam the arabian woman go in public unveiled . the pronoun be in the pl . masc . whereas the pl . fem . be use in the previous part of the verse . the partisan of ali quote this passage to prove the intimate union of ali and his posterity with the prophet . that be to zaid . the favour of god to zaid consist in have cause him to become a muslim the favour of muhammad in adopt him a his son . zaid and abu lahab sura cxi . p. be the only contemporary of muhammad mention by name in the koran . thy plan to obtain zeinab or zenobia zaid 's wife a thy wife . lit who bring the message of god . if thou makest use of the special prerogative confer in verse . he have nine wife at this period beside slave . the number of wife allow to the faithful be four . see note p. . the first slave whom muhammad take to wife be raihana at the conquest of the banu koreidha . his . . weil . verse refer to the conduct of the guest at muhammad 's house after his marriage with zeinab . albuhari passim . muslim i. ff . wah . comp . caussir iii . . ullmann p. quote a similar precept from the talmud do all that the master of the house biddeth but wait not to be ask to depart . this verse can not be of later date than hej . when muhammad 's daughter omm kulthum die . leave only fatima . this may refer to the charge of adultery say by the rabbins to have be bring by korah against moses . comp . tr . sanhedrin fol . a. and number xii . . the verse be say to have be reveal on account of aspersion throw on muhammad for unfairly divide spoil whereupon he say god be merciful to my brother moses . he be wrong more than this and bore it with patience . sura lxiii . the hypocrite civ . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the hypocrite come to thee they say we bear witness that thou art the sent one of god . god knoweth that thou art his sent one but god beareth witness that the hypocrite do surely lie . their faith have they use a a cloak and they turn aside others from the way of god ! evil be all their doings . this for that they believe then become unbeliever ! therefore hath a seal be set upon their heart and they understand not . when thou seest them their person make thee marvel and if they speak thou listenest with pleasure to their discourse . like timber be they lean against a wall ! they think that every shout be against them . they be enemy beware of them then god do battle with them ! how false be they ! and when it be say to them come the apostle of god will ask pardon for you they turn their head aside and thou seest them withdraw in their pride . alike shall it be to them whether thou ask forgiveness for them or ask it not . by no mean will god forgive them god hath no guidance for a perverse people . these be they who say to you of medina spend not aught upon those who be with the apostle of god and they will be force to quit him . yet the treasure of the heaven and of the earth be god 's ! but the hypocrite have no understanding . they say if we return to the city the mighty will assuredly drive out the weaker from it . but might be with god and with the apostle and with the faithful ! yet the hypocrite understand not . o ye who believe ! let not your wealth and your child delude you into forgetfulness of god . whoever shall act thus shall surely suffer loss . and expend in the cause of god out of that with which we have supply you ere death surprise each one of you and he say o lord ! wilt thou not respite me to a term not far distant that i may give alms and become one of the just ? and by no mean will god respite a soul when it hour hath come ! and god be fully cognisant of what ye do . reveal shortly after the expedition against the banu ' l mustaliq in hej . . see n ld . p. n. the hypocrite mention in the late sura be the disaffected portion of the population of medina who covertly oppose the claim of muhammad to temporal authority over that city . they be gradually absorb a the authority of islam increase . or in accordance with another reading oath . comp . p . cix . . like timber or joist support in a wall or lean against it i.e . their person be bulky but their heart so hypocritical and cowardly that they be afraid of the slight noise . in the original sa kat be perhaps an allusion to the shout of gabriel that be to exterminate the wicked . sura xxiv . light . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful a sura which we have send down and sanction ! clear sign have we send down therein that ye may take warning . the whore and the whoremonger scourge each of them with an hundred stripe and let not compassion keep you from carry out the sentence of god if ye believe in god and the last day and let some of the faithful witness their chastisement . the whoremonger shall not marry other than a whore or an idolatress and the whore shall not marry other than a whoremonger or an idolater . such alliance be forbid to the faithful . they who defame virtuous woman and bring not four witness scourge them with fourscore stripe and receive ye not their testimony for ever for these be perverse person save those who afterwards repent and live virtuously for truly god be lenient merciful ! and they who shall accuse their wife and have no witness but themselves the testimony of each of them shall be a testimony by god four time repeat that he be indeed of them that speak the truth . and the fifth time that the malison of god be upon him if he be of them that lie . but it shall avert the chastisement from her if she testify a testimony four time repeat by god that he be of them that lie and a fifth time to call down the wrath of god on her if he have speak the truth . and but for the goodness and mercy of god towards you and that god be he who loveth to turn wise . . . . ! of a truth they who advance that lie be a large number of you but regard it not a an evil to you . no it be an advantage to you . to every man among them shall it be do accord to the offence he hath committed and a to that person among them who take on himself to aggravate it a sore punishment doth await him . do not the faithful of both sex when ye heard of this form a favourable judgment in their own mind and say this be a manifest lie ? have they bring four witness of the fact ? if they can not produce the witness they be the liar in the sight of god . and but for the goodness of god towards you and his mercy in this world and in the next a severe punishment have come upon you for that which ye spread abroad when ye utter with your tongue and spake with your mouth that of which ye have no knowledge . ye deem it to be a light matter but with god it be a grave one . and do ye say when ye heard it it be not for u to talk of this affair ! o god ! by thy glory this be a gross calumny ? god hath warn you that ye go not back to the like of this for ever if ye be believer and god maketh his sign clear to you for god be know wise . but a for those who love that foul calumny should go forth against those who believe a grievous chastisement await them in this world and in the next . and god hath knowledge but ye have not . and but for the goodness of god towards you and his mercy and that god be kind merciful . . . ! o ye who believe ! follow not the step of satan for whosoever shall follow the step of satan he will enjoin on him what be base and blameworthy and but for the goodness of god towards you and his mercy no one of you have be cleanse for ever but god maketh whom he will to be clean and god heareth knoweth . and let not person of wealth and mean among you swear that they will not give to their kindred to the poor and to those who have flee their home in the cause of god let them rather pardon and pas over the offence . desire ye not that god should forgive you ? and god be gracious merciful ! verily they who throw out charge against virtuous but careless woman who yet be believer shall be curse in this world and in the world to come and a terrible punishment doth await them . their own tongue and hand and foot shall one day bear witness against them of their own doings . on that day will god pay them their just due and they shall know that god be the clear truth itself . bad woman for bad men and bad men for bad woman but virtuous woman for virtuous men and virtuous men for virtuous woman ! these shall be clear from calumny theirs shall be forgiveness and an honourable provision . o ye who believe ! enter not into other house than your own until ye have ask leave and have salute it inmate . this will be best for you haply ye will bear this in mind . and if ye find no one therein then enter it not till leave be give you and if it be say to you go ye back then go ye back . this will be more blameless in you and god knoweth what ye do . there shall be no harm in your enter house in which no one dwelleth for the supply of your need and god knoweth what ye do openly and what ye hide . speak unto the believer that they restrain their eye and observe continence . thus will they be more pure . god be well aware of what they do . and speak to the believe woman that they refrain their eye and observe continence and that they display not their ornament except those which be external and that they throw their veil over their bosom and display not their ornament except to their husband or their father or their husband ' father or their son or their husband ' son or their brother or their brother ' son or their sister ' son or their woman or their slave or male domestic who have no natural force or to child who note not woman 's nakedness . and let them not strike their foot together so a to discover their hidden ornament . and be ye all turn to god o ye believer ! that it may be well with you . and marry those among you who be single and your good servant and the handmaiden . if they be poor god of his bounty will enrich them . god be all bounteous knowing . and let those who can not find a match live in continence till god of his bounty shall enrich them . and to those of your slave who desire a deed of manumission execute it for them if ye know good in them and give them a portion of the wealth of god which he hath give you . force not your female slave into sin in order that ye may gain the casual fruition of this world if they wish to preserve their modesty . yet if any one compel them then verily to them after their compulsion will god be forgive merciful . and now have we send down to you clear sign and an instance from among those who flourish before you and a caution for the god fearing . god be the light of the heaven and of the earth . his light be like a niche in which be a lamp the lamp encase in glass the glass a it be a glistening star . from a bless tree be it light the olive neither of the east nor of the west whose oil would well nigh shine out even though fire touch it not ! it be light upon light . god guideth whom he will to his light and god setteth forth parable to men for god knoweth all thing . in the temple which god hath allow to be rear that his name may therein be remember do men praise him morn and even . men whom neither merchandise nor traffic beguile from the remembrance of god and from the observance of prayer and the payment of the stated alms through fear of the day when heart shall throb and eye shall roll that for their most excellent work may god recompense them and of his bounty increase it to them more and more for god maketh provision for whom he pleaseth without measure . but a to the infidel their work be like the vapour in a plain which the thirsty dreameth to be water until when he cometh unto it he findeth it not aught but findeth that god be with him and he fully payeth him his account for swift to take account be god or like the darkness on the deep sea when cover by billow rid upon billow above which be clouds darkness upon darkness . when a man reacheth forth his hand he can not nearly see it ! he to whom god shall not give light no light at all hath he ! hast thou not see how all in the heaven and in the earth uttereth the praise of god ? the very bird a they spread their wing ? every creature knoweth it prayer and it praise ! and god knoweth what they do . god 's the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth and unto god the final return ! hast thou not see that god driveth cloud lightly forward then gathereth them together then pileth them in mass ? and then thou seest the rain forthcoming from their midst and he causeth cloud like mountain charge with hail to descend from the heaven and he maketh it to fall on whom he will and from whom he will he turneth it aside . the brightness of his lightning all but taketh away the sight ! god causeth the day and the night to take their turn . verily in this be teach for men of insight . and god hath create every animal of water . some go upon the belly some go upon two foot some go upon four foot . god hath create what he please . aye god hath power over all thing . now have we send down distinct sign . and god guideth whom he will into the right path for there be who say we believe on god and on the apostle and we obey yet after this a part of them turn back . but these be not of the faithful . and when they be summon before god and his apostle that he may judge between them lo ! a part of them withdraw but have the truth be on their side they would have come to him obedient . what ! be they diseased of heart ? do they doubt ? be they afraid that god and his apostle will deal unfairly with them ? nay themselves be the unjust doer . the word of the believer when call to god and his apostle that he may judge between them be only to say we have hear and we obey these be they with whom it shall be well . and whoso shall obey god and his apostle and shall dread god and fear him these be they that shall be the blissful . and they have swear by god with a most solemn oath that if thou give them the word they will certainly march forth . say swear ye not of more worth be obedience . verily god be well aware of what ye do . say obey god and obey the apostle . suppose that ye turn back still the burden of his duty be on him only and the burden of your duty rest on you . if ye obey him ye shall have guidance but plain preaching be all that devolve upon the apostle . god hath promise to those of you who believe and do the thing that be right that he will cause them to succeed others in the land a he give succession to those who be before them and that he will establish for them that religion which they delight in and that after their fear he will give them security in exchange . they shall worship me nought shall they join with me and whoso after this believe not they will be the impious . but observe prayer and pay the state alms and obey the apostle that haply ye may find mercy . let not the infidel think that they can weaken god on his own earth their dwelling place shall be the fire ! and right wretched the journey ! o ye who believe ! let your slave and those of you who have not come of age ask leave of you three time a day ere they come into your presence before the morning prayer and when ye lay aside your garment at mid day and after the evening prayer . these be your three time of privacy . no blame shall attach to you or to them if after these time when ye go your round of attendance on one another they come in without permission . thus doth god make clear to you his sign and god be know wise ! and when your child come of age let them ask leave to come into your presence a they who be before them ask it . thus doth god make clear to you his sign and god be know wise . a to woman who be past childbearing and have no hope of marriage no blame shall attach to them if they lay aside their outer garment but so a not to shew their ornament . yet if they abstain from this it will be good for them and god heareth knoweth . no crime shall it be in the blind or in the lame or in the sick to eat at your table or in yourselves if ye eat in your own house or in the house of your father or of your mother or of your brother or of your sister or of your uncle on the father 's side or of your aunt on the father 's side or of your uncle on the mother 's side or of your aunt on the mother 's side or in those of which ye posse the key or in the house of your friend . no blame shall attach to you whether ye eat together or apart . and when ye enter house salute one another with a good and blessed greeting a from god . thus doth god make clear to you his sign that haply ye may comprehend them . verily they only be believer who believe in god and his apostle and who when they be with him upon any affair of common interest depart not until they have seek his leave . yes they who ask leave of thee be those who believe in god and his apostle . and when they ask leave of thee on account of any affair of their own then grant it to those of them whom thou wilt and ask indulgence for them of god for god be indulgent merciful . address not the apostle a ye address one another . god knoweth those of you who withdraw quietly from the assembly screen themselves behind others . and let those who transgress his command beware l some present trouble befall them or a grievous chastisement befall them hereafter . be not whatever be in the heaven and the earth god 's ? he knoweth your state and one day shall men be assemble before him and he will tell them of what they have do for god knoweth all thing . with this verse commence the reference to the scandal against ayesha to which verse read like a late addition . see his . ff . albuhari passim . muslim ii . ff . tirm . . tabari and weil p. . say to refer to hilal ben umaiya muslim i. . tirm . . annasai f. assamarq . who have accuse his wife of adultery . two of these commentator however give the name of another muslim a the person intend . comp . numb . v. ii with which muhammad must have be acquaint . the rumour of improper intimacy between ayesha and safwan ibn el moattal during muhammad 's return from the expedition against the tribe of mostaliq an . hej . in which he be separate from her for an entire day which she pass in the company of safwan who have find her when accidentally leave behind . verse be reveal shortly after the return . whose character be clear . abdallah ibn obba . abulf . p. . comp . verse n. . abubekr have be desirous to punish one of his relative mestah who have propagate the scandal against ayesha by refuse him gift or alms . the very member of a man shall testify against him for thus we read jer . xliii . ye be yourselves my witness saith the lord . chagiga . thaanith a. it be the custom in arabia before islam to enter house without permission . freyt . einl . p. . that be the anklet . comp . isai . iii . on account of poverty . comp . deut . xv . . the meaning probably be that the scandal raise against ayesha resemble the scandal in the case of joseph in egypt and of the virgin mary detail in previous sura . an idea perhaps derive from gen. i. . comp . tr . cholin fol . a. verse obviously refer to a period perhaps that between the battle of ohod and the end of the war of the ditch when muhammad 's prospect be overcloud and the confidence of his follower shake . this verse be intend to relieve the scruple of the muslim who . follow the superstitious custom of the arab think that they ought not to admit the blind etc . to their table to eat alone or in a house of which they be entrust with the key etc . lit . make not the call of the apostle among you like the call of some of you to others i.e . address him by some respectful and honourable title . thus in the talmud it be forbidden to a disciple to call his rabbi by name even when he be not in his presence and again neither be he to salute his rabbi nor to return his salutation in the same way that salutation be give and return among friend . whoever despise the wise men hath no portion in the world to come . see hilchoth torah c. . sura lviii . she who plead cvi . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful god hath hear the word of her who plead with thee against her husband and make her plaint to god and god hath hear your mutual intercourse for god heareth beholdeth . a to those of you who put away their wife by say be thou to me a my mother 's back their mother they be not they only be their mother who give them birth ! they certainly say a blameworthy thing and an untruth but truly god be forgive indulgent . and those who thus put away their wife and afterwards would recall their word must free a captive before they can come together again . to this be ye warn to conform and god be aware of what ye do . and he who findeth not a captive to set free shall fast two month in succession before they two come together . and he who shall not be able to do so shall fee sixty poor men . this that he may believe in god and his apostle . these be the statute of god and for the unbeliever be an afflictive chastisement ! truly they who oppose god and his apostle shall be bring low a those who be before them be bring low . and now have we send down demonstrative sign and for the infidel be a shameful chastisement . on the day when god shall raise them all to life and shall tell them of their doings . god hath take count of them though they have forget them ! and god be witness over all thing . dost thou not see that god knoweth all that be in the heaven and all that be in the earth ? three person speak not privately together but he be their fourth nor five but he be their sixth nor few nor more but wherever they be he be with them . then on the day of resurrection he will tell them of their deed for god knoweth all thing . hast thou not mark those who have be forbidden secret talk and return to what they have be forbid and talk privately together with wickedness and hate and disobedience towards the apostle ? and when they come to thee they greet thee not a god greeteth thee and they say among themselves why doth not god punish u for what we say ? hell shall be their meed they shall be burn at it fire and a wretched passage thither ! o believer ! when ye hold private converse together let it not be with wickedness and hate and disobedience towards the apostle but let your private talk be with justice and the fear of god aye fear ye god unto whom ye shall be gather ! only of satan be this clandestine talk that he may bring the faithful to grief but unless by god 's permission not aught shall he harm them ! in god then let the faithful trust . o ye who believe ! when it be say to you make room in your assembly then make ye room . god will make room for you in paradise ! and when it be say to you rise up then rise ye up . god will uplift those of you who believe and those to whom the knowledge be give to lofty grade ! and god be cognisant of your action . o ye who believe ! when ye go to confer in private with the apostle give alms before such conference . good will this be for you and more pure . but if ye have not the mean then truly god be lenient merciful . do ye hesitate to give alms previously to your private conference ? then if ye do it not and god will excuse it in you at least observe prayer and pay the state impost and obey god and his apostle for god be cognisant of your action . hast thou not remark those who make friend of that people with whom god be anger ? they be neither of your party nor of theirs and they swear to a lie know it to be such . god hath get ready for them a severe torment for evil be that they do . they make a cloak of their faith and turn others aside from the way of god wherefore a shameful torment awaiteth them . not at all shall their wealth or their child avail them aught against god . companion shall they be of the fire they shall abide therein for ever . on the day when god shall raise them all they will swear to him a they now swear to you deem that it will avail them . be they not yes they the liar ? satan hath gotten mastery over them and make them forget the remembrance of god . these be satan 's party . what ! shall not verily the party of satan be for ever lose . verily they who oppose god and his apostle shall be among the most vile . god hath write this decree i will surely prevail and my apostle also . truly god be strong mighty . thou shalt not find that any of those who believe in god and in the last day love him who opposeth god and his apostle even though they be their father or their son or their brother or their near kin . on the heart of these hath god grave the faith and with his own spirit hath he strengthen them and he will bring them into garden beneath whose shade the river flow to remain therein eternally . god be well pleased in them and they in him . these be god 's party ! shall not of a truth a party of god be for ever bless ? khaula daughter of thalaba who have be divorce by the formula in verse which be understood among the arab to imply perpetual separation . this muhammad have assert in her case but in consequence of the woman 's prayer etc . a relaxation of the law on fulfilment of the condition mention in verse be hereby allow . none of the early tradition fix any date for this sura though late authority weil fix the end of hej . or the beginning of hej . . the subject matter be in part similar to that of sura xxiv . see sura ciii . xxxiii . . instead of say es salam aleika peace be on thee the infidel and jew say es sam aleika a plague or poison on thee . see geiger p. . lit . sufficiency . the jew swear that they be muslim . sura xxii . the pilgrimage cvii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o men of mecca fear your lord . verily the earthquake of the last hour will be a tremendous thing ! on the day when ye shall behold it every suckle woman shall forsake her suck babe and every woman that hath a burden in her womb shall cast her burden and thou shalt see men drunken yet be they not drunken but it be the mighty chastisement of god ! there be a man who without knowledge wrangleth about god and followeth every rebellious satan concern whom it be decree that he shall surely beguile and guide into the torment of the flame whoever shall take him for his lord . o men ! if ye doubt a to the resurrection yet of a truth have we create you of dust then of the moist germ of life then of clot of blood then of piece of flesh shapen and unshapen that we might give you proofs of our power ! and we cause one sex or the other at our pleasure to abide in the womb until the appointed time then we bring you forth infant then permit you to reach your age of strength and one of you dieth and another of you liveth on to an age so abject that all his former knowledge be clean forgotten ! and thou hast see the earth dry up and barren but when we send down the rain upon it it stirreth and swelleth and groweth every kind of luxuriant herb . this for that god be the truth and that it be he who quickeneth the dead and that he hath power over everything and that the hour will indeed come there be no doubt of it and that god will wake up to life those who be in the tomb . a man there be who disputeth about god without knowledge or guidance or enlighten book turn aside in scorn to mislead others from the way of god ! disgrace shall be his in this world and on the day of the resurrection we will make him taste the torment of the burning this for thy handywork of old ! for god be not unjust to his servant . there be some who serve god in a single point . if good come upon one of them he resteth in it but if trial come upon him he turneth him round to infidelity with the loss both of this world and of the next ! this same be the clear ruin ! he calleth upon that beside god which can neither hurt him nor profit him . this same be the far go error ! he calleth on him who would sooner hurt than profit him . surely bad the lord and surely bad the vassal ! but god will bring in those who shall believe and do the thing that be right into garden 'neath which the river flow for god doth that which he pleaseth . let him who thinketh that god will not help his apostle in this world and in the next stretch a cord aloft a if to destroy himself then let him cut it and see whether his device can bring that to nought at which he be angry ! thus send we down the koran with it clear sign verse and because god guideth whom he pleaseth . a to those who believe and the jew and the sabeites and the christian and the magians and those who join other god with god of a truth god shall decide between them on the day of resurrection for god be witness of all thing . seest thou not that all in the heaven and all on the earth adoreth god ? the sun and the moon and the star and the mountain and the tree and the beast and many men ? but of many be chastisement the due and whom god shall disgrace there shall be none to honour god doth that which pleaseth him . these the faithful and the infidel be the two disputant who dispute concern their lord but for those who have disbelieve garment of fire shall be cut out the boiling water shall be pour down upon their head all that be in their bowel and their skin shall be dissolve and there be mace of iron for them ! so oft a they for very anguish would fain come forth thence back shall they be turn into it and taste ye the torment of the burning . but god will bring in those who shall have believe and do the thing that be right into garden 'neath which the river flow . adorn shall they be therein with golden bracelet and with pearl and their raiment therein shall be of silk for they be guide to the best of word guide to the glorious path ! but those who believe not and seduce others from the way of god and from the holy mosque which we have appoint to all men alike for those who abide therein and for the stranger and those who seek impiously to profane it we will cause to taste a grievous punishment . and call to mind when we assign the site of the house to abraham and say unite not aught with me in worship and cleanse my house for those who go in procession round it and who stand or bow in worship and proclaim to the people a pilgrimage let them come to thee on foot and on every fleet camel arriving by every deep defile that they may bear witness of it benefit to them and may make mention of god 's name on the appoint day over the brute beast with which he hath supply them for sustenance therefore eat thereof yourselves and fee the needy the poor then let them bring the neglect of their person to a close and let them pay their vow and circuit the ancient house . this do . and he that respecteth the sacred ordinance of god this will be best for him with his lord . the flesh of cattle be allow you save of those already specify to you . shun ye therefore the pollution of idol and shun ye the word of falsehood sound in faith godward unite no god with him for whoever uniteth god with god be like that which falleth from on high and the bird snatch it away or the wind wafteth it to a distant place . this do . and they who respect the rite of god perform an action which proceedeth from piety of heart . ye may obtain advantage from the cattle up to the set time for slay them then the place for sacrifice them be at the ancient house . and to every people have we appoint rite that they may commemorate the name of god over the brute beasts which he hath provide for them . and your god be the one god . to him therefore surrender yourselves and bear thou good tidings to those who humble them whose heart when mention be make of god thrill with awe and to those who remain steadfast under all that be falleth them and observe prayer and give alms of that with which we have supply them . and the camel have we appoint you for the sacrifice to god much good have ye in them . make mention therefore of the name of god over them when ye slay them a they stand in a row and when they be fall over on their side eat of them and fee him who be content and asketh not and him who asketh . thus have we subject them to you to the intent ye should be thankful . by no mean can their flesh reach unto god neither their blood but piety on your part reacheth him . thus hath he subject them to you that ye might magnify god for his guidance moreover announce to those who do good deed that god will ward off mischief from believer for god loveth not the false the infidel . a sanction be give to those who because they have suffer outrage have take up arm and verily god be well able to succour them those who have be drive forth from their home wrongfully only because they say our lord be the god . and if god have not repel some men by others cloister and church and oratory and mosque wherein the name of god be ever commemorate would surely have be destroy . and him who helpeth god will god surely help for god be right strong mighty those who if we establish them in this land will observe prayer and pay the alms of obligation and enjoin what be right and forbid what be evil . and the final issue of all thing be unto god . moreover if they charge thee with imposture then already before them the people of noah and ad and themoud and the people of abraham and the people of lot and the dweller in madian have charge their prophet with imposture ! moses too be charge with imposture ! and i bore long with the unbeliever then seize on them and how great be the change i work ! and how many city which have be ungodly and whose roof be now lay low in ruin have we destroy ! and well have be abandon and lofty castle ! have they not journey through the land ? have they not hearts to understand with or ear to hear with ? it be not that to these sight their eye be blind but the heart in their breast be blind ! and they will bid thee to hasten the chastisement . but god can not fail his threat . and verily a day with thy lord be a a thousand year a ye reckon them ! how many city have i long borne with wicked though they be yet then lay hold on them to chastise them ! unto me shall all return . say o men ! i be only your open warner and they who believe and do the thing that be right shall have forgiveness and an honourable provision but those who strive to invalidate our sign shall be inmate of hell . we have not send any apostle or prophet before thee among whose desire satan inject not some wrong desire but god shall bring to nought that which satan have suggest . thus shall god affirm his revelation for god be know wise ! that he may make that which satan hath inject a trial to those in whose heart be a disease and whose heart be harden . verily the wicked be in a far go severance from the truth ! and that they to whom the knowledge hath be give may know that the koran be the truth from thy lord and may believe in it and their heart may acquiesce in it for god be surely the guider of those who believe into the straight path . but the infidel will not cease to doubt concern it until the hour come suddenly upon them or until the chastisement of the day of desolation come upon them . on that day the kingdom shall be god 's he shall judge between them and they who shall have believe and do the thing that be right shall be in garden of delight but they who be infidel and treat our sign a lie these then their 's a shameful chastisement ! and a to those who flee their country for the cause of god and be afterwards slain or die surely with goodly provision will god provide for them ! for verily god ! he surely be the best of provider ! he will assuredly bring them in with an in bringing that shall please them well for verily god be right know gracious . so shall it be . and whoever in make exact reprisal for injury do him shall again be wrong god will assuredly aid him for god be most merciful gracious . so shall it be for that god causeth the night to enter in upon the day and he causeth the day to enter in upon the night and for that god heareth seeth . so shall it be for that god be the truth and because what they call on beside him be vanity and because god be the lofty the mighty ! seest thou not that god sendeth down water from heaven and that on the morrow the earth be clad with verdure ? for god be benignant cognisant of all . his all in the heaven and all on earth and verily god ! he assuredly be the rich the praiseworthy ! seest thou not that god hath put under you whatever be in the earth and the ship which traverse the sea at his bidding ? and he holdeth back the heaven that it fall not on the earth unless he permit it ! for god be right gracious to mankind merciful . and he it be who hath give you life then will cause you to die then will give you life of a truth man be all ungrateful . to every people have we appoint observance which they observe . therefore let them not dispute this matter with thee but bid them to thy lord for thou art on the right way but if they debate with thee then say god best knoweth what ye do ! god will judge between you on the day of resurrection a to the matter wherein ye differ . knowest thou not that god knoweth whatever be in the heaven and on the earth ? this truly be write in the book this truly be easy for god . they worship beside god that for which he hath send down no warranty and that of which they have no knowledge but for those who commit this wrong no helper ! and when our clear sign be rehearse to them thou mayst perceive disdain in the countenance of the infidel . scarce can they refrain from rush to attack those who rehearse our sign to them ! say shall i tell you of bad than this ? the fire which god hath threaten to those who believe not ! wretched the passage thither ! o men ! a parable be set forth to you wherefore hearken to it . verily they on whom ye call beside god can not create a fly though they assemble for it and if the fly carry off aught from them they can not take it away from it ! weak the suppliant and the supplicated ! unworthy the estimate they form of god ! for god be right powerful mighty ! god chooseth messenger from among the angel and from among men verily god heareth seeth . he knoweth what be before them and what be behind them and unto god shall all thing return . believer ! bow down and prostrate yourselves and worship your lord and work righteousness that you may fare well . and do valiantly in the cause of god a it behoveth you to do for him . he hath elect you and hath not lay on you any hardship in religion the faith of your father abraham . he hath name you the muslim heretofore and in this book that the apostle may be a witness against you and that ye may be witness against the rest of mankind . therefore observe prayer and pay the legal impost and cleave fast to god . he be your liege lord a goodly lord and a goodly helper ! this sura be generally say to have be reveal at mecca but this be probably only the case with verse . mr. muir place it at the close of the meccan sura of the fifth period . see n ld p. . say to be abu jahl . see sura xcvi . p. n. . lit . so that after knowledge he knoweth not aught . the teaching and progress of islam . see sura xci . ii . . the sabeites be probably hanyfs . see pref . the kaaba . sharastani inform u that there be an opinion prevalent among the arab that the walking round the kaaba and other ceremony be symbolic of the motion of the planet and of other astronomical fact . watwat mabahij al fikr . lib . i. c. say that most arabic tribe be originally star worshipper sabeans . the people of saba worship the sun the tribe of asad and kaninah the moon etc . etc . at a late period they all sink into idolatry and in the time of muhammad the idol round the kaaba amount to . lit . thin with the implied sense of fleet . the ten first day of the dhu'lhajja . for the ceremony see freytag 's einleitung p. burton 's pilgrimage vol . iii . sale 's note and prelim . disc . that be the uncut beard nail etc . offering of animal be by no mean confine to mecca and the pilgrimage . it be not uncommon say mr. lane without any definite view but that of obtain general blessing to make vow of animal and sometimes a peasant vow that he will sacrifice for the sake of a saint a calf which he possess as soon a it be grow and fat . it be let loose by consent of all his neighbour to pasture where it will even in field of young wheat and at last after it have be sacrifice a public feast be make of it meat . many a large bull be thus give away . modern egyptian i. . compare dr. gobat 's abyssinia p. for similar custom among christian of probably arabian extraction . five or six thousand animal be say to have be slay in the valley of mina by the pilgrim of the year . see lieut . burton 's pilgrimage iii . p. . the victim be consider by the devout a an expression of their conviction that death be their desert at the hand of god . see ibn batoutah iv . . par . ed . comp . sur . xxxii . p. . the ayats sign or verse of the koran . it be say by tradition that muhammad be console by this revelation for the satanic suggestion mention sur . liii . p. n. . but in this view of the text for among whose desire or affection we should render when he recite . lit . they measure not god with truth of his measurement . sura xlviii . the victory cviii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful verily we have win for thee an undoubted victory in token that god forgiveth thy earlier and later fault and fulfilleth his goodness to thee and guideth thee on the right way and that god succoureth thee with a mighty succour . he it be who sendeth down a spirit of secure repose into the heart of the faithful that they might add faith to their faith for god 's be the army of the heaven and of the earth and god be know wise and that he may bring the believe men and the believing woman into garden 'neath whose tree the river flow to dwell therein for ever and that he may cancel their evil deed for this be the great bliss with god and that he may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical woman and the men and woman who join other god with god and think evil thought of him . theirs shall be a round of evil and god be angry with them and curseth them and hath prepare hell for them and an evil journey thither ! the army of the heaven and of the earth be god 's and god be mighty wise ! verily we have send thee to be a witness and a herald of good an announcer and a warner that ye may believe on god and on his apostle and may assist him and honour him and praise him morning and evening . in truth they who plight fealty to thee really plight that fealty to god the hand of god be over their hand ! whoever therefore shall break his oath shall only break it to his own hurt but whoever shall be true to his engagement with god he will give him a great reward . the arab who take not the field with you will say to thee we be engage with our property and our family therefore ask thou pardon for u . they speak with their tongue what be not in their heart . say and who can have any power over god in your behalf whether he will you some loss or whether he will you an advantage ? yes god be acquaint with your doings . but ye thought that the apostle and the faithful could never more come back to their family and your heart be pleased at this and ye think an evil thought of this expedition and ye become an undone people for whoso believeth not in god and his apostle . . . . verily we have get ready the flame for the infidel ! and god 's be the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth whom he will he forgiveth and whom he will he punisheth and god be gracious merciful ! they who take not the field with you will say when ye go forth to the spoil to take it let u follow you . fain would they change the word of god . say ye shall by no mean follow u thus hath god say already . they will say nay ye be jealous of u . nay ! they be men of little understanding . say to those arab of the desert who take not the field ye shall be call forth against a people of mighty valour . ye shall do battle with them or they shall profess islam . if ye obey a goodly recompense will god give you but if ye turn back a ye turn back aforetime he will chastise you with a sore chastisement . it shall be no crime on the part of the blind the lame or the sick if they go not to the fight . but whoso shall obey god and his apostle he shall bring him into the garden 'neath which the river flow but whoso shall turn back he will punish him with a sore punishment . well pleased now hath god be with the believer when they plight fealty to thee under the tree and he know what be in their heart therefore do he send down upon them a spirit of secure repose and reward them with a speedy victory and with the rich booty which they take for god be mighty wise ! god promise you the take of a rich booty and speed it to you and he withhold men 's hand from you for a sign to the faithful and that he might guide you along the right way and other booty over which ye have not yet have power but now hath god compass them for you for god be over all thing potent . if the infidel shall fight against you they shall assuredly turn their back then neither protector nor helper shall they find ! such be god 's method carry into effect of old no change canst thou find in god 's mode of deal . and he it be who hold their hand from you and your hand from them in the valley of mecca after that he have give you the victory over them for god saw what ye do . these be they who believe not and keep you away from the sacred mosque as well a the offering which be prevent from reach the place of sacrifice . and have it not be that ye would have tread down believer both men and woman whom ye know not so that a crime might have light on you without your knowledge on their account and that god would bring whom he will within his mercy this would have be otherwise order . have they be apart we have surely punish such of them a believe not with a sore punishment . when the unbeliever have foster rage in their heart the rage of ignorance of heathen god send down his peace on his apostle and on the faithful and stablished in them the word of piety for they be most worthy and deserving of it and god knoweth all thing . now hath god in truth make good to his apostle the dream in which he say ye shall surely enter the sacred mosque if god will in full security have your head shave and your hair cut ye shall not fear for he knoweth what ye know not and he hath ordain you beside this a speedy victory . it be he who hath send his apostle with the guidance and the religion of truth that he may exalt it above every religion . and enough for thee be this testimony on the part of god . muhammad be the apostle of god and his comrade be vehement against the infidel but full of tenderness among themselves . thou mayst see them bow down prostrate themselves implore favour from god and his acceptance . their token be on their face the mark of their prostration . this be their picture in the law and their picture in the evangel they be a the seed which putteth forth it stalk then strengtheneth it and it groweth stout and riseth upon it stem rejoice the husbandman that the infidel may be wrathful at them . to such of them a believe and do the thing that be right hath god promise forgiveness and a noble recompense . this sura be probably reveal shortly after the peace of hudaibiya . ann . hej . . some commentator however understand the victory of the taking of mecca two year later the preterite be use in the prophetic style for the future others of the taking of chaibar or muta ? a town of the roman empire . lit . be leave behind . on the return to medina . see weil 's leben . p. n. . the law relative to booty viz . that those who be not at hudaibiya should have no share in the booty to be obtain from the jew at chaibar . muhammad march against them in hej . . when the rumour reach muhammad at hudaibiya that othman ibn affan whom he have send to inform the meccans that he be merely come to visit their temple and with peaceable intention have be slay by them . at chaibar . the valley of mecca may mean hudaibiya . but the commentator explain this verse of different event . it probably however refers to the accord to djalalein prisoner whom muhammad dismiss freely at hudaibiya . have the believer be separate from the infidel . this dream muhammad have at medina before he set out for al hudaibiya . his follower expect it fulfilment within the year but when the truce frustrate their hope this verse be reveal to pacify them . dust from the pavement . the muhammadan who say their prayer on carpet often place little brick before them which they touch in prostration with their forehead . comp . mark iv . . lit . leg . sura lxvi . the forbid cix . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful why o prophet ! dost thou hold that to be forbidden which god hath make lawful to thee from a desire to please thy wife since god be lenient merciful ? god hath allow you release from your oath and god be your master and he be the know wise . when the prophet tell a recent occurrence a a secret to one of his wife and when she divulge it and god inform him of this he acquaint her with part and withheld part . and when he have tell her of it she say who tell thee this ? he say the know the sage hath tell it me . if ye both be turn to god in penitence for now have your heart go astray . . . . but if ye conspire against the prophet then know that god be his protector and gabriel and every just man among the faithful and the angel be his helper besides . haply if he put you both away his lord will give him in exchange other wife good than you muslims believer devout penitent obedient observant of fast both know of men and virgin . o believer ! save yourselves and your family from the fire whose fuel be men and stone over which be set angel fierce and mighty they disobey not god in what he hath command them but execute his behest . o ye infidel ! make no excuse for yourselves this day ye shall surely be recompense accord to your work . o believer ! turn to god with the turning of true penitence haply your lord will cancel your evil deed and will bring you into the garden 'neath which the river flow on the day when god will not shame the prophet nor those who have share his faith their light shall run before them and on their right hand ! they shall say lord perfect our light and pardon u for thou hast power over all thing . o prophet ! make war on the infidel and hypocrite and deal rigorously with them . hell shall be their abode ! and wretched the passage to it ! god setteth forth a an example to unbelievers the wife of noah and the wife of lot they be under two of our righteous servant both of whom they deceive but their husband avail them nought against god and it shall be say enter ye into the fire with those who enter . god also holdeth forth to those who believe the example of the wife of pharaoh when she say lord build me an house with thee in paradise and deliver me from pharaoh and his doings and deliver me from the wicked and mary the daughter of imran who keep her maidenhood and into whose womb we breathe of our spirit and who believe in the word of her lord and his scripture and be one of the devout . the first verse of this sura be reveal hej . . on occasion of muhammad 's revive affection for mary a copt slave send him by the governor of egypt from whom he have recently verse swear to his wife hafsa to separate entirely . hafsa who have be greatly incense at their amour of which muhammad have himself inform her communicate the matter in confidence to ayesha from whose altered manner probably the prophet find that his secret have be betray . to free muhammad from his obligation to hafsa be the object of this chapter . muhammad withhold the fact that ayesha as well a god be his informant but taxed hafsa with not have keep his secret . supply god will pardon you . asia a name perhaps corrupt from that of pharaoh 's daughter bithiah . chron . iv . . see sura xxi . . lit . quae rimam suam tuita est in quam rimam inflavimus spiritus nostri partem . thus beidh . sura . she who be try . medina . versus in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o ye who believe ! take not my foe and your foe for friend shew them kindness although they believe not that truth which hath come to you they drive forth the apostle and yourselves because ye believe in god your lord ! if ye go forth to fight on my way and from a desire to please me and shew them kindness in private i well know what ye conceal and what ye discover ! whoso doth this hath already go astray from the even way . if they meet with you they will prove your foe hand and tongue will they put forth for your hurt and will desire that you become infidel again . neither your kindred nor your child shall at all avail you on the day of the resurrection . a severance between you will it make ! and your action doth god behold . a good example have ye in abraham and in those who follow him when they say to their people verily we be clear of you and of what ye worship beside god we renounce you and between u and hath hatred and enmity spring up for ever until ye believe in god alone . yet imitate not the language of abraham to his father i will pray for thy forgiveness but not aught shall i obtain for thee from god . o our lord ! in thee do we trust ! to thee do we turn ! to thee we shall come back at the last . o our lord ! expose u not for trial to the unbeliever and forgive u for thou art the mighty the wise ! a good example have ye in them for all who hope in god and in the last day . but let who will turn back god truly be the rich the praiseworthy ! god will perhaps establish good will between yourselves and those of them whom ye take to be your enemy god be powerful and god be gracious merciful . god doth not forbid you to deal with kindness and fairness toward those who have not make war upon you on account of your religion or drive you forth from your home for god loveth those who act with fairness . only doth god forbid you to make friend of those who on account of your religion have war against you and have drive you forth from your home and have aid those who drive you forth and whoever maketh friend of them be wrong doer . o believer ! when believe woman come over to you a refugee mohadjers then make trial of them . god best knoweth their faith but if ye have also ascertain their faith let them not go back to the infidel they be not lawful for them nor be the unbeliever lawful for these woman . but give them back what they have spend for their dower . no crime shall it be in you to marry them provide ye give them their dower . do not retain any right in the infidel woman but demand back what you have spend for their dower and let the unbeliever demand back what they have spend for their wife . this be the ordinance of god which he ordaineth among you and god be know wise . and if any of your wife escape from you to the infidel from whom ye afterwards take any spoil then give to those whose wife shall have flee away the like of what they shall have spend for their dower and fear god in whom ye believe . o prophet ! when believe woman come to thee and pledge themselves that they will not associate aught with god and that they will not steal or commit adultery nor kill their child nor bring scandalous charge nor disobey thee in what be right then plight thou thy faith to them and ask pardon for them of god for god be indulgent merciful ! o believer ! enter not into amity with those against whom god be anger they despair of the life to come even a the infidel despair of the inmate of the tomb . reveal probably as far a verse ramadhan hej . shortly before the taking of mecca . haleb ? ben abu baltaa have inform the koreisch of an intended surprise of mecca on the part of muhammad with the view of make term for his own family who have be leave there . the offence be pardon but the revelation be nevertheless publish with the view of prevent similar act of treachery in future . speaking of the representative of the different religious system prevalent in the roman empire a orpheus abraham christ apollonius of tyana enshrine among the household deity of alexander severus mr. milman remark hist . of christianity ii . p. that it be singular that abraham rather than moses be place at the head of judaism it be possible that the traditionary sanctity which attach to the first parent of the jewish people and of many of the arab tribe and which be afterwards embody in the koran be float in the east and would comprehend a it be the opinion not only of the jew but of a much wide circle of the syrian native . sura cxiii . ix . . that be by their conversion hereafter . say see n ld . p. to have be reveal at or shortly after the peace of hudaibiya . accord to the term then agree upon a mutual restitution of property be to take place . who be convert to islam . lit . with a calumny which they have devise between their hand and their foot . say to have be reveal at the taking of mecca . tab . beidh . sura . help cxi . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful when the help of god and the victory arrive and thou seest men enter the religion of god by troop then utter the praise of thy lord implore his pardon for he loveth to turn in mercy . this sura be reveal at the taking of mecca and be suppose to have give muhammad warning of his death . sura xlix . the apartment cxii . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o believer ! enter not upon any affair ere god and his apostle permit you and fear ye god for god heareth knoweth . o believer ! raise not your voice above the voice of the prophet neither speak loud to him a ye speak loud one to another l your work come to nought and ye unaware of it . they who lower their voice in the presence of the apostle of god be the person whose heart god hath incline to piety . forgiveness shall be theirs and a rich reward . they who call out to thee while thou art within thine apartment have most of them no right perception of what be due to thee . but if they wait patiently till thou come forth to them it be far good for them . but god be indulgent merciful . o believer ! if any bad man come to you with news clear it up at once l through ignorance ye harm others and speedily have to repent of what ye have do . and know that an apostle of god be among you ! should he give way to you in many matter ye would certainly become guilty of a crime . but god hath endear the faith to you and hath give it favour in your heart and hath make unbelief and wickedness and disobedience hateful to you . such be they who pursue a right course . through the bounty and grace which be from god and god be know wise . if two body of the faithful be at war then make ye peace between them and if the one of them wrong the other fight against that party which doth the wrong until they come back to the precept of god if they come back make peace between them with fairness and act impartially god loveth those who act with impartiality . only the faithful be brethren wherefore make peace between your brother and fear god that ye may obtain mercy . o believer ! let not men laugh men to scorn who haply may be good than themselves neither let woman laugh woman to scorn who may haply be good than themselves ! neither defame one another nor call one another by nickname . bad be it to be call wicked after have profess the faith and whoso repent not of this be doer of wrong . o believer ! avoid frequent suspicion for some suspicion be a crime and pry not neither let the one of you traduce another in his absence . would any one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother ? surely ye would loathe it . and fear ye god for god be ready to turn merciful . o men ! verily we have create you of a male and a female and we have divide you into people and tribe that ye might have knowledge one of another . truly the most worthy of honour in the sight of god be he who feareth him most . verily god be know cognisant . the arab of the desert say we believe . say thou ye believe not but rather say we profess islam for the faith hath not yet find it way into your heart . but if ye obey god and his apostle he will not allow you to lose any of your action for god be indulgent merciful . the true believer be those only who believe in god and his apostle and afterwards doubt not and who contend with their substance and their person on the path of god . these be the sincere . say will ye teach god about your religion ? when god knoweth whatever be in the heaven and on the earth yea god hath knowledge of all thing . they taunt thee with their have embrace islam . say taunt me not with your have embrace islam god rather taunteth you with his have guide you to the faith acknowledge this if ye be sincere . verily god knoweth the secret of the heaven and of the earth and god beholdeth what ye do . or anticipate not take not the lead of god and his apostle . all the ancient interpreter a his . ff . ibn sa 'd . tab . ag n . f. comp . also weil ff . caussin iii . refer from to the disrespectful demeanour in muhammad 's presence of the envoy of the banu tamim in hej . or . lit . from without . the commentator mention in the last note as well a others explain this verse of al walid ben uqba who have bring a false report of the refusal of the banu'lmustaliq to pay certain alms which muhammad have send him to demand . this al walid become governor of kufa under othman . he probably be never really convert to islam . upon this passage die muslimen say n ldeke verschiedene geschichten erz hlen so dass sich nichts sicher bestimmen i sst p. . this remark apply to the great mass of muhammadan comment . say to refer to safia one of muhammad 's wife . who have be taunt by his other wife with be a jewess . lit . bad the name wickedness after faith . that be not the most nobly bear like the koreisch . this verse be say to have be reveal in mecca on the day of it conquest . see weil leben p. and n. the ban asad have come to medina in a year of famine to seek support for themselves and family and make profession of islamism . beidh . thus also ibn sad . tabari . wah . a if by so do they have confer a favour on the prophet . sura ix . immunity cxiii . medina . verse an immunity from god and his apostle to those with whom ye be in league among the polytheist arab ! those who join god with god . go ye therefore at large in the land four month but know that god ye shall not weaken and that those who believe not god will put to shame and a proclamation on the part of god and his apostle to the people on the day of the great pilgrimage that god be free from any engagement with the votary of other god with god a be his apostle ! if therefore ye turn to god it will be good for you but if ye turn back then know that ye shall not weaken god and to those who believe not announce thou a grievous punishment . but this concerneth not those polytheist with whom ye be in league and who shall have afterwards in no way fail you nor aid anyone against you . observe therefore engagement with them through the whole time of their treaty for god loveth those who fear him . and when the sacred month be pass kill those who join other god with god wherever ye shall find them and seize them besiege them and lay wait for them with every kind of ambush but if they shall convert and observe prayer and pay the obligatory alms then let them go their way for god be gracious merciful . if any one of those who join god with god ask an asylum of thee grant him an asylum that he may hear the word of god and then let him reach his place of safety . this for that they be people devoid of knowledge . how shall they who add god to god be in league with god and with his apostle save those with whom ye make a league at the sacred temple ? so long a they be true to you be ye true to them for god loveth those who fear him . how can they ? since if they prevail against you they will not regard in you either tie of blood or faith . with their mouth will they content you but their heart will be averse . the great part of them be perverse doer . they sell the sign of god for a mean price and turn others aside from his way evil be it that they do ! they regard not in a believer either tie of blood or faith these be the transgressor ! yet if they turn to god and observe prayer and pay the impost then be they your brother in religion . we make clear our sign to those who understand . but if after alliance make they break their oath and revile your religion then do battle with the ring leader of infidelity for no oath be bind with them that they may desist . what ! will ye not fight against those meccans who have break their oath and aim to expel your apostle and attack you first ? will ye dread them ? god be more worthy of your fear if ye be believer ! so make war on them by your hand will god chastise them and will put them to shame and will give you victory over them and will heal the bosom of a people who believe and will take away the wrath of their heart . god will be turn unto whom he will and god be know wise . think ye that ye shall be forsake a if god do not yet know those among you who do valiantly and take none for their friend beside god and his apostle and the faithful ? god be well apprise of your doings . it be not for the votary of other god with god witness against themselves of infidelity to visit the temple of god . these ! vain their work and in the fire shall they abide for ever ! he only should visit the temple of god who believeth in god and the last day and observeth prayer and payeth the legal alms and dreadeth none but god . these haply will be among the rightly guide . do ye place the give drink to the pilgrim and the visitation of the sacred temple on the same level with him who believeth in god and the last day and fighteth on the way of god ? they shall not be hold equal by god and god guideth not the unrighteous . they who have believe and flee their home and striven with their substance and with their person on the path of god shall be of high grade with god and these be they who shall be happy ! tidings of mercy from himself and of his good pleasure doth their lord send them and of garden in which lasting pleasure shall be theirs therein shall they abide for ever for god ! with him be a great reward . o believer ! make not friend of your father or your brother if they love unbelief above faith and whoso of you shall make them his friend will be wrong doer . say if your father and your son and your brother and your wife and your kindred and the wealth which ye have gain and merchandise which ye fear may be unsold and dwelling wherein ye delight be dearer to you than god and his apostle and effort on his path then wait until god shall himself enter on his work and god guideth not the impious . now hath god help you in many battlefield and on the day of honein when ye pride yourselves on your number but it avail you nothing and the earth with all it breadth become too straight for you then turn ye your back in flight then do god send down his spirit of repose upon his apostle and upon the faithful and he send down the host which ye saw not and he punish the infidel this the infidel ' reward ! yet after this will god be turn to whom he pleaseth for god be gracious merciful ! o believer ! only they who join god with god be unclean ! let them not therefore after this their year come near the sacred temple . and if ye fear want god if he please will enrich you of his abundance for god be know wise . make war upon such of those to whom the scripture have be give a believe not in god or in the last day and who forbid not that which god and his apostle have forbid and who profess not the profession of the truth until they pay tribute out of hand and they be humble . the jew say ezra ozair be a son of god and the christian say the messiah be a son of god . such the saying in their mouth ! they resemble the saying of the infidel of old ! god do battle with them ! how be they misguide ! they take their teacher and their monk and the messiah son of mary for lord beside god though bidden to worship one god only . there be no god but he ! far from his glory be what they associate with him ! fain would they put out god 's light with their mouth but god only desireth to perfect his light albeit the infidel abhor it . he it be who hath send his apostle with the guidance and a religion of the truth that he may make it victorious over every other religion albeit they who assign partner to god be averse from it . o believer ! of a truth many of the teacher and monk do devour man 's substance in vanity and turn them from the way of god . but to those who treasure up gold and silver and expend it not in the way of god announce tidings of a grievous torment . on that day their treasure shall be heat in hell fire and their forehead and their side and their back shall be brand with them . . . . this be what ye have treasure up for yourselves taste therefore your treasure ! twelve month be the number of month with god accord to god 's book since the day when he create the heaven and the earth of these four be sacred this be the right usage but wrong not yourselves therein attack those who join god with god in all a they attack you in all and know that god be with those who fear him . to carry over a sacred month to another be only a growth of infidelity . the infidel be lead into error by it . they allow it one year and forbid it another that they may make good the number of month which god hath hallow and they allow that which god hath prohibit . the evil of their deed hath be prepare for them by satan for god guideth not the people who do not believe . o believer ! what possess you that when it be say to you march forth on the way of god ye sink heavily earthwards ? what ! prefer ye the life of this world to the next ? but the fruition of this mundane life in respect of that which be to come be but little . unless ye march forth with a grievous chastisement will he chastise you and he will place another people in your stead and ye shall in no way harm him for over everything be god potent . if ye assist not your prophet . . . god assist him formerly when the unbeliever drive him forth in company with a second only ! when they two be in the cave when the prophet say to his companion be not distress verily god be with u . and god send down his tranquillity upon him and strengthen him with host ye saw not and make the word of those who believe not the abase and the word of god be the exalt for god be mighty wise . march ye forth the light and heavy armed and contend with your substance and your person on the way of god . this if ye know it will be good for you . have there be a near advantage and a short journey they would certainly have follow thee but the way seem long to them . yet will they swear by god have we be able we have surely go forth with you they be self destroyer ! and god knoweth that they be surely liars ! god forgive thee ! why didst thou give them leave to stay behind ere they who make true excuse have become know to thee and thou hadst know the liar ? they who believe in god and in the last day will not ask leave of thee to be exempt from contend with their substance and their person . but god knoweth those who fear him ! they only will ask thy leave who believe not in god and the last day and whose heart be full of doubt and who be toss up and down in their doubtings . moreover have they be desirous to take the field they would have get ready for that purpose the munition of war . but god be averse to their marching forth and make them laggard and it be say sit ye at home with those who sit . have they take the field with you they would only have add a burden to you and have hurry about among you stir you up to sedition and some there be among you who would have listen to them and god knoweth the evil doer . of old aim they at sedition and derange thy affair until the truth arrive and the behest of god become apparent averse from it though they be . some of them say to thee allow me to remain at home and expose me not to the trial . have they not fall into a trial already ? but verily hell shall environ the infidel ! if a success betide thee it annoyeth them but if a reverse betide thee they say we take our own measure before and they turn their back and be glad . say nothing can befall u but what god hath destine for u . our liege lord be he and on god let the faithful trust ! say await ye for u other than one of the two best thing ? but we await for you the infliction of a chastisement by god from himself or at our hand . wait ye then we verily will wait with you . say make ye your offering willingly or by constraint it can not be accept from you because ye be a wicked people and nothing hindreth the acceptance of their offering but that they believe not in god and his apostle and discharge not the duty of prayer but with sluggishness and make not offering but with reluctance . let not therefore their rich or their child amaze thee . god be only mind to punish them by mean of these in this life present and that their soul may depart while they be unbeliever . and they swear by god that they be indeed of you yet they be not of you but they be people who be afraid of you if they find a place of refuge or cave or a hiding place they assuredly turn towards it and haste thereto . some of them also defame thee in regard to the alms yet if a part be give them they be content but if no part be give them behold they be angry ! would that they be satisfy with that which god and his apostle have give them and would say god sufficeth u ! god will vouchsafe unto u of his favour and so will his apostle verily unto god do we make our suit ! but alms be only to be give to the poor and the needy and those who collect them and to those whose heart be win to islam and for ransom and for debtor and for the cause of god and the wayfarer . this be an ordinance from god and god be know wise . there be some of them who injure the prophet and say he be all ear . say an ear of good to you ! he believeth in god and believeth the believer and be a mercy to such of you a believe but they who injure the apostle of god shall suffer a dolorous chastisement . they swear to you by god to please you but worthy be god and his apostle that they should please him if they be believer . know they not that for him who opposeth god and his apostle be surely the fire of hell in which he shall remain for ever ? this be the great ignominy ! the hypocrite be afraid lest a sura should be send down concern them to tell them plainly what be in their heart . say scoff ye but god will bring to light that which ye be afraid of . and if thou question them they will surely say we be only discourse and jest . say what ! do ye scoff at god and his sign and his apostle ? make no excuse from faith ye have pass to infidelity ! if we forgive some of you we will punish others for that they have be evil doer . hypocritical men and woman imitate one another . they enjoin what be evil and forbid what be just and shut up their hand . they have forget god and he hath forget them . verily the hypocrite be the perverse doer . god promiseth the hypocritical men and woman and the unbeliever the fire of hell therein shall they abide this their sufficing portion ! and god hath curse them and a lasting torment shall be theirs . ye act like those who flourish before you . mighty be they than you in prowess and more abundant in wealth and child and they enjoy their portion so ye also enjoy your portion a they who be before you enjoy theirs and ye hold discourse like their discourse . these ! vain their work both for this world and for that which be to come ! these ! they be the lost one . hath not the history reach them of those who be before them ? of the people of noah and of ad and of themoud and of the people of abraham and of the inhabitant of madian and of the overthrown city ? their apostle come to them with clear proof of their mission god would not deal wrongly by them but they deal wrongly by themselves . the faithful of both sex be mutual friend they enjoin what be just and forbid what be evil they observe prayer and pay the legal impost and they obey god and his apostle . on these will god have mercy verily god be mighty wise . to the faithful both men and woman god promiseth garden 'neath which the river flow in which they shall abide and goodly mansion in the garden of eden . but best of all will be god 's good pleasure in them . this will be the great bliss . o prophet ! contend against the infidel and the hypocrite and be rigorous with them hell shall be their dwelling place ! wretched the journey thither ! they swear by god that they say no such thing yet spake they the word of infidelity and from muslim become unbeliever ! they plan what they could not effect and only disapprove of it because god and his apostle have enrich them by his bounty ! if they repent it will be good for them but if they fall back into their sin with a grievous chastisement will god chastise them in this world and the next and on earth they shall have neither friend nor protector ! some there be of them who make this agreement with god if truly he give u of his bounty we will surely give alms and surely be of the righteous . yet when he have vouchsafe them of his bounty they become covetous thereof and turn their back and withdraw afar off so he cause hypocrisy to take it turn in their heart until the day on which they shall meet him for that they fail their promise to god and that they be liar ! know they not that god knoweth their secret and their private talk and that god knoweth the secret thing ? they who traduce such of the faithful a give their alms freely and those who find nothing to give but their earnings and scoff at them god shall scoff at them and there be a grievous torment in store for them . ask thou forgiveness for them or ask it not it will be the same . if thou ask forgiveness for them seventy time god will by no mean forgive them . this for that they believe not in god and his apostle ! and god guideth not the ungodly people . they who be leave at home be delight to stay behind god 's apostle and be averse from contend with their rich and their person for the cause of god and say march not out in the heat . say a fiercer heat will be the fire of hell . would that they understand this . little therefore let them laugh and much let them weep a the meed of their doings ! if god bring thee back from the fight to some of them and they ask thy leave to take the field say by no mean shall ye ever take the field with me and by no mean shall ye fight an enemy with me ye be well pleased to sit at home at the first crisis sit ye at home then with those who lag behind . never pray thou over anyone of them who dieth or stand at his grave because they believe not in god and his apostle and die in their wickedness . let not their rich or their child astonish thee through these god be fain only to punish them in this world and that their soul should depart while they be still infidel . when a sura be send down with believe in god and go forth to war with his apostle those of them who be possess of rich demand exemption and say allow u to be with those who sit at home . well content be they to be with those who stay behind for a seal hath be set on their heart so that they understand not but the apostle and those who share his faith contend for the faith with purse and person and these ! all good thing await them and these be they who shall be happy . god hath make ready for them garden 'neath which the river flow wherein they shall remain for ever this will be the great bliss . some arab of the desert come with excuse pray exemption and they who have gainsay god and his apostle sat at home a grievous punishment shall light on such of them a believe not . it shall be no crime in the weak and in the sick and in those who find not the mean of contribute to stay at home provide they be sincere with god and his apostle . against those who act virtuously there be no cause of blame and god be gracious merciful nor against those to whom when they come to thee that thou shouldst mount them thou didst say i find not wherewith to mount you and they turn away their eye shed flood of tear for grief because they find no mean to contribute . only be there cause of blame against those who though they be rich ask thee for exemption . they be pleased to be with those who stay behind and god hath set a seal upon their heart they have no knowledge . they will excuse themselves to you when ye come back to them . say excuse yourselves not we can not believe you now hath god inform u about you god will behold your doings and so will his apostle to him who knoweth alike thing hide and thing manifest shall ye hereafter be bring back and he will tell you what ye have do . they will adjure you by god when ye be come back to them to withdraw from them withdraw from them then for they be unclean their dwelling shall be hell in recompense for their desert . they will adjure you to take pleasure in them but if ye take pleasure in them god truly will take no pleasure in those who act corruptly . the arab of the desert be most stout in unbelief and dissimulation and likelier it be that they should be unaware of the law which god hath send down to his apostle and god be know wise . of the arab of the desert there be some who reckon what they expend in the cause of god a tribute and wait for some change of fortune to befall you a change for evil shall befall them ! god be the hearer the knower . and of the arab of the desert some believe in god and in the last day and deem those alms an approach to god and to the apostle 's prayer . be they not their approach ? into his mercy shall god lead them yes god be indulgent merciful . a for those who lead the way the first of the mohadjers and the ansars and those who have follow their noble conduct god be well pleased with them and they with him he hath make ready for them garden under whose tree the river flow to abide therein for aye this shall be the great bliss and of the arab of the desert round about you some be hypocrite and of the people of medina some be stubborn in hypocrisy . thou knowest them not muhammad we know them twice will we chastise them then shall they be give over to a great chastisement . others have own their fault and with an action that be right they have mix another that be wrong . god will haply be turn to them for god be forgive merciful . take alms of their substance that thou mayst cleanse and purify them thereby and pray for them for thy prayer shall assure their mind and god heareth knoweth . know they not that when his servant turn to him with repentance god accepteth it and that he accepteth alms and that god be he who turneth the merciful ? say work ye but god will behold your work and so will his apostle and the faithful and ye shall be bring before him who knoweth alike the hidden and the manifest and he will tell you of all your work . and others await the decision of god whether he will punish them or whether he will be turn unto them but god be know wise . there be some who have build a mosque for mischief and for infidelity and to disunite the faithful and in expectation of him who in time past war against god and his apostle . they will surely swear our aim be only good but god be witness that they be liar . never set thou foot in it . there be a mosque found from it first day in piety . more worthy be it that thou enter therein therein be men who aspire to purity and god loveth the purified . which of the two be best ? he who hath found his building on the fear of god and the desire to please him or he who hath found his building on the brink of an undermined bank wash away by torrent so that it rusheth with him into the fire of hell ? but god guideth not the doer of wrong . their building which they have build will not cease to cause uneasiness in their heart until their heart be cut in piece . god be know wise . verily of the faithful hath god buy their person and their substance on condition of paradise for them in return on the path of god shall they fight and slay and be slay a promise for this be pledge in the law and in the evangel and in the koran and who more faithful in to his engagement than god ? rejoice therefore in the contract that ye have contract for this shall be the great bliss . those who turn to god and those who serve who praise who fast who bow down who prostrate themselves who enjoin what be just and forbid what be evil and keep to the bound of god . . . wherefore bear these good tidings to the faithful . it be not for the prophet or the faithful to pray for the forgiveness of those even though they be of kin who associate other being with god after it hath be make clear to them that they be to be the inmate of hell . for neither do abraham ask forgiveness for his father but in pursuance of a promise which he have promise to him but when it be shewn him that he be an enemy to god he declare himself clear of him . yet abraham be pitiful kind . nor be it for god to lead a people into error after he hath guide them aright until that which they ought to dread hath be clearly shewn them . verily god knoweth all thing . god ! his the kingdom of the heaven and of the earth ! he maketh alive and killeth ! ye have no patron or helper save god . now hath god turn him unto the prophet and unto the refugee mohadjers and unto the helper ansars who follow him in the hour of distress after that the heart of a part of them have well nigh fail them . then turn he unto them for he be kind to them merciful . he hath also turn him unto the three who be leave behind so that the earth spacious a it be become too strait for them and their soul become so straiten within them that they bethink them that there be no refuge from god but unto himself . then be he turn to them that they might be turn to him for god be he that turneth the merciful . believer ! fear god and be with the sincere . no cause have the people of medina and the arab of the desert around them to abandon god 's apostle or to prefer their own life to his because neither thirst nor the labour nor hunger could come upon them when on path of god neither do they step a step which may anger the unbeliever neither do they receive from the enemy any damage but it be write down to them a a good work . verily god suffereth not the reward of the righteous to perish . nor give they alms either small or great nor traverse they a torrent but it be thus reckon to them that god may reward them with good than they have work . the faithful must not march forth all together to the war and if a party of every band of them march not out it be that they may instruct themselves in their religion and may warn their people when they come back to them that they take heed to themselves . believer ! wage war against such of the infidel a be your neighbour and let them find you rigorous and know that god be with those who fear him . whenever a sura be send down there be some of them who say whose faith hath it increase ? it will increase the faith of those who believe and they shall rejoice . but a to those in whose heart be a disease it will add doubt to their doubt and they shall die infidel . do they not see that they be prove every year once or twice ? yet they turn not neither be they warn . and whenever a sura be send down they look at one another . . . . doth any one see you ? then turn they aside . god shall turn their heart aside because they be a people devoid of understand . now hath an apostle come unto you from among yourselves your iniquity press heavily upon him . he be careful over you and towards the faithful compassionate merciful . if they turn away say god sufficeth me there be no god but he . in him put i my trust . he be the possessor of the glorious throne ! the immunity be say by some commentator to have form originally one sura with the eighth p. and that on this account the usual formula of invocation be not prefix . the caliph othman account for this omission of the bismillah from the fact of this sura have be reveal with the exception of a few verse shortly before the prophet 's death who leave no instruction on the subject . mishcat p. . the former verse from or accord to other tradition from be recite to the pilgrim at mecca by ali ann . hej . . lit . that ye can not weaken god . shaw l dhu'lkaada dhu'lhajja muharram . these month be observe by the arabian previous to the time of muhammad . al abbas muhammad 's uncle when take prisoner have defend his unbelief and declare that he have perform these two important duty . beidh . or shall issue his behest . at the battle of honein a valley three mile from mecca a.h. the muhammadan presume upon the great superiority of their number men over the enemy who be only strong be seize with a panic throughout their rank . order be restore and victory obtain through the bravery and presence of mind of muhammad and his kindred . the enemy attack and rout you on all side . see ii . p. . through the breaking off commercial relation . or by right of subjection sale in cash wahl . all without exception k. i.e . a if by count hand . thus hilchoth melachim vi . . the jew be command in case of war with the gentile to offer peace on two condition that they become tributary and renounce idolatry . thus also chap . viii . . the muhammadan tradition be that ezra be raise to life after he have be year dead and dictate from memory the whole jewish law which have be lose during the captivity to the scribe . that the jew regard ezra a a son of god be due to muhammad 's own invention . see sonna v. h. v. purgstall 's fundgruben des orient i. . the talmudists however use very exaggerated language concern him . thus sanhedrin . ezra would have be fully worthy to have be the lawgiver if moses have not precede him . josephus ant . xi . speaks of his high repute greek text with the people and of his honourable burial . muhammad probably represent the jew a have deify ezra with the view of show that they as well a the christian have tamper with the doctrine of the divine unity . an allusion to the word rabbi use by jew and christian of their priest etc . but in arabic of god only . comp . matt . xxiii . . see sur . cxiv . v. . the intercalation of a month every third year in order to reduce the lunar to the solar year be justify by the muhammadan from this passage . see sur . xiii . p. n. . with abubekr . lit . second of two . wahk . reich oder arm . savary young or old . ibn hisam pronounce this to be the old verse of the sura . this refer to the expedition of tabouk a town half way between medina and damascus against the greek a.h. . muhammad be now at the head of an army of men . verse be say to have be reveal during the march . lit . prepare a preparation . lit . write . that be victory or martyrdom . compare sura iii . . geiger p. shew that this be precisely the teaching of the talmudists with regard to the wicked . the poor i.e . absolute paupers the needy i.e . those in some temporary distress . the petty arab chief with whom muhammad make term after the battle of honein in order to secure their follower . there seem to be a play in the original upon the similarity of the word for injure and ear . lit . be the one from the other . from give alms . comp . sura liv . p. . the tradition a to the collection of pitch from wood of the ark in the time of berosus b. . ? for amulet and of the wood itself in the time of josephus ant . i. c. apion i. must have reach muhammad through his jewish informant . fragment be say to have exist in the day of benjamin of tudela and to have be carry away by the chalif omar from the mountain al djoudi to the mosque of gazyrat ibn omar . to kill muhammad . the circumstance be give in a tradition preserve ap . weil p. note . the meaning be that the people of medina who have become enrich by muhammad 's residence among them have no well motive for disapprove the attempt upon his life . lit . they have nothing to avenge but that etc . prayer for the dead be customary among the arabian before muhammad . see freyt . einl . p. . the mohadiers be those who flee with muhammad from mecca to medina the ansars his auxiliary in medina . the commentator be not agree a to the nature of this double punishment . the fine of a third part of all their substance be impose upon seven of those who have hold back from the expedition to tabouk . this be the fault spoken of in the preceding verse . the tribe of beni ganim have build a mosque professedly from religious motif which they invite muhammad on his way to tabouk to dedicate by a solemn act of prayer . muhammad however discover that the real motive of the beni ganim be jealousy of the tribe of beni amru ibn auf and of the mosque at kuba and that there exist and understand between them and his enemy the monk abu amir who be then in syria for the purpose of urge the greek to attack the muslim and their mosque . it be to him that the word irs dan refers . to the dweller at kuba . verse be probably promulged on the return from tabouk previous to the entry into medina . abu amir . or never stand thou in it to pray . the mosque of kuba about three mile s.s.e . of medina . the spot where this verse be reveal be still point out and call makam el ayat or the place of sign . burton 's pilgrimage ii . p. .muhammad lay the first brick and it be the first place of public prayer in el islam . ib . p. . the beni ganim . that be up to the time of their death they will never reflect on what they have do without bitter pang of conscience . see weil 's . der prophet pp . and note . lit . limit i.e . law . shall have their recompense . see verse . lit . turn aside swerve . three ansars who do not accompany muhammad to tabouk and who on his return be put under interdict and not release from it till after fifty day of penance . verse probably belong to the period after the return from tabouk to medina . while fight for the cause of god . sura . the table cxiv . medina . verse in the name of god the compassionate the merciful o believer ! be faithful to your engagement . you be allow the flesh of cattle other than what be hereinafter recite except game which be not allow you while ye be on pilgrimage . verily god ordaineth what he pleaseth . o believer ! violate neither the rite of god nor the sacred month muharram nor the offering nor it ornament nor those who press on to the sacred house seek favour from their lord and his good pleasure in them . but when all be over then take to the chase and let not ill will at those who would have keep you from the sacred mosque lead you to transgress but rather be helpful to one another accord to goodness and piety but be not helpful for evil and malice and fear ye god . verily god be severe in punish ! that which dieth of itself and blood and swine 's flesh and all that hath be sacrifice under the invocation of any other name than that of god and the strangle and the kill by a blow or by a fall or by gore and that which hath be eat by beast of prey unless ye make it clean by give the death stroke yourselves and that which hath be sacrifice on the block of stone be forbid you and to make division of the slain by consult the arrow be impiety in you . woe this day on those who forsake your religion ! and fear them not but fear me . this day have i perfect your religion for you and have fill up the measure of my favour upon you and it be my pleasure that islam be your religion but whoso without wilful leaning to wrong shall be force by hunger to transgress to him verily will god be indulgent merciful . they will ask thee what be make lawful for them . say those thing which be good be legalise to you and the prey of beast of chase which ye have train like dog teach them a god hath taught you . eat therefore of what they shall catch for you and make mention of the name of god over it and fear god verily swift be god to reckon this day thing healthful be legalise to you and the meat of those who have receive the scripture be allow to you a your meat be to them . and you be permit to marry virtuous woman who be believer and virtuous woman of those who have receive the scripture before you when you shall have provide them their portion live chastely with them without fornication and without take concubine . vain the work of him who shall renounce the faith ! and in the next world he shall be of the lost . o believer ! when ye address yourselves to prayer wash your face and your hand up to the elbow and wipe your head and your foot to the ankle . and if ye have become unclean then purify yourselves . but if ye be sick or on a journey or if one of you come from the place of retirement or if ye have touch woman and ye find no water then take clean sand and rub your face and your hand with it . god desireth not to lay a burden upon you but he desireth to purify you and he would fill up the measure of his favour upon you that ye may be grateful . and remember the favour of god upon you and his covenant which he hath covenant with you when ye say we have hear and will obey and fear god verily god knoweth the very secret of the breast . o believer ! stand up a witness for god by righteousness and let not ill will at any induce you not to act uprightly . act uprightly . next will this be to the fear of god . and fear ye god verily god be apprise of what ye do . god hath promise to those who believe and do the thing that be right that for them be pardon and a great reward . but they who be infidel and treat our sign a lie these shall be mat with hell fire . o believer ! recollect god 's favour upon you when certain folk be mind to stretch forth their hand against you but he keep their hand from you . fear god then and on god let the faithful trust . of old do god accept the covenant of the child of israel and out of them we raise up twelve leader and god say verily i will be with you . if ye observe prayer and pay the obligatory alms and believe in my apostle and help them and lend god a liberal loan i will surely put away from you your evil deed and i will bring you into garden 'neath which the river flow ! but whoso of you after this believeth not hath go astray from the even path . but for their break their covenant we have curse them and have harden their heart . they shift the word of scripture from their place and have forget part of what they be teach . thou wilt not cease to discover deceit on their part except in a few of them . but forgive them and pass it over verily god loveth those who act generously ! and of those who say we be christian have we accept the covenant . but they too have forget a part of what they be teach wherefore we have stir up enmity and hatred among them that shall last till the day of the resurrection and in the end will god tell them of their doings . o people of the scripture ! now be our apostle come to you to clear up to you much that ye conceal of those scripture and to pass over many thing . now hath a light and a clear book come to you from god by which god will guide him who shall follow after his good pleasure to path of peace and will bring them out of the darkness to the light by his will and to the straight path will he guide them . infidel now be they who say verily god be the messiah ibn maryam son of mary ! say and who could aught obtain from god if he choose to destroy the messiah ibn maryam and his mother and all who be on the earth together ? for with god be the sovereignty of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them ! he createth what he will and over all thing be god potent . say the jew and christian son be we of god and his beloved . say why then doth he chastise you for your sin ? nay ! ye be but a part of the men whom he hath created ! he will pardon whom he pleaseth and chastise whom he pleaseth and with god be the sovereignty of the heaven and of the earth and of all that be between them and unto him shall all thing return . o people of the book ! now hath our apostle come to you to clear up to you the cessation of apostle l you should say there hath come to u no bearer of good tidings nor any warner . but now hath a bearer of good tidings and a warner reach you . and god be almighty . and remember when moses say to his people o my people ! call to mind the goodness of god towards you when he appoint prophet among you and appoint you king and give you what never have be give before to any human being enter o my people ! the holy land which god hath destine for you . turn not back l ye be overthrow to your ruin . they say o moses ! therein be men of might . and verily we can by no mean enter it till they be go forth . but if they go forth from it then verily will we enter in . then say two men of those who fear their lord and to whom god have be gracious enter in upon them by the gate and when ye enter it ye overcome ! if ye be believer put ye your trust in god . they say o moses ! never can we enter while they remain therein . go thou and thy lord and fight for here will we sit u down . he say o my lord verily of none be i master but of myself and my brother put thou therefore a difference between u and this ungodly people . he say verily the land shall be forbid them forty year they shall wander in the earth perplexed . fret not thyself therefore for the ungodly people . relate to them exactly the story of the son of adam when they each offer an offering accept from the one of them and not accept from the other . the one say i will surely slay thee . say the other god only accept from those that fear him . even if thou stretch forth thine hand against me to slay me i will not stretch forth my hand against thee to slay thee . truly i fear god the lord of the world . yea rather would i that thou shouldest bear my sin and thine own sin and that thou become an inmate of the fire for that be the recompense of the unjust doer . and his passion lead him to slay his brother and he slew him and he become one of those who perish . and god send a raven which scratch upon the ground to shew him how he might hide his brother 's wrong . he say o woe be me ! be i too weak to become like this raven and to hide away my brother 's wrong ? and he become one of the repentant . for this cause have we ordain to the child of israel that he who slayeth any one unless it be a person guilty of manslaughter or of spread disorder in the land shall be a though he have slay all mankind but that he who saveth a life shall be a though he have save all mankind alive . of old our apostle come to them with the proof of their mission then verily after this most of them committed excess in the land . only the recompense of those who war against god and his apostle and go about to commit disorder on the earth shall be that they shall be slay or crucify or have their alternate hand and foot cut off or be banish the land this their disgrace in this world and in the next a great torment shall be theirs except those who ere you have them in your power shall repent for know that god be forgive merciful . o ye who believe ! fear god . desire union with him . contend earnestly on his path that you may attain to happiness . a to the infidel if that they have twice the rich of the earth to be their ransom from torment on the day of resurrection it should not be accept from them ! and a dolorous torment shall be their 's . fain would they come forth from the fire but forth from it they shall not come and a lasting torment shall be their 's . a to the thief whether man or woman cut ye off their hand in recompense for their doings . this be a penalty by way of warn from god himself . and god be mighty wise . but whoever shall turn him to god after this his wickedness and amend god truly will be turn to him for god be forgive merciful . knowest thou not that the sovereignty of the heaven and of the earth be god 's ? he chastiseth whom he will and whom he will he forgiveth . and god hath power over all thing . o apostle ! let not those who vie with one another in speed to infidelity vex thee of those who say with their mouth we believe but whose heart believe not or of the jew listener to a lie listener to others but who come not to thee . they shift the word of the law from their place and say if this be bring to you receive it but if this be not bring to you then beware of it . for him whom god would mislead thou canst in no wise prevail with god ! they whose heart god shall not please to cleanse shall suffer disgrace in this world and in the next a grievous punishment listener to a falsehood and greedy devourer of the forbidden ! if therefore they have recourse to thee then judge between them or withdraw from them . if thou withdraw from them then can they have no power to injure thee . but if thou judge then judge between them with equity . verily god loveth those who deal equitably . but how shall they make thee their judge since they possess already the law in which be the behest of god and have not obey it ? after this they will turn their back but such be not believer . verily we have send down the law towrat wherein be guidance and light . by it do the prophet who profess islam judge the jew and the doctor and the teacher judge by that portion of the book of god of which they be the keeper and the witness . therefore o jew ! fear not men but fear me and barter not away my sign for a mean price ! and whoso will not judge by what god hath send down such be the infidel . and therein have we enact for them life for life and eye for eye and nose for nose and ear for ear and tooth for tooth and for wound retaliation whoso shall compromise it a alms shall have therein the expiation of his sin and whoso will not judge by what god hath send down such be the transgressor . and in the footstep of the prophet cause we jesus the son of mary to follow confirm the law which be before him and we give him the evangel with it guidance and light confirmatory of the precede law a guidance and warn to those who fear god and that the people of the evangel may judge accord to what god hath send down therein . and whoso will not judge by what god hath send down such be the perverse . and to thee we have send down the book of the koran with truth confirmatory of previous scripture and their safeguard . judge therefore between them by what god hath send down and follow not their desire by desert the truth which hath come unto thee . to every one of you have we give a rule and a beaten track . and if god have please he have surely make you all one people but he would test you by what he hath give to each . be emulous then in good deed . to god shall ye all return and he will tell you concern the subject of your dispute . wherefore do thou judge between them by what god hath send down and follow not their wish ! but be on thy guard against them l they beguile thee from any of those precept which god hath send down to thee and if they turn back then know thou that for some of their crime doth god choose to punish them for truly most men be perverse . desire they therefore the judgment of the time of pagan ignorance ? but what good judge can there be than god for those who believe firmly ? o believer ! take not the jew or christian a friend . they be but one another 's friend . if any one of you taketh them for his friend he surely be one of them ! god will not guide the evil doer . so shalt thou see the diseased at heart speed away to them and say we fear l a change of fortune befall u . but haply god will of himself bring about some victory or event of his own ordering then soon will they repent them of their secret imaginings . then will the faithful say what ! be these they who swear by their most solemn oath that they be surely with you ? vain their work and themselves shall come to ruin . o ye who believe ! should any of you desert his religion god will then raise up a people love by him and love him lowly towards the faithful haughty towards the infidel . for the cause of god will they contend and not fear the blame of the blamer . this be the grace of god ! on whom he will he bestoweth it ! god be vast omniscient ! verily your protector be god and his apostle and those who believe who observe prayer and pay the alms of obligation and who bow in worship . and whoso take god and his apostle and those who believe for friend they truly be the people of god they shall have the upper hand . o ye who believe ! take not such of those who have receive the scripture before you a scoff and jest at your religion or the infidel for your friend but fear god if ye be believer nor those who when ye call to prayer make it an object of raillery and derision . this they do because they be a people who understand not . say o people of the book ! do ye not disavow u only because we believe in god and in what he hath send down to u and in what he hath send down aforetime and because most of you be doer of ill ? say can i announce to you any retribution bad than that which awaiteth them with god ? they whom god hath curse and with whom he hath be angry some of them hath he change into ape and swine and they who worship thagout be in evil plight and have go far astray from the right path ! when they present themselves to you they say we believe but infidels they come in unto you and infidel they go forth ! god well know what they conceal . many of them shalt thou see hasten together to wickedness and malice and to eat unlawful thing . shame on them for what they have do ! have not their doctor and teacher forbid their uttering wickedness and their eating unlawful food bad indeed would have be their doings ! the hand of god say the jew be chain up . their own hand shall be chain up and for that which they have say shall they be curse . nay ! outstretched be both his hand ! at his own pleasure do he bestow gift . that which hath be send down to thee from thy lord will surely increase the rebellion and unbelief of many of them and we have put enmity and hatred between them that shall last till the day of the resurrection . oft a they kindle a beacon fire for war shall god quench it ! and their aim will be to abet disorder on the earth but god loveth not the abettor of disorder . but if the people of the book believe and have the fear of god we will surely put away their sin from them and will bring them into garden of delight and if that they observe the law and the evangel and what hath be send down to them from their lord they shall surely have their fill of good thing from above them and from beneath their foot . some there be among them who act aright but many of them how evil be their doings ! o apostle ! proclaim all that hath be send down to thee from thy lord for if thou do it not thou hast not proclaim his message at all . and god will protect thee from evil men verily god guideth not the unbeliever . say o people of the book ! ye have no ground to stand on until ye observe the law and the evangel and that which hath be send down to you from your lord . the book which hath be send down to thee from thy lord will certainly increase the rebellion and unbelief of many of them but be not thou trouble for the unbeliever . verily they who believe and the jew and the sabeites and the christian whoever of them believeth in god and in the last day and doth what be right on them shall come no fear neither shall they be put to grief . of old we accept the covenant of the child of israel and send apostle to them . oft a an apostle come to them with that for which they have no desire some they treat a liar and some they slew and they reckon that no harm would come of it but they become blind and deaf ! then be god turn unto them then many of them again become blind and deaf ! but god behold what they do . infidel now be they who say god be the messiah son of mary for the messiah say o child of israel ! worship god my lord and your lord . whoever shall join other god with god god shall forbid him the garden and his abode shall be the fire and the wicked shall have no helper . they surely be infidel who say god be the third of three for there be no god but one god and if they refrain not from what they say a grievous chastisement shall light on such of them a be infidels . will they not therefore be turn unto god and ask pardon of him ? since god be forgive merciful ! the messiah son of mary be but an apostle other apostle have flourish before him and his mother be a just person they both eat food . behold ! how we make clear to them the sign ! then behold how they turn aside ! say will ye worship beside god that which can neither hurt nor help ? but god ! he only heareth knoweth . say o people of the book ! outstep not bound of truth in your religion neither follow the desire of those who have already go astray and who have cause many to go astray and have themselves go astray from the evenness of the way . those among the child of israel who believe not be curse by the tongue of david and of jesus son of mary . this because they be rebellious and become transgressor they forbid not one another the iniquity which they work ! detestable be their action ! thou shalt see many of them make friend of the infidel . evil the action which their own passion have send on beforehand for god be angry with them and in torment shall they abide for ever but if they have believe in god and the prophet and the koran which hath be send down to him they have not take them for their friend but perverse be most of them . of all men thou wilt certainly find the jew and those who join other god with god to be the most intense in hatred of those who believe and thou shalt certainly find those to be near in affection to them who say we be christian . this because some of them be priest and monk and because they be free from pride . and when they hear that which hath be send down to the apostle thou seest their eye overflow with tear at the truth they recognise therein say o our lord ! we believe write u down therefore with those who bear witness to it . and why should we not believe in god and in the truth which hath come down to u and crave that our lord would bring u into paradise with the just ? therefore hath god reward them for these their word with garden 'neath which the river flow they shall abide therein for ever this the reward of the righteous ! but they who believe not and treat our sign a lie shall be the inmate of hell fire . o ye who believe ! interdict not the healthful viands which god hath allow you go not beyond this limit . god loveth not those who outstep it . and eat of what god hath give you for food that which be lawful and wholesome and fear god in whom ye believe . god will not punish you for a mistaken word in your oath but he will punish you in regard to an oath take seriously . it expiation shall be to fee ten poor person with such middle food a ye fee your own family with or to clothe them or to set free a captive . but he who can not find mean shall fast three day . this be the expiation of your oath when ye shall have swear . keep then your oath . thus god maketh his sign clear to you that ye may give thanks . o believer ! surely wine and game of chance and statue and the divining arrow be an abomination of satan 's work ! avoid them that ye may prosper . only would satan sow hatred and strife among you by wine and game of chance and turn you aside from the remembrance of god and from prayer will ye not therefore abstain from them ? obey god and obey the apostle and be on your guard but if ye turn back know that our apostle be only bound to deliver a plain announcement . no blame shall attach to those who believe and do good work in regard to any food they have take in case they fear god and believe and do the thing that be right and shall still fear god and believe and shall still fear him and do good for god loveth those who do good . o ye who believe ! god will surely make trial of you with such game a ye may take with your hand or your lance that god may know who feareth him in secret and whoever after this transgresseth shall suffer a grievous chastisement . o believer ! kill no game while ye be on pilgrimage . whosoever among you shall purposely kill it shall comsent pensate for it in domestic animal of equal value accord to the judgment of two just person among you to be bring a an offering to the caaba or in expiation thereof shall fee the poor or a the equivalent of this shall fast that he may taste the ill consequence of his deed . god forgiveth what be past but whoever doth it again god will take vengeance on him for god be mighty and vengeance be his . it be lawful for you to fish in the sea and to eat fish a provision for you and for those who travel but it be unlawful for you to hunt by land while ye be still on pilgrimage fear ye god therefore before whom ye shall be assemble . god hath appoint the caaba the sacred house to be a station for mankind and the sacred month and the offering and it ornament . this that ye may know that god knoweth all that be in the heaven and on the earth and that god hath knowledge of everything . know that god be severe in punish and that god be forgive merciful . the apostle be only bound to preach and god knoweth what ye bring to light and what ye conceal . say the evil and the good shall not be value alike even though the abundance of evil please thee therefore fear god o ye of understand ! that it may be well with you . o believer ! ask u not of thing which if they be tell might only pain you but if ye ask of such thing when the entire koran shall have be send down they will be declare to you god will pardon you for this for god be forgive gracious . they who be before you ask concern such thing and afterwards quickly disbelieve therein god hath not ordain anything on the subject . of bahira or sa ba or wasila or hami but the unbeliever have invent this lie against god and most of them have no understanding . and when it be say to them accede to that which god hath send down and to the apostle they say sufficient for u be the faith in which we find our father . what ! though their father know nothing and have no guidance ? o believer ! take heed to yourselves . he who erreth shall not hurt you when ye have the guidance to god shall ye all return and he will tell you that which ye have do . o believer ! let there be witness between you when death draweth nigh to any of you at the time of make the testament two witness just men from among yourselves or two others of a different tribe from yourselves if ye be journey in the earth and the calamity of death surprise you . ye shall shut them both up after the prayer and if ye doubt them they shall swear by god we will not take a bribe though the party be of kin to u neither will we conceal the testimony of god for then we should be among the wicked . but if it shall be make clear that both have be guilty of a falsehood two others of those who have convict them thereof the two near in blood shall stand up in their place and they shall swear by god verily our witness be more true than the witness of these two neither have we advance anything untrue for then should we be of the unjust . thus will it be easy for men to bear a true witness or fear l after their oath another oath be give . therefore fear god and hearken for god guideth not the perverse . one day will god assemble the apostle and say what reply be make to you ? they shall say we have no knowledge but thou art the knower of secret . when he shall say o jesus ! son of mary ! call to mind my favour upon thee and upon thy mother when i strengthen thee with the holy spirit that thou shouldest speak to men alike in the cradle and when grow up and when i teach thee the scripture and wisdom and the law and the evangel and thou didst create of clay a it be the figure of a bird by my leave and didst breathe into it and by my leave it become a bird and thou didst heal the blind and the leper by my leave and when by my leave thou didst bring forth the dead and when i withhold the child of israel from thee when thou hadst come to them with clear token and such of them a believe not say this be nought but plain sorcery and when i reveal unto the apostle believe on me and on my sent one they say we believe and bear thou witness that we be muslim . remember when the apostle say o jesus son of mary ! be thy lord able to send down a furnished table to u out of heaven ? he say fear god if ye be believer . they say we desire to eat therefrom and to have our heart assure and to know that thou hast indeed speak truth to u and to be witness thereof . jesus son of mary say o god our lord ! send down a table to u out of heaven that it may become a recur festival to u to the first of u and to the last of u and a sign from thee and do thou nourish u for thou art the best of nourishers . and god say verily i will cause it to descend unto you but whoever among you after that shall disbelieve i will surely chastise him with a chastisement wherewith i will not chastise any other creature . and when god shall say o jesus son of mary hast thou say unto mankind 'take me and my mother a two god beside god ? ' he shall say glory be unto thee ! it be not for me to say that which i know to be not the truth have i say that verily thou wouldest have know it thou knowest what be in me but i know not what be in thee for thou well knowest thing unseen ! i spake not to them aught but that which thou didst bid me 'worship god my lord and your lord ' and i be a witness of their action while i stay among them but since thou hast take me to thyself thou hast thyself watch them and thou art witness of all thing if thou punish them they be thy servant and if thou forgive them . . . . thou verily art the mighty the wise ! god will say this day shall their truth advantage the truthful . garden shall they have 'neath which the river flow and remain therein for ever god be well pleased with them and they with him . this shall be the great bliss . unto god belongeth the sovereignty of the heaven and of the earth and of all that they contain and he hath power over all thing . the garland etc . attach to the victim offer at mecca . when you have again return to your common and everyday life by lay aside the ihram or pilgrim 's robe . this generally consist of two piece of cotton or linen or woollen cloth without seam or ornament one of which be wrap round the loin and the other thrown over the shoulder . the instep heel and head must be bare . the koreisch send to meet muhammad who be on his way to visit the caaba with men at hudaibiya an . hej . to prohibit his nearer approach . a truce for ten year be ultimately conclude . by make war in the holy month . comp . tract cholin c. . lit . on block or shaft of stone . these be set up by the pagan arab in front of their house for the purpose of sacrifice thereon . see freytag 's einl . p. and tr . cholin p. . it be the custom to draw lot for joint of a camel with arrow some feather and others unfeathered keep for this purpose in the temple of mecca . see pocock spec . hist . ar . under the word hobal . in the sense of sound healthful . thus talm . tr . berachoth . this refer to the oath of fidelity which muhammad 's follower take at al akaba . abulf . vit.moh.p . . it be quite uncertain to what event this refers . the commentator narrate and have doubtless invent various incident a have occasion it . verse belong probably to the period shortly before the taking of chaibar in the beginning of hej . . it be remarkable that muhammad although he have invent these twelve leader of tribe should nowhere mention the number of the apostle . there be no doubt however from the ancient biographies that he choose twelve assistant for the propagation of islam . see gagnier vie de . ii . xvi . the space between the mission of different prophet . call by the arabian habeel and kabeel . the dialogue between cain and abel be slightly vary from that give in targ . jerus . on gen. iv . and jonath . ben uzziel . or the sin against me i.e . of slay me . in the jewish tradition the raven shew the mode of burial to adam not to cain . pirke r. elieser c. . midr . fol . ii ap . weil legenden p. . or corpse . thus mischn . sanhedr . iv . we find it say in the case of cain who murder his brother 'the voice of thy brother 's blood crieth ' it be not say blood of thy brother but blood i.e . his blood and the blood of his seed . therefore be man create single in order to shew that to him who kill a single individual of israel it shall be reckon a if he have slay the whole race and that he etc . precisely a in the text . comp . also the same form of expression in bab . tal kidush if one fulfil but one commandment he cause the scale of innocence to preponderate for himself and the whole world but if he commit one sin he cause the scale of guilt to preponderate for himself and the whole world . muhammad be say by the early traditionists to have punish a woman who have be guilty of theft in this manner while on the route to mecca previous to it capture . we be therefore able to fix the date of verse . usury bribe . ex . xxi . . this may refer to proposal make to the muslim to enter into alliance with the jew and christian against the heathen after the reverse at ohod . lane observe mod . egyptian i. with regard to this precept that of the lead feature of the character of the mooslims none be more remarkable than their religious pride . they regard person of every other faith a the child of perdition and such the mooslim be early taught to despise . they be however a remarkable for their toleration a for their contempt of unbeliever . weil suggest that verse be reveal subsequently to contest with the jew but before muhammad have break with the christian i.e . between hej . and . that be god have cease to be bounteous . the muslim believe that at the day of judgment all the jew will appear with the right hand tie to the neck . that be the koran . the jew be to retain a faith in the towr t or law the christian in the injil or gospel but both jew and christian be to receive the koran a the complement of both . see sura xci . ii . p. . i thess . ii . . do not give herself out to be a goddess . djelal . that be be human being and subject to the usual want and liability of ordinary person . see sura ii . p. . mark viii . . geiger derive both the arabic word from syriac term and render elder and cleric p. . but the root of the arabic word render monk be generally say to be rahaba to fear . comp . sura cix . xvi . . the date of verse be therefore probably hej . . if you violate it . see verse . tradition have expand the word ansab so a to include all figure and hence the strict observer of the letter of the koran forbid the game of chess . the persian however and indians generally interpret this verse more liberally . this and the two following verse be place by the commentator in the year of hudaibiya a also . that be cube house . maison carr e. it be also commonly call the bait ullah house of god . the caaba be an oblong massive structure ft. in length in breadth and the height somewhat great than the length . at the s.e . corner be the famous hajar el aswad or black stone accord to lieut . burton an undoubted aerolite . it be figure in mr. muir 's life of mahomet . the caaba stand in an open parallelogram of about ft. by ft. and be surround by colonnade the pillar of which make of various marble some egyptian but mostly meccan stand in a quadruple row on the east side and three deep on the other side and amount to . it have be rebuild several time but have not be materially alter since a.h. . name give to the sacred animal which be mark and allow to range for pasture at liberty . the dedicated mother camel be the saiba the wasila include also goat or ewes the eleventh female offspring of the camel be bahira the dedicated stallion be hami . these form of superstition grow up obviously from a remote period out of the intense affection of the bedouin for his flock especially his horse and camel . lit . on you your soul . lit . upon it face i.e . accord to it plain scope . see evang . infant . c. invenimus in libro josephi pontificis qui vixit tempore christi jesum locutum esse et quidem cum in cunis jaceret etc . the date of verse to the end be uncertain . precisely the same expression be apply to our lord in the arabic evang . infanti c. at the end which also relate the story of the bird . ar . el hawariyin a different word from that use for jesus hud saleh and the other apostle par excellence . the root of the word be the thiopic hawyra to go send hence the church be call in thiopic the beth chrestyan ant hawariyat i.e . apostolic . see however the note on thilo 's cod . apoc . p. who derive from the root hur to be white pure hence friends helper . comp . cor . xi . sqq . muhammad obviously refers to the eucharist . thou hast a right to do so a their lord .