marcus aurelius antoninus be bear on april a. . . his real name be . annius verus and he be sprung of a noble family which claim descent from numa second king of rome . thus the most religious of emperor come of the blood of the most pious of early king . his father annius verus have hold high office in rome and his grandfather of the same name have be thrice consul . both his parent die young but marcus hold them in love remembrance . on his father 's death marcus be adopt by his grandfather the consular annius verus and there be deep love between these two . on the very first page of his book marcus gratefully declare how of his grandfather he have learn to be gentle and meek and to refrain from all anger and passion . the emperor hadrian divine the fine character of the lad whom he use to call not verus but verissimus more truthful than his own name . he advance marcus to equestrian rank when six year of age and at the age of eight make him a member of the ancient salian priesthood . the boy 's aunt annia galeria faustina be marry to antoninus pius afterwards emperor . hence it come about that antoninus have no son adopt marcus change his name to that which he be know by and betroth him to his daughter faustina . his education be conduct with all care . the able teacher be engage for him and he be train in the strict doctrine of the stoic philosophy which be his great delight . he be teach to dress plainly and to live simply to avoid all softness and luxury . his body be train to hardihood by wrestle hunting and outdoor game and though his constitution be weak he show great personal courage to encounter the fierce boar . at the same time he be keep from the extravagancy of his day . the great excitement in rome be the strife of the faction a they be call in the circus . the race driver use to adopt one of four colour red blue white or green and their partisan show an eagerness in support them which nothing could surpass . riot and corruption go in the train of the race chariot and from all these thing marcus hold severely aloof . in marcus be raise to the consulship and in his betrothal be consummate by marriage . two year later faustina bring him a daughter and soon after the tribunate and other imperial honour be confer upon him . antoninus pius die in and marcus assume the imperial state . he at once associate with himself . ceionius commodus whom antoninus have adopt a a young son at the same time with marcus give him the name of lucius aurelius verus . henceforth the two be colleague in the empire the junior be train a it be to succeed . no sooner be marcus settle upon the throne than war break out on all side . in the east vologeses iii . of parthia begin a long meditate revolt by destroy a whole roman legion and invade syria . verus be send off in hot haste to quell this rising and he fulfil his trust by plunge into drunkenness and debauchery while the war be leave to his officer . soon after marcus have to face a more serious danger at home in the coalition of several powerful tribe on the northern frontier . chief among those be the marcomanni or marchmen the quadi mention in this book the sarmatians the catti the jazyges . in rome itself there be pestilence and starvation the one brought from the east by verus 's legion the other cause by flood which have destroy vast quantity of grain . after all have be do possible to allay famine and to supply press need marcus be force even to sell the imperial jewel to find money both emperor set forth to a struggle which be to continue more or less during the rest of marcus 's reign . during these war in verus die . we have no mean of follow the campaign in detail but thus much be certain that in the end the roman succeed in crush the barbarian tribe and effect a settlement which make the empire more secure . marcus be himself commander in chief and victory be due no less to his own ability than to his wisdom in choice of lieutenant show conspicuously in the case of pertinax . there be several important battle fight in these campaign and one of them have become celebrate for the legend of the thunder legion . in a battle against the quadi in the day seem to be go in favour of the foe when on a sudden arose a great storm of thunder and rain the lightning strike the barbarian with terror and they turn to rout . in late day this storm be say to have be send in answer to the prayer of a legion which contain many christian and the name thunder legion should be give to it on this account . the title of thunder legion be know at an early date so this part of the story at least can not be true but the aid of the storm be acknowledge by one of the scene carve on antonine 's column at rome which commemorate these war . the settlement make after these trouble might have be more satisfactory but for an unexpected rising in the east . avidius cassius an able captain who have win renown in the parthian war be at this time chief governor of the eastern province . by whatever mean induce he have conceive the project of proclaim himself emperor as soon a marcus who be then in feeble health should die and a report have be convey to him that marcus be dead cassius do a he have plan . marcus on hear the news immediately patch up a peace and return home to meet this new peril . the emperor great grief be that he must need engage in the horror of civil strife . he praise the quality of cassius and express a heartfelt wish that cassius might not be drive to do himself a hurt before he should have the opportunity to grant a free pardon . but before he could come to the east news have come to cassius that the emperor still live his follower fell away from him and he be assassinate . marcus now go to the east and while there the murderer bring the head of cassius to him but the emperor indignantly refuse their gift nor would he admit the men to his presence . on this journey his wife faustina die . at his return the emperor celebrate a triumph . immediately afterwards he repair to germany and take up once more the burden of war . his operation be follow by complete success but the trouble of late year have be too much for his constitution at no time robust and on march he die in pannonia . the good emperor be not spar domestic trouble . faustina have bear him several child of whom he be passionately fond . their innocent face may still be see in many a sculpture gallery recall with odd effect the dreamy countenance of their father . but they die one by one and when marcus come to his own end only one of his son still live the weak and worthless commodus . on his father 's death commodus who succeed him undo the work of many campaign by a hasty and unwise peace and his reign of twelve year prove him to be a ferocious and bloodthirsty tyrant . scandal have make free with the name of faustina herself who be accuse not only of unfaithfulness but of intrigue with cassius and egg him on to his fatal rebellion it must be admit that these charge rest on no sure evidence and the emperor at all event love her dearly nor ever felt the slight qualm of suspicion . a a soldier we have see that marcus be both capable and successful a an administrator he be prudent and conscientious . although steep in the teaching of philosophy he do not attempt to remodel the world on any preconceived plan . he tread the path beat by his predecessor seek only to do his duty as well a he could and to keep out corruption . he do some unwise thing it be true . to create a compeer in empire a he do with verus be a dangerous innovation which could only succeed if one of the two efface himself and under diocletian this very precedent cause the roman empire to split into half . he err in his civil administration by too much centralising . but the strong point of his reign be the administration of justice . marcus seek by law to protect the weak to make the lot of the slave less hard to stand in place of father to the fatherless . charitable foundation be endow for rear and educate poor child . the province be protect against oppression and public help be give to city or district which might be visit by calamity . the great blot on his name and one hard indeed to explain be his treatment of the christian . in his reign justin at rome become a martyr to his faith and polycarp at smyrna and we know of many outbreak of fanaticism in the province which cause the death of the faithful . it be no excuse to plead that he know nothing about the atrocity do in his name it be his duty to know and if he do not he would have be the first to confess that he have fail in his duty . but from his own tone in speaking of the christian it be clear he know them only from calumny and we hear of no measure take even to secure that they should have a fair hearing . in this respect trajan be good than he . to a thoughtful mind such a religion a that of rome would give small satisfaction . it legend be often childish or impossible it teaching have little to do with morality . the roman religion be in fact of the nature of a bargain men pay certain sacrifice and rite and the god grant their favour irrespective of right or wrong . in this case all devout soul be throw back upon philosophy a they have be though to a less extent in greece . there be under the early empire two rival school which practically divide the field between them stoicism and epicureanism . the ideal set before each be nominally much the same . the stoic aspire to the repression of all emotion and the epicurean to freedom from all disturbance yet in the upshot the one have become a synonym of stubborn endurance the other for unbridled licence . with epicureanism we have nothing to do now but it will be worth while to sketch the history and tenet of the stoic sect . zeno the founder of stoicism be bear in cyprus at some date unknown but his life may be say roughly to be between the year and b. . cyprus have be from time immemorial a meeting place of the east and west and although we can not grant any importance to a possible strain of phoenician blood in him for the phoenician be no philosopher yet it be quite likely that through asia minor he may have come in touch with the far east . he study under the cynic crate but he do not neglect other philosophical system . after many year ' study he open his own school in a colonnade in athens call the paint porch or stoa which give the stoic their name . next to zeno the school of the porch owe most to chrysippus b.c . who organise stoicism into a system . of him it be say 'but for chrysippus there have be no porch . ' the stoic regard speculation a a mean to an end and that end be a zeno put it to live consistently omologonuenws zhn or a it be later explain to live in conformity with nature . this conforming of the life to nature oralogoumenwz th fusei zhn . be the stoic idea of virtue . this dictum might easily be take to mean that virtue consist in yield to each natural impulse but that be very far from the stoic meaning . in order to live in accord with nature it be necessary to know what nature be and to this end a threefold division of philosophy be make into physic deal with the universe and it law the problem of divine government and teleology logic which train the mind to discern true from false and ethic which apply the knowledge thus gain and test to practical life . the stoic system of physic be materialism with an infusion of pantheism . in contradiction to plato 's view that the idea or prototype of phenomenon alone really exist the stoic hold that material object alone exist but immanent in the material universe be a spiritual force which act through them manifest itself under many form a fire aether spirit soul reason the ruling principle . the universe then be god of whom the popular god be manifestation while legend and myth be allegorical . the soul of man be thus an emanation from the godhead into whom it will eventually be re absorb . the divine ruling principle make all thing work together for good but for the good of the whole . the high good of man be consciously to work with god for the common good and this be the sense in which the stoic try to live in accord with nature . in the individual it be virtue alone which enable him to do this a providence rule the universe so virtue in the soul must rule man . in logic the stoic system be noteworthy for their theory a to the test of truth the criterion . they compare the new born soul to a sheet of paper ready for write . upon this the sens write their impression fantasia and by experience of a number of these the soul unconsciously conceive general notion koinai eunoiai or anticipation . prolhyeis when the impression be such a to be irresistible it be call katalnptikh fantasia one that hold fast or a they explain it one proceed from truth . idea and inference artificially produce by deduction or the like be test by this 'holding perception . ' of the ethical application i have already speak . the high good be the virtuous life . virtue alone be happiness and vice be unhappiness . carry this theory to it extreme the stoic say that there could be no gradation between virtue and vice though of course each have it special manifestation . moreover nothing be good but virtue and nothing but vice be bad . those outside thing which be commonly call good or bad such a health and sickness wealth and poverty pleasure and pain be to him indifferent adiofora . all these thing be merely the sphere in which virtue may act . the ideal wise man be sufficient unto himself in all thing autarkhs and know these truth he will be happy even when stretch upon the rack . it be probable that no stoic claim for himself that he be this wise man but that each strove after it a an ideal much a the christian strives after a likeness to christ . the exaggeration in this statement be however so obvious that the late stoic be drive to make a further subdivision of thing indifferent into what be preferable prohgmena and what be undesirable . they also hold that for him who have not attain to the perfect wisdom certain action be proper . kaqhkonta these be neither virtuous nor vicious but like the indifferent thing hold a middle place . two point in the stoic system deserve special mention . one be a careful distinction between thing which be in our power and thing which be not . desire and dislike opinion and affection be within the power of the will whereas health wealth honour and other such be generally not so . the stoic be call upon to control his desire and affection and to guide his opinion to bring his whole be under the sway of the will or lead principle just a the universe be guide and govern by divine providence . this be a special application of the favourite greek virtue of moderation swfrosuum and have also it parallel in christian ethic . the second point be a strong insistence on the unity of the universe and on man 's duty a part of a great whole . public spirit be the most splendid political virtue of the ancient world and it be here make cosmopolitan . it be again instructive to note that christian sage insist on the same thing . christian be teach that they be member of a worldwide brotherhood where be neither greek nor hebrew bond nor free and that they live their life a fellow worker with god . such be the system which underlie the meditation of marcus aurelius . some knowledge of it be necessary to the right understanding of the book but for u the chief interest lie elsewhere . we do not come to marcus aurelius for a treatise on stoicism . he be no head of a school to lay down a body of doctrine for student he do not even contemplate that others should read what he write . his philosophy be not an eager intellectual inquiry but more what we should call religious feeling . the uncompromising stiffness of zeno or chrysippus be soften and transform by pass through a nature reverent and tolerant gentle and free from guile the grim resignation which make life possible to the stoic sage becomes in him almost a mood of aspiration . his book record the innermost thought of his heart set down to ease it with such moral maxim and reflection a may help him to bear the burden of duty and the countless annoyance of a busy life . it be instructive to compare the meditation with another famous book the imitation of christ . there be the same ideal of self control in both . it should be a man 's task say the imitation 'to overcome himself and every day to be strong than himself . ' 'in withstanding of the passion standeth very peace of heart . ' 'let u set the axe to the root that we be purge of our passion may have a peaceable mind . ' to this end there must be continual self examination . 'if thou may not continually gather thyself together namely sometimes do it at least once a day the morning or the evening . in the morning purpose in the evening discuss the manner what thou hast be this day in word work and thought . ' but while the roman 's temper be a modest self reliance the christian aim at a more passive mood humbleness and meekness and reliance on the presence and personal friendship of god . the roman scrutinise his fault with severity but without the self contempt which make the christian 'vile in his own sight . ' the christian like the roman bid 'study to withdraw thine heart from the love of thing visible ' but it be not the busy life of duty he have in mind so much a the contempt of all worldly thing and the 'cutting away of all low delectation . ' both rate men 's praise or blame at their real worthlessness 'let not thy peace ' say the christian 'be in the mouth of men . ' but it be to god 's censure the christian appeal the roman to his own soul . the petty annoyance of injustice or unkindness be look on by each with the same magnanimity . 'why doth a little thing say or do against thee make thee sorry ? it be no new thing it be not the first nor shall it be the last if thou live long . at best suffer patiently if thou canst not suffer joyously . ' the christian should sorrow more for other men 's malice than for our own wrong but the roman be incline to wash his hand of the offender . 'study to be patient in suffer and bear other men 's default and all manner infirmity ' say the christian but the roman would never have think to add 'if all men be perfect what have we then to suffer of other men for god ? ' the virtue of suffer in itself be an idea which do not meet u in the meditation . both alike realise that man be one of a great community . 'no man be sufficient to himself ' say the christian 'we must bear together help together comfort together . ' but while he see a chief importance in zeal in exalted emotion that be and avoidance of lukewarmness the roman think mainly of the duty to be do as well a might be and less of the feeling which should go with the do of it . to the saint a to the emperor the world be a poor thing at best . 'verily it be a misery to live upon the earth ' say the christian few and evil be the day of man 's life which passeth away suddenly a a shadow . but there be one great difference between the two book we be consider . the imitation be address to others the meditation by the writer to himself . we learn nothing from the imitation of the author 's own life except in so far a he may be assume to have practise his own preaching the meditation reflect mood by mood the mind of him who write them . in their intimacy and frankness lie their great charm . these note be not sermon they be not even confession . there be always an air of self consciousness in confession in such revelation there be always a danger of unctuousness or of vulgarity for the best of men . st. augus tine be not always clear of offence and john bunyan himself exaggerate venial peccadillo into heinous sin . but marcus aurelius be neither vulgar nor unctuous he extenuate nothing but nothing set down in malice . he never pose before an audience he may not be profound he be always sincere . and it be a lofty and serene soul which be here disclose before u . vulgar vice seem to have no temptation for him this be not one tie and bind with chain which he strive to break . the fault he detect in himself be often such a most men would have no eye to see . to serve the divine spirit which be implant within him a man must 'keep himself pure from all violent passion and evil affection from all rashness and vanity and from all manner of discontent either in regard of the god or men ' or a he say elsewhere 'unspotted by pleasure undaunted by pain . ' unwavering courtesy and consideration be his aim . 'whatsoever any man either doth or saith thou must be good ' 'doth any man offend ? it be against himself that he doth offend why should it trouble thee ? ' the offender need pity not wrath those who must needs be correct should be treat with tact and gentleness and one must be always ready to learn good . 'the best kind of revenge be not to become like unto them . ' there be so many hint of offence forgiven that we may believe the note follow sharp on the fact . perhaps he have fall short of his aim and thus seek to call his principle to mind and to strengthen himself for the future . that these saying be not mere talk be plain from the story of avidius cassius who would have usurp his imperial throne . thus the emperor faithfully carry out his own principle that evil must be overcome with good . for each fault in others nature say he have give u a counteract virtue 'as for example against the unthankful it hath give goodness and meekness a an antidote . ' one so gentle towards a foe be sure to be a good friend and indeed his page be full of generous gratitude to those who have serve him . in his first book he set down to account all the debt due to his kinsfolk and teacher . to his grandfather he owe his own gentle spirit to his father shamefastness and courage he learn of his mother to be religious and bountiful and single mind . rusticus do not work in vain if he show his pupil that his life need amend . apollonius teach him simplicity reasonableness gratitude a love of true liberty . so the list run on every one he have dealing with seem to have give him something good a sure proof of the goodness of his nature which think no evil . if his be that honest and true heart which be the christian ideal this be the more wonderful in that he lack the faith which make christian strong . he could say it be true 'either there be a god and then all be well or if all thing go by chance and fortune yet mayest thou use thine own providence in those thing that concern thee properly and then art thou well . ' or again 'we must need grant that there be a nature that doth govern the universe . ' but his own part in the scheme of thing be so small that he do not hope for any personal happiness beyond what a serene soul may win in this mortal life . ' o my soul the time i trust will be when thou shalt be good simple more open and visible than that body by which it be enclose ' but this be say of the calm contentment with human lot which he hop to attain not of a time when the trammel of the body shall be cast off . for the rest the world and it fame and wealth 'all be vanity . ' the god may perhaps have a particular care for him but their especial care be for the universe at large thus much should suffice . his god be good than the stoic god who sit aloof from all human thing untroubled and uncaring but his personal hope be hardly strong . on this point he say little though there be many allusion to death a the natural end doubtless he expect his soul one day to be absorb into the universal soul since nothing come out of nothing and nothing can be annihilate . his mood be one of strenuous weariness he do his duty a a good soldier wait for the sound of the trumpet which shall sound the retreat he have not that cheerful confidence which lead socrates through a life no less noble to a death which be to bring him into the company of god he have worship and men whom he have revere . but although marcus aurelius may have hold intellectually that his soul be destine to be absorb and to lose consciousness of itself there be time when he felt a all who hold it must sometimes feel how unsatisfying be such a creed . then he grope blindly after something le empty and vain . 'thou hast take ship ' he say 'thou hast sail thou art come to land go out if to another life there also shalt thou find god who be everywhere . ' there be more in this than the assumption of a rival theory for argument 's sake . if worldly thing 'be but a a dream the thought be not far off that there may be an awaken to what be real . when he speak of death a a necessary change and point out that nothing useful and profitable can be bring about without change do he perhaps think of the change in a corn of wheat which be not quicken except it die ? nature 's marvellous power of recreate out of corruption be surely not confine to bodily thing . many of his thought sound like far off echo of st. paul and it be strange indeed that this most christian of emperor have nothing good to say of the christian . to him they be only sectary 'violently and passionately set upon opposition . profound a philosophy these meditation certainly be not but marcus aurelius be too sincere not to see the essence of such thing a come within his experience . ancient religion be for the most part concern with outward thing . do the necessary rite and you propitiate the god and these rite be often trivial sometimes violate right feeling or even morality . even when the god stand on the side of righteousness they be concern with the act more than with the intent . but marcus aurelius know that what the heart be full of the man will do . 'such a thy thought and ordinary cogitation be ' he say 'such will thy mind be in time . ' and every page of the book show u that he know think be sure to issue in act . he drill his soul a it be in right principle that when the time come it may be guide by them . to wait until the emergency be to be too late . he see also the true essence of happiness . 'if happiness do consist in pleasure how come notorious robber impure abominable liver parricide and tyrant in so large a measure to have their part of pleasure ? ' he who have all the world 's pleasure at command can write thus ' a happy lot and portion be good inclination of the soul good desire good action . ' by the irony of fate this man so gentle and good so desirous of quiet joy and a mind free from care be set at the head of the roman empire when great danger threaten from east and west . for several year he himself command his army in chief . in camp before the quadi he date the first book of his meditation and show how he could retire within himself amid the coarse clangour of arm . the pomp and glory which he despise be all his what to most men be an ambition or a dream to him be a round of weary task which nothing but the stern sense of duty could carry him through . and he do his work well . his war be slow and tedious but successful . with a statesman 's wisdom he foresee the danger to rome of the barbarian horde from the north and take measure to meet it . a it be his settlement give two century of respite to the roman empire have he fulfil the plan of push the imperial frontier to the elbe which seem to have be in his mind much more might have be accomplish . but death cut short his design . truly a rare opportunity be give to marcus aurelius of show what the mind can do in despite of circumstance . most peaceful of warrior a magnificent monarch whose ideal be quiet happiness in home life bent to obscurity yet bear to greatness the love father of child who die young or turn out hateful his life be one paradox . that nothing might lack it be in camp before the face of the enemy that he pass away and go to his own place . translation the following be a list of the chief english translation of marcus aurelius by meric casaubon jeremy collier james thomson r. graf h. mccormac george long g. h. rendall and j. jackson . renan 's marc aur le in his history of the origin of christianity which appear in be the most vital and original book to be have relate to the time of marcus aurelius . pater 's marius the epicurean form another outside commentary which be of service in the imaginative attempt to create again the period . marcus aurelius antoninus the roman emperor his first book concern himself wherein antoninus recordeth what and of whom whether parent friend or master by their good example or good advice and counsel he have learn divide into number or section . antoninus book vi . num . xlviii . whensoever thou wilt rejoice thyself think and meditate upon those good part and especial gift which thou hast observe in any of them that live with thee a industry in one in another modesty in another bountifulness in another some other thing . for nothing can so much rejoice thee a the resemblance and parallel of several virtue eminent in the disposition of them that live with thee especially when all at once a it be they represent themselves unto thee . see therefore that thou have them always in a readiness . the first book i. of my grandfather verus i have learn to be gentle and meek and to refrain from all anger and passion . from the fame and memory of him that beget me i have learn both shamefastness and manlike behaviour . of my mother i have learn to be religious and bountiful and to forbear not only to do but to intend any evil to content myself with a spare diet and to fly all such excess a be incidental to great wealth . of my great grandfather both to frequent public school and auditories and to get me good and able teacher at home and that i ought not to think much if upon such occasion i be at excessive charge . ii . of him that bring me up not to be fondly addict to either of the two great faction of the courser in the circus call prasini and veneti nor in the amphitheatre partially to favour any of the gladiator or fencer a either the parmularii or the secutores . moreover to endure labour nor to need many thing when i have anything to do to do it myself rather than by others not to meddle with many business and not easily to admit of any slander . iii . of diognetus not to busy myself about vain thing and not easily to believe those thing which be commonly speak by such a take upon them to work wonder and by sorcerer or prestidigitator and impostor concern the power of charm and their drive out of demon or evil spirit and the like . not to keep quail for the game nor to be mad after such thing . not to be offend with other men 's liberty of speech and to apply myself unto philosophy . him also i must thank that ever i heard first bacchius then tandasis and marcianus and that i do write dialogue in my youth and that i take like to the philosopher ' little couch and skin and such other thing which by the grecian discipline be proper to those who profess philosophy . iv . to rusticus i be behold that i first enter into the conceit that my life want some redress and cure . and then that i do not fall into the ambition of ordinary sophist either to write tract concern the common theorem or to exhort men unto virtue and the study of philosophy by public oration a also that i never by way of ostentation do affect to show myself an active able man for any kind of bodily exercise . and that i give over the study of rhetoric and poetry and of elegant neat language . that i do not use to walk about the house in my long robe nor to do any such thing . moreover i learn of him to write letter without any affectation or curiosity such a that be which by him be write to my mother from sinuessa and to be easy and ready to be reconcile and well pleased again with them that have offend me as soon a any of them would be content to seek unto me again . to read with diligence not to rest satisfy with a light and superficial knowledge nor quickly to assent to thing commonly speak of whom also i must thank that ever i light upon epictetus his hypomnemata or moral commentary and common faction which also he give me of his own . . from apollonius true liberty and unvariable steadfastness and not to regard anything at all though never so little but right and reason and always whether in the sharp pain or after the loss of a child or in long disease to be still the same man who also be a present and visible example unto me that it be possible for the same man to be both vehement and remiss a man not subject to be vexed and offend with the incapacity of his scholar and auditor in his lecture and exposition and a true pattern of a man who of all his good gift and faculty least esteem in himself that his excellent skill and ability to teach and persuade others the common theorem and maxim of the stoic philosophy . of him also i learn how to receive favour and kindness a commonly they be account from friend so that i might not become obnoxious unto them for them nor more yielding upon occasion than in right i ought and yet so that i should not pass them neither a an unsensible and unthankful man . vi . of sextus mildness and the pattern of a family govern with paternal affection and a purpose to live accord to nature to be grave without affectation to observe carefully the several disposition of my friend not to be offend with idiot nor unseasonably to set upon those that be carry with the vulgar opinion with the theorem and tenet of philosopher his conversation be an example how a man might accommodate himself to all men and company so that though his company be sweet and more pleasing than any flatterer 's cogging and fawning yet be it at the same time most respected and reverence who also have a proper happiness and faculty rationally and methodically to find out and set in order all necessary determination and instruction for a man 's life . a man without ever the least appearance of anger or any other passion able at the same time most exactly to observe the stoic apathia or unpassionateness and yet to be most tender hearted ever of good credit and yet almost without any noise or rumour very learned and yet make little show . vii . from alexander the grammarian to be un reprovable myself and not reproachfully to reprehend any man for a barbarism or a solecism or any false pronunciation but dextrously by way of answer or testimony or confirmation of the same matter take no notice of the word to utter it a it should have be speak or by some other such close and indirect admonition handsomely and civilly to tell him of it . viii . of fronto to how much envy and fraud and hypocrisy the state of a tyrannous king be subject unto and how they who be commonly call eupatridas gk . i.e . nobly bear be in some sort incapable or void of natural affection . ix . of alexander the platonic not often nor without great necessity to say or to write to any man in a letter ' i be not at leisure ' nor in this manner still to put off those duty which we owe to our friend and acquaintance to every one in his kind under pretence of urgent affair . . of catulus not to contemn any friend 's expostulation though unjust but to strive to reduce him to his former disposition freely and heartily to speak well of all my master upon any occasion a it be report of domitius and athenodotus and to love my child with true affection . xi . from my brother severus to be kind and loving to all them of my house and family by whom also i come to the knowledge of thrasea and helvidius and cato and dio and brutus . he it be also that do put me in the first conceit and desire of an equal commonwealth administer by justice and equality and of a kingdom wherein should be regard nothing more than the good and welfare of the subject . of him also to observe a constant tenor not interrupt with any other care and distraction in the study and esteem of philosophy to be bountiful and liberal in the large measure always to hope the best and to be confident that my friend love me . in whom i moreover observe open deal towards those whom he reprove at any time and that his friend might without all doubt or much observation know what he would or would not so open and plain be he . xii . from claudius maximus in all thing to endeavour to have power of myself and in nothing to be carry about to be cheerful and courageous in all sudden chance and accident a in sickness to love mildness and moderation and gravity and to do my business whatsoever it be thoroughly and without querulousness . whatsoever he say all men believe him that a he spake so he think and whatsoever he do that he do it with a good intent . his manner be never to wonder at anything never to be in haste and yet never slow nor to be perplex or deject or at any time unseemly or excessively to laugh nor to be angry or suspicious but ever ready to do good and to forgive and to speak truth and all this a one that seem rather of himself to have be straight and right than ever to have be rectify or redress neither be there any man that ever think himself undervalue by him or that could find in his heart to think himself a good man than he . he would also be very pleasant and gracious . xiii . in my father i observe his meekness his constancy without waver in those thing which after a due examination and deliberation he have determine . how free from all vanity he carry himself in matter of honour and dignity a they be esteem his laboriousness and assiduity his readiness to hear any man that have aught to say tend to any common good how generally and impartially he would give every man his due his skill and knowledge when rigour or extremity or when remissness or moderation be in season how he do abstain from all unchaste love of youth his moderate condescending to other men 's occasion a an ordinary man neither absolutely require of his friend that they should wait upon him at his ordinary meal nor that they should of necessity accompany him in his journey and that whensoever any business upon some necessary occasion be to be put off and omit before it could be end he be ever find when he go about it again the same man that he be before . his accurate examination of thing in consultation and patient hearing of others . he would not hastily give over the search of the matter a one easy to be satisfy with sudden notion and apprehension . his care to preserve his friend how neither at any time he would carry himself towards them with disdainful neglect and grow weary of them nor yet at any time be madly fond of them . his contented mind in all thing his cheerful countenance his care to foresee thing afar off and to take order for the least without any noise or clamour . moreover how all acclamation and flattery be repress by him how carefully he observe all thing necessary to the government and keep an account of the common expense and how patiently he do abide that he be reprehend by some for this his strict and rigid kind of deal . how he be neither a superstitious worshipper of the god nor an ambitious pleaser of men or studious of popular applause but sober in all thing and everywhere observant of that which be fit no affecter of novelty in those thing which conduce to his ease and convenience plenty whereof his fortune do afford him without pride and bragging yet with all freedom and liberty so that a he do freely enjoy them without any anxiety or affectation when they be present so when absent he find no want of them . moreover that he be never commend by any man a either a learned acute man or an obsequious officious man or a fine orator but a a ripe mature man a perfect sound man one that could not endure to be flatter able to govern both himself and others . moreover how much he do honour all true philosopher without upbraid those that be not so his sociableness his gracious and delightful conversation but never unto satiety his care of his body within bound and measure not a one that desire to live long or over studious of neatness and elegancy and yet not a one that do not regard it so that through his own care and providence he seldom need any inward physic or outward application but especially how ingeniously he would yield to any that have obtain any peculiar faculty a either eloquence or the knowledge of the law or of ancient custom or the like and how he concur with them in his best care and endeavour that every one of them might in his kind for that wherein he excel be regard and esteem and although he do all thing carefully after the ancient custom of his forefather yet even of this be he not desirous that men should take notice that he do imitate ancient custom . again how he be not easily move and toss up and down but love to be constant both in the same place and business and how after his great fit of headache he would return fresh and vigorous to his wonted affair . again that secret he neither have many nor often and such only a concern public matter his discretion and moderation in exhibiting of the public sight and show for the pleasure and pastime of the people in public building . congiaries and the like . in all these thing have a respect unto men only a men and to the equity of the thing themselves and not unto the glory that might follow . never wont to use the bath at unseasonable hour no builder never curious or solicitous either about his meat or about the workmanship or colour of his clothes or about anything that belong to external beauty . in all his conversation far from all inhumanity all boldness and incivility all greediness and impetuosity never do anything with such earnestness and intention that a man could say of him that he do sweat about it but contrariwise all thing distinctly a at leisure without trouble orderly soundly and agreeably . a man might have apply that to him which be record of socrates that he know how to want and to enjoy those thing in the want whereof most men show themselves weak and in the fruition intemperate but to hold out firm and constant and to keep within the compass of true moderation and sobriety in either estate be proper to a man who hath a perfect and invincible soul such a he show himself in the sickness of maximus . xiv . from the god i receive that i have good grandfather and parent a good sister good master good domestic love kinsman almost all that i have and that i never through haste and rashness transgress against any of them notwithstanding that my disposition be such a that such a thing if occasion have be might very well have be commit by me but that it be the mercy of the god to prevent such a concurring of matter and occasion a might make me to incur this blame . that i be not long bring up by the concubine of my father that i preserve the flower of my youth . that i take not upon me to be a man before my time but rather put it off longer than i need . that i live under the government of my lord and father who would take away from me all pride and vainglory and reduce me to that conceit and opinion that it be not impossible for a prince to live in the court without a troop of guard and follower extraordinary apparel such and such torch and statue and other like particular of state and magnificence but that a man may reduce and contract himself almost to the state of a private man and yet for all that not to become the more base and remiss in those public matter and affair wherein power and authority be requisite . that i have have such a brother who by his own example might stir me up to think of myself and by his respect and love delight and please me . that i have get ingenuous child and that they be not bear distort nor with any other natural deformity . that i be no great proficient in the study of rhetoric and poetry and of other faculty which perchance i might have dwell upon if i have find myself to go on in them with success . that i do by time prefer those by whom i be bring up to such place and dignity which they seem unto me most to desire and that i do not put them off with hope and expectation that since that they be yet but young i would do the same hereafter . that i ever know apollonius and rusticus and maximus . that i have have occasion often and effectually to consider and meditate with myself concern that life which be accord to nature what the nature and manner of it be so that a for the god and such suggestion help and inspiration a might be expect from them nothing do hinder but that i might have begin long before to live accord to nature or that even now that i be not yet partaker and in present possession of that life that i myself in that i do not observe those inward motion and suggestion yea and almost plain and apparent instruction and admonition of the god be the only cause of it . that my body in such a life hath be able to hold out so long . that i never have to do with benedicta and theodotus yea and afterwards when i fell into some fit of love i be soon cure . that have be often displease with rusticus i never do him anything for which afterwards i have occasion to repent . that it be so that my mother be to die young yet she live with me all her latter year . that as often a i have a purpose to help and succour any that either be poor or fall into some present necessity i never be answer by my officer that there be not ready money enough to do it and that i myself never have occasion to require the like succour from any other . that i have such a wife so obedient so love so ingenuous . that i have choice of fit and able men to whom i might commit the bring up of my child . that by dream i have receive help a for other thing so in particular how i might stay my casting of blood and cure my dizziness a that also that happen to thee in cajeta a unto chryses when he pray by the seashore . and when i do first apply myself to philosophy that i do not fall into the hand of some sophist or spend my time either in read the manifold volume of ordinary philosopher nor in practise myself in the solution of argument and fallacy nor dwelt upon the study of the meteor and other natural curiosity . all these thing without the assistance of the god and fortune could not have be . . in the country of the quadi at granua these . betimes in the morning say to thyself this day i shalt have to do with an idle curious man with an unthankful man a railer a crafty false or an envious man an unsociable uncharitable man . all these ill quality have happen unto them through ignorance of that which be truly good and truly bad . but i that understand the nature of that which be good that it only be to be desire and of that which be bad that it only be truly odious and shameful who know moreover that this transgressor whosoever he be be my kinsman not by the same blood and seed but by participation of the same reason and of the same divine particle how can i either be hurt by any of those since it be not in their power to make me incur anything that be truly reproachful ? or angry and ill affect towards him who by nature be so near unto me ? for we be all bear to be fellow worker a the foot the hand and the eyelid a the row of the upper and under teeth for such therefore to be in opposition be against nature and what be it to chafe at and to be averse from but to be in opposition ? xvi . whatsoever i be be either flesh or life or that which we commonly call the mistress and overrule part of man reason . away with thy book suffer not thy mind any more to be distract and carry to and fro for it will not be but a even now ready to die think little of thy flesh blood bone and a skin a pretty piece of knit and twisted work consist of nerve vein and artery think no more of it than so . and a for thy life consider what it be a wind not one constant wind neither but every moment of an hour let out and suck in again . the third be thy rule part and here consider thou art an old man suffer not that excellent part to be bring in subjection and to become slavish suffer it not to be draw up and down with unreasonable and unsociable lust and motion a it be with wire and nerve suffer it not any more either to repine at anything now present or to fear and fly anything to come which the destiny hath appoint thee . xvii . whatsoever proceeds from the god immediately that any man will grant totally depend from their divine providence . a for those thing that be commonly say to happen by fortune even those must be conceive to have dependence from nature or from that first and general connection and concatenation of all those thing which more apparently by the divine providence be administer and bring to pass . all thing flow from thence and whatsoever it be that be be both necessary and conduce to the whole part of which thou art and whatsoever it be that be requisite and necessary for the preservation of the general must of necessity for every particular nature be good and behoveful . and a for the whole it be preserve a by the perpetual mutation and conversion of the simple element one into another so also by the mutation and alteration of thing mixed and compound . let these thing suffice thee let them be always unto thee a thy general rule and precept . a for thy thirst after book away with it with all speed that thou die not murmuring and complain but truly meek and well satisfied and from thy heart thankful unto the god . the second book i. remember how long thou hast already put off these thing and how often a certain day and hour a it be have be set unto thee by the god thou hast neglect it . it be high time for thee to understand the true nature both of the world whereof thou art a part and of that lord and governor of the world from whom a a channel from the spring thou thyself didst flow and that there be but a certain limit of time appoint unto thee which if thou shalt not make use of to calm and allay the many distemper of thy soul it will pass away and thou with it and never after return . ii . let it be thy earnest and incessant care a a roman and a man to perform whatsoever it be that thou art about with true and unfeigned gravity natural affection freedom and justice and a for all other care and imagination how thou mayest ease thy mind of them . which thou shalt do if thou shalt go about every action a thy last action free from all vanity all passionate and wilful aberration from reason and from all hypocrisy and self love and dislike of those thing which by the fate or appointment of god have happen unto thee . thou seest that those thing which for a man to hold on in a prosperous course and to live a divine life be requisite and necessary be not many for the god will require no more of any man that shall but keep and observe these thing . iii . do soul do abuse and contemn thyself yet a while and the time for thee to respect thyself will be at an end . every man 's happiness depend from himself but behold thy life be almost at an end whiles afford thyself no respect thou dost make thy happiness to consist in the soul and conceit of other men . iv . why should any of these thing that happen externally so much distract thee ? give thyself leisure to learn some good thing and cease roving and wandering to and fro . thou must also take heed of another kind of wander for they be idle in their action who toil and labour in this life and have no certain scope to which to direct all their motion and desire . . for not observe the state of another man 's soul scarce be ever any man know to be unhappy . tell whosoever they be that intend not and guide not by reason and discretion the motion of their own soul they must of necessity be unhappy . vi . these thing thou must always have in mind what be the nature of the universe and what be mine in particular this unto that what relation it hath what kind of part of what kind of universe it be and that there be nobody that can hinder thee but that thou mayest always both do and speak those thing which be agreeable to that nature whereof thou art a part . vii . theophrastus where he compare sin with sin a after a vulgar sense such thing i grant may be compare say well and like a philosopher that those sin be great which be commit through lust than those which be commit through anger . for he that be angry seem with a kind of grief and close contraction of himself to turn away from reason but he that sin through lust be overcome by pleasure doth in his very sin bewray a more impotent and unmanlike disposition . well then and like a philosopher doth he say that he of the two be the more to be condemn that sin with pleasure than he that sin with grief . for indeed this latter may seem first to have be wrong and so in some manner through grief thereof to have be force to be angry whereas he who through lust doth commit anything do of himself merely resolve upon that action . viii . whatsoever thou dost affect whatsoever thou dost project so do and so project all a one who for aught thou knowest may at this very present depart out of this life . and a for death if there be any god it be no grievous thing to leave the society of men . the god will do thee no hurt thou mayest be sure . but if it be so that there be no god or that they take no care of the world why should i desire to live in a world void of god and of all divine providence ? but god there be certainly and they take care for the world and a for those thing which be truly evil a vice and wickedness such thing they have put in a man 's own power that he might avoid them if he would and have there be anything besides that have be truly bad and evil they would have have a care of that also that a man might have avoid it . but why should that be think to hurt and prejudice a man 's life in this world which can not any way make man himself the good or the worse in his own person ? neither must we think that the nature of the universe do either through ignorance pas these thing or if not a ignorant of them yet a unable either to prevent or good to order and dispose them . it can not be that she through want either of power or skill should have commit such a thing so a to suffer all thing both good and bad equally and promiscuously to happen unto all both good and bad . a for life therefore and death honour and dishonour labour and pleasure rich and poverty all these thing happen unto men indeed both good and bad equally but a thing which of themselves be neither good nor bad because of themselves neither shameful nor praiseworthy . ix . consider how quickly all thing be dissolve and resolve the body and substances themselves into the matter and substance of the world and their memory into the general age and time of the world . consider the nature of all worldly sensible thing of those especially which either ensnare by pleasure or for their irksomeness be dreadful or for their outward lustre and show be in great esteem and request how vile and contemptible how base and corruptible how destitute of all true life and be they be . . it be the part of a man endow with a good understanding faculty to consider what they themselves be in very deed from whose bare conceit and voice honour and credit do proceed a also what it be to die and how if a man shall consider this by itself alone to die and separate from it in his mind all those thing which with it usually represent themselves unto u he can conceive of it no otherwise than a of a work of nature and he that fear any work of nature be a very child . now death it be not only a work of nature but also conduce to nature . xi . consider with thyself how man and by what part of his be join unto god and how that part of man be affect when it be say to be diffuse . there be nothing more wretched than that soul which in a kind of circuit compasseth all thing search a he saith even the very depths of the earth and by all sign and conjecture pry into the very thought of other men 's soul and yet of this be not sensible that it be sufficient for a man to apply himself wholly and to confine all his thought and care to the tendance of that spirit which be within him and truly and really to serve him . his service doth consist in this that a man keep himself pure from all violent passion and evil affection from all rashness and vanity and from all manner of discontent either in regard of the god or men . for indeed whatsoever proceeds from the god deserve respect for their worth and excellency and whatsoever proceeds from men a they be our kinsman should by u be entertain with love always sometimes a proceed from their ignorance of that which be truly good and bad a blindness no less than that by which we be not able to discern between white and black with a kind of pity and compassion also . xii . if thou shouldst live three thousand or as many a ten thousand of year yet remember this that man can part with no life properly save with that little part of life which he now live and that which he live be no other than that which at every instant he part with . that then which be long of duration and that which be short come both to one effect . for although in regard of that which be already past there may be some inequality yet that time which be now present and in be be equal unto all men . and that be it which we part with whensoever we die it doth manifestly appear that it can be but a moment of time that we then part with . for a for that which be either past or to come a man can not be say properly to part with it . for how should a man part with that which he hath not ? these two thing therefore thou must remember . first that all thing in the world from all eternity by a perpetual revolution of the same time and thing ever continue and renew be of one kind and nature so that whether for a hundred or two hundred year only or for an infinite space of time a man see those thing which be still the same it can be no matter of great moment . and secondly that that life which any the long liver or the short liver part with be for length and duration the very same for that only which be present be that which either of them can lose a be that only which they have for that which he hath not no man can truly be say to lose . xiii . remember that all be but opinion and conceit for those thing be plain and apparent which be speak unto monimus the cynic and a plain and apparent be the use that may be make of those thing if that which be true and serious in them be receive as well a that which be sweet and please . xiv . a man 's soul doth wrong and disrespect itself first and especially when as much a in itself lie it become an aposteme and a it be an excrescency of the world for to be grieve and displease with anything that happen in the world be direct apostacy from the nature of the universe part of which all particular nature of the world be . secondly when she either be averse from any man or lead by contrary desire or affection tend to his hurt and prejudice such a be the soul of them that be angry . thirdly when she be overcome by any pleasure or pain . fourthly when she doth dissemble and covertly and falsely either doth or saith anything . fifthly when she doth either affect or endeavour anything to no certain end but rashly and without due ratiocination and consideration how consequent or inconsequent it be to the common end . for even the least thing ought not to be do without relation unto the end and the end of the reasonable creature be to follow and obey him who be the reason a it be and the law of this great city and ancient commonwealth . . the time of a man 's life be a a point the substance of it ever flow the sense obscure and the whole composition of the body tend to corruption . his soul be restless fortune uncertain and fame doubtful to be brief a a stream so be all thing belong to the body a a dream or a a smoke so be all that belong unto the soul . our life be a warfare and a mere pilgrimage . fame after life be no good than oblivion . what be it then that will adhere and follow ? only one thing philosophy . and philosophy doth consist in this for a man to preserve that spirit which be within him from all manner of contumely and injury and above all pain or pleasure never to do anything either rashly or feignedly or hypocritically wholly to depend from himself and his own proper action all thing that happen unto him to embrace contentedly a come from him from whom he himself also come and above all thing with all meekness and a calm cheerfulness to expect death a be nothing else but the resolution of those element of which every creature be compose . and if the element themselves suffer nothing by this their perpetual conversion of one into another that dissolution and alteration which be so common unto all why should it be fear by any ? be not this accord to nature ? but nothing that be accord to nature can be evil whilst i be at carnuntzim . the third book i. a man must not only consider how daily his life wasteth and decreaseth but this also that if he live long he can not be certain whether his understand shall continue so able and sufficient for either discreet consideration in matter of business or for contemplation it be the thing whereon true knowledge of thing both divine and human doth depend . for if once he shall begin to dote his respiration nutrition his imaginative and appetitive and other natural faculty may still continue the same he shall find no want of them . but how to make that right use of himself that he should how to observe exactly in all thing that which be right and just how to redress and rectify all wrong or sudden apprehension and imagination and even of this particular whether he should live any long or no to consider duly for all such thing wherein the best strength and vigour of the mind be most requisite his power and ability will be past and go . thou must hasten therefore not only because thou art every day nearer unto death than other but also because that intellective faculty in thee whereby thou art enable to know the true nature of thing and to order all thy action by that knowledge doth daily waste and decay or may fail thee before thou die . ii . this also thou must observe that whatsoever it be that naturally doth happen to thing natural hath somewhat in itself that be please and delightful a a great loaf when it be bake some part of it cleave a it be and part asunder and make the crust of it rugged and unequal and yet those part of it though in some sort it be against the art and intention of bake itself that they be thus cleft and part which should have be and be first make all even and uniform they become it well nevertheless and have a certain peculiar property to stir the appetite . so figs be account fair and ripest then when they begin to shrink and wither a it be . so ripe olive when they be next to putrefaction then be they in their proper beauty . the hang down of grape the brow of a lion the froth of a foaming wild boar and many other like thing though by themselves consider they be far from any beauty yet because they happen naturally they both be comely and delightful so that if a man shall with a profound mind and apprehension consider all thing in the world even among all those thing which be but mere accessory and natural appendix a it be there will scarce appear anything unto him wherein he will not find matter of pleasure and delight . so will he behold with as much pleasure the true rictus of wild beast a those which by skilful painter and other artificer be imitate . so will he be able to perceive the proper ripeness and beauty of old age whether in man or woman and whatsoever else it be that be beautiful and allure in whatsoever be with chaste and continent eye he will soon find out and discern . those and many other thing will he discern not credible unto every one but unto them only who be truly and familiarly acquaint both with nature itself and all natural thing . iii . hippocrates have cure many sickness fell sick himself and die . the chaldean and astrologians have foretell the death of diver be afterwards themselves surprise by the fate . alexander and pompeius and caius caesar have destroy so many town and cut off in the field so many thousand both of horse and foot yet they themselves at last be fain to part with their own life . heraclitus have write so many natural tract concern the last and general conflagration of the world die afterwards all fill with water within and all bedaub with dirt and dung without . louse kill democritus and socrates another sort of vermin wicked ungodly men . how then stand the case ? thou hast take ship thou hast sail thou art come to land go out if to another life there also shalt thou find god who be everywhere . if all life and sense shall cease then shalt thou cease also to be subject to either pain or pleasure and to serve and tend this vile cottage so much the viler by how much that which minister unto it doth excel the one be a rational substance and a spirit the other nothing but earth and blood . iv . spend not the remnant of thy day in thought and fancy concern other men when it be not in relation to some common good when by it thou art hinder from some other good work . that be spend not thy time in think what such a man doth and to what end what he saith and what he think and what he be about and such other thing or curiosity which make a man to rove and wander from the care and observation of that part of himself which be rational and overrule . see therefore in the whole series and connection of thy thought that thou be careful to prevent whatsoever be idle and impertinent but especially whatsoever be curious and malicious and thou must use thyself to think only of such thing of which if a man upon a sudden should ask thee what it be that thou art now think thou mayest answer this and that freely and boldly that so by thy thought it may presently appear that in all thee be sincere and peaceable a becometh one that be make for society and regard not pleasure nor give way to any voluptuous imagination at all free from all contentiousness envy and suspicion and from whatsoever else thou wouldest blush to confess thy thought be set upon . he that be such be he surely that doth not put off to lay hold on that which be best indeed a very priest and minister of the god well acquaint and in good correspondence with him especially that be seat and place within himself a in a temple and sacrary to whom also he keep and preserve himself unspotted by pleasure undaunted by pain free from any manner of wrong or contumely by himself offer unto himself not capable of any evil from others a wrestler of the best sort and for the high prize that he may not be cast down by any passion or affection of his own deeply dye and drench in righteousness embracing and accept with his whole heart whatsoever either happeneth or be allot unto him . one who not often nor without some great necessity tend to some public good mindeth what any other either speaks or doth or purposeth for those thing only that be in his own power or that be truly his own be the object of his employment and his thought be ever take up with those thing which of the whole universe be by the fate or providence destinated and appropriate unto himself . those thing that be his own and in his own power he himself take order for that they be good and a for those that happen unto him he believe them to be so . for that lot and portion which be assign to every one a it be unavoidable and necessary so be it always profitable . he remember besides that whatsoever partakes of reason be akin unto him and that to care for all men generally be agree to the nature of a man but a for honour and praise that they ought not generally to be admit and accept of from all but from such only who live accord to nature . a for them that do not what manner of men they be at home or abroad day or night how condition themselves with what manner of condition or with men of what condition they moil and pass away the time together he knoweth and remembers right well he therefore regard not such praise and approbation a proceed from them who can not like and approve themselves . . do nothing against thy will nor contrary to the community nor without due examination nor with reluctancy . affect not to set out thy thought with curious neat language . be neither a great talker nor a great undertaker . moreover let thy god that be in thee to rule over thee find by thee that he hath to do with a man an age man a sociable man a roman a prince one that hath order his life a one that expecteth a it be nothing but the sound of the trumpet sound a retreat to depart out of this life with all expedition . one who for his word or action neither need an oath nor any man to be a witness . vi . to be cheerful and to stand in no need either of other men 's help or attendance or of that rest and tranquillity which thou must be behold to others for . rather like one that be straight of himself or hath ever be straight than one that hath be rectify . vii . if thou shalt find anything in this mortal life well than righteousness than truth temperance fortitude and in general good than a mind content both with those thing which accord to right and reason she doth and in those which without her will and knowledge happen unto thee by the providence if i say thou canst find out anything good than this apply thyself unto it with thy whole heart and that which be best wheresoever thou dost find it enjoy freely . but if nothing thou shalt find worthy to be prefer to that spirit which be within thee if nothing well than to subject unto thee thine own lust and desire and not to give way to any fancy or imagination before thou hast duly consider of them nothing well than to withdraw thyself to use socrates his word from all sensuality and submit thyself unto the god and to have care of all men in general if thou shalt find that all other thing in comparison of this be but vile and of little moment then give not way to any other thing which be once though but affect and incline unto it will no more be in thy power without all distraction a thou oughtest to prefer and to pursue after that good which be thine own and thy proper good . for it be not lawful that anything that be of another and inferior kind and nature be it what it will a either popular applause or honour or rich or pleasure should be suffer to confront and contest a it be with that which be rational and operatively good . for all these thing if once though but for a while they begin to please they presently prevail and pervert a man 's mind or turn a man from the right way . do thou therefore i say absolutely and freely make choice of that which be best and stick unto it . now that they say be best which be most profitable . if they mean profitable to man a he be a rational man stand thou to it and maintain it but if they mean profitable a he be a creature only reject it and from this thy tenet and conclusion keep off carefully all plausible show and colour of external appearance that thou mayest be able to discern thing rightly . viii . never esteem of anything a profitable which shall ever constrain thee either to break thy faith or to lose thy modesty to hate any man to suspect to curse to dissemble to lust after anything that requireth the secret of wall or veil . but he that preferreth before all thing his rational part and spirit and the sacred mystery of virtue which issueth from it he shall never lament and exclaim never sigh he shall never want either solitude or company and which be chief of all he shall live without either desire or fear . and a for life whether for a long or short time he shall enjoy his soul thus compass about with a body he be altogether indifferent . for if even now he be to depart he be a ready for it a for any other action which may be perform with modesty and decency . for all his life long this be his only care that his mind may always be occupy in such intention and object a be proper to a rational sociable creature . ix . in the mind that be once truly disciplined and purge thou canst not find anything either foul or impure or a it be fester nothing that be either servile or affect no partial tie no malicious averseness nothing obnoxious nothing conceal . the life of such an one death can never surprise as imperfect a of an actor that should die before he have end or the play itself be at an end a man might speak . . use thine opinative faculty with all honour and respect for in her indeed be all that thy opinion do not beget in thy understand anything contrary to either nature or the proper constitution of a rational creature . the end and object of a rational constitution be to do nothing rashly to be kindly affected towards men and in all thing willingly to submit unto the god . cast therefore all other thing aside keep thyself to these few and remember withal that no man properly can be say to live more than that which be now present which be but a moment of time . whatsoever be besides either be already past or uncertain . the time therefore that any man doth live be but a little and the place where he liveth be but a very little corner of the earth and the great fame that can remain of a man after his death even that be but little and that too such a it be whilst it be be by the succession of silly mortal men preserve who likewise shall shortly die and even while they live know not what in very deed they themselves be and much less can know one who long before be dead and go . xi . to these ever present help and memento let one more be add ever to make a particular description and delineation a it be of every object that present itself to thy mind that thou mayest wholly and throughly contemplate it in it own proper nature bare and naked wholly and severally divide into it several part and quarter and then by thyself in thy mind to call both it and those thing of which it doth consist and in which it shall be resolve by their own proper true name and appellation . for there be nothing so effectual to beget true magnanimity a to be able truly and methodically to examine and consider all thing that happen in this life and so to penetrate into their nature that at the same time this also may concur in our apprehension what be the true use of it ? and what be the true nature of this universe to which it be useful ? how much in regard of the universe may it be esteem ? how much in regard of man a citizen of the supreme city of which all other city in the world be a it be but house and family ? xii . what be this that now my fancy be set upon ? of what thing doth it consist ? how long can it last ? which of all the virtue be the proper virtue for this present use ? a whether meekness fortitude truth faith sincerity contentation or any of the rest ? of everything therefore thou must use thyself to say this immediately come from god this by that fatal connection and concatenation of thing or which almost come to one by some coincidental casualty . and a for this it proceed from my neighbour my kinsman my fellow through his ignorance indeed because he know not what be truly natural unto him but i know it and therefore carry myself towards him accord to the natural law of fellowship that be kindly and justly . a for those thing that of themselves be altogether indifferent a in my best judgment i conceive everything to deserve more or less so i carry myself towards it . xiii . if thou shalt intend that which be present follow the rule of right and reason carefully solidly meekly and shalt not intermix any other business but shall study this only to preserve thy spirit unpolluted and pure and shall cleave unto him without either hope or fear of anything in all thing that thou shalt either do or speak content thyself with heroical truth thou shalt live happily and from this there be no man that can hinder thee . xiv . a physician and chirurgeons have always their instrument ready at hand for all sudden cure so have thou always thy dogma in a readiness for the knowledge of thing both divine and human and whatsoever thou dost even in the small thing that thou dost thou must ever remember that mutual relation and connection that be between these two thing divine and thing human . for without relation unto god thou shalt never speed in any worldly action nor on the other side in any divine without some respect have to thing human . . be not deceive for thou shalt never live to read thy moral commentary nor the act of the famous roman and grecian nor those excerpta from several book all which thou hadst provide and lay up for thyself against thine old age . hasten therefore to an end and give over all vain hope help thyself in time if thou carest for thyself a thou oughtest to do . xvi . to steal to sow to buy to be at rest to see what be to be do which be not see by the eye but by another kind of sight what these word mean and how many way to be understood they do not understand . the body the soul the understanding . a the sens naturally belong to the body and the desire and affection to the soul so do the dogma to the understanding . xvii . to be capable of fancy and imagination be common to man and beast . to be violently draw and move by the lust and desire of the soul be proper to wild beast and monster such a phalaris and nero be . to follow reason for ordinary duty and action be common to them also who believe not that there be any god and for their advantage would make no conscience to betray their own country and who when once the door be shut upon them dare do anything . if therefore all thing else be common to these likewise it follow that for a man to like and embrace all thing that happen and be destinated unto him and not to trouble and molest that spirit which be seat in the temple of his own breast with a multitude of vain fancy and imagination but to keep him propitious and to obey him a a god never either speak anything contrary to truth or do anything contrary to justice be the only true property of a good man . and such a one though no man should believe that he liveth a he doth either sincerely and conscionably or cheerful and contentedly yet be he neither with any man at all angry for it nor divert by it from the way that leadeth to the end of his life through which a man must pass pure ever ready to depart and willing of himself without any compulsion to fit and accommodate himself to his proper lot and portion . the fourth book i. that inward mistress part of man if it be in it own true natural temper be towards all worldly chance and event ever so disposed and affect that it will easily turn and apply itself to that which may be and be within it own power to compass when that can not be which at first it intend . for it never doth absolutely addict and apply itself to any one object but whatsoever it be that it doth now intend and prosecute it doth prosecute it with exception and reservation so that whatsoever it be that fall out contrary to it first intention even that afterwards it make it proper object . even a the fire when it prevail upon those thing that be in his way by which thing indeed a little fire would have be quench but a great fire doth soon turn to it own nature and so consume whatsoever come in his way yea by those very thing it be make great and great . ii . let nothing be do rashly and at random but all thing accord to the most exact and perfect rule of art . iii . they seek for themselves private retire place a country villages the sea shore mountain yea thou thyself art wont to long much after such place . but all this thou must know proceeds from simplicity in the high degree . at what time soever thou wilt it be in thy power to retire into thyself and to be at rest and free from all business . a man can not any whither retire good than to his own soul he especially who be beforehand provide of such thing within which whensoever he doth withdraw himself to look in may presently afford unto him perfect ease and tranquillity . by tranquillity i understand a decent orderly disposition and carriage free from all confusion and tumultuousness . afford then thyself this retire continually and thereby refresh and renew thyself . let these precept be brief and fundamental which as soon a thou dost call them to mind may suffice thee to purge thy soul throughly and to send thee away well pleased with those thing whatsoever they be which now again after this short withdrawing of thy soul into herself thou dost return unto . for what be it that thou art offend at ? can it be at the wickedness of men when thou dost call to mind this conclusion that all reasonable creature be make one for another ? and that it be part of justice to bear with them ? and that it be against their will that they offend ? and how many already who once likewise prosecute their enmity suspect hated and fiercely contend be now long ago stretch out and reduced unto ash ? it be time for thee to make an end . a for those thing which among the common chance of the world happen unto thee a thy particular lot and portion canst thou be displease with any of them when thou dost call that our ordinary dilemma to mind either a providence or democritus his atom and with it whatsoever we bring to prove that the whole world be a it be one city ? and a for thy body what canst thou fear if thou dost consider that thy mind and understand when once it hath recollect itself and know it own power hath in this life and breath whether it run smoothly and gently or whether harshly and rudely no interest at all but be altogether indifferent and whatsoever else thou hast heard and assent unto concern either pain or pleasure ? but the care of thine honour and reputation will perchance distract thee ? how can that be if thou dost look back and consider both how quickly all thing that be be forgotten and what an immense chaos of eternity be before and will follow after all thing and the vanity of praise and the inconstancy and variableness of human judgment and opinion and the narrowness of the place wherein it be limited and circumscribe ? for the whole earth be but a one point and of it this inhabited part of it be but a very little part and of this part how many in number and what manner of men be they that will commend thee ? what remain then but that thou often put in practice this kind of retiring of thyself to this little part of thyself and above all thing keep thyself from distraction and intend not anything vehemently but be free and consider all thing a a man whose proper object be virtue a a man whose true nature be to be kind and sociable a a citizen a a mortal creature . among other thing which to consider and look into thou must use to withdraw thyself let those two be among the most obvious and at hand . one that the thing or object themselves reach not unto the soul but stand without still and quiet and that it be from the opinion only which be within that all the tumult and all the trouble doth proceed . the next that all these thing which now thou seest shall within a very little while be change and be no more and ever call to mind how many change and alteration in the world thou thyself hast already be an eyewitness of in thy time . this world be mere change and this life opinion . iv . if to understand and to be reasonable be common unto all men then be that reason for which we be term reasonable common unto all . if reason be general then be that reason also which prescribeth what be to be do and what not common unto all . if that then law . if law then be we fellow citizen . if so then be we partner in some one commonweal . if so then the world be a it be a city . for which other commonweal be it that all men can be say to be member of ? from this common city it be that understand reason and law be derive unto u for from whence else ? for a that which in me be earthly i have from some common earth and that which be moist from some other element be impart a my breath and life hath it proper fountain and that likewise which be dry and fiery in me for there be nothing which doth not proceed from something a also there be nothing that can be reduce unto mere nothing so also be there some common beginning from whence my understanding hath proceed . . a generation be so also death a secret of nature 's wisdom a mixture of element resolve into the same element again a thing surely which no man ought to be ashamed of in a series of other fatal event and consequence which a rational creature be subject unto not improper or incongruous nor contrary to the natural and proper constitution of man himself . vi . such and such thing from such and such cause must of necessity proceed . he that would not have such thing to happen be a he that would have the fig tree grow without any sap or moisture . in sum remember this that within a very little while both thou and he shall both be dead and after a little while more not so much a your name and memory shall be remain . vii . let opinion be take away and no man will think himself wrong . if no man shall think himself wrong then be there no more any such thing a wrong . that which make not man himself the bad can not make his life the bad neither can it hurt him either inwardly or outwardly . it be expedient in nature that it should be so and therefore necessary . viii . whatsoever doth happen in the world doth happen justly and so if thou dost well take heed thou shalt find it . i say not only in right order by a series of inevitable consequence but accord to justice and a it be by way of equal distribution accord to the true worth of everything . continue then to take notice of it a thou hast begin and whatsoever thou dost do it not without this proviso that it be a thing of that nature that a good man a the word good be properly take may do it . this observe carefully in every action . ix . conceit no such thing a he that wrongeth thee conceiveth or would have thee to conceive but look into the matter itself and see what it be in very truth . . these two rule thou must have always in a readiness . first do nothing at all but what reason proceed from that regal and supreme part shall for the good and benefit of men suggest unto thee . and secondly if any man that be present shall be able to rectify thee or to turn thee from some erroneous persuasion that thou be always ready to change thy mind and this change to proceed not from any respect of any pleasure or credit thereon depend but always from some probable apparent ground of justice or of some public good thereby to be further or from some other such inducement . xi . hast thou reason ? i have . why then makest thou not use of it ? for if thy reason do her part what more canst thou require ? xii . a a part hitherto thou hast have a particular subsistence and now shalt thou vanish away into the common substance of him who first beget thee or rather thou shalt be resume again into that original rational substance out of which all others have issue and be propagate . many small piece of frankincense be set upon the same altar one drop first and be consume another after and it come all to one . xiii . within ten day if so happen thou shalt be esteem a god of them who now if thou shalt return to the dogma and to the honouring of reason will esteem of thee no good than of a mere brute and of an ape . xiv . not a though thou hadst thousand of year to live . death hang over thee whilst yet thou liv whilst thou mayest be good . . now much time and leisure doth he gain who be not curious to know what his neighbour hath say or hath do or hath attempt but only what he doth himself that it may be just and holy ? or to express it in agathos ' word not to look about upon the evil condition of others but to run on straight in the line without any loose and extravagant agitation . xvi . he who be greedy of credit and reputation after his death doth not consider that they themselves by whom he be remember shall soon after every one of them be dead and they likewise that succeed those until at last all memory which hitherto by the succession of men admire and soon after die hath have it course be quite extinct . but suppose that both they that shall remember thee and thy memory with them should be immortal what be that to thee ? i will not say to thee after thou art dead but even to thee live what be thy praise ? but only for a secret and politic consideration which we call oikonomian or dispensation . for a for that that it be the gift of nature whatsoever be commend in thee what might be object from thence let that now that we be upon another consideration be omit a unseasonable . that which be fair and goodly whatsoever it be and in what respect soever it be that it be fair and goodly it be so of itself and terminates in itself not admit praise a a part or member that therefore which be praise be not thereby make either good or bad . this i understand even of those thing that be commonly call fair and good a those which be commend either for the matter itself or for curious workmanship . a for that which be truly good what can it stand in need of more than either justice or truth or more than either kindness and modesty ? which of all those either becomes good or fair because commend or dispraised suffers any damage ? doth the emerald become worse in itself or more vile if it be not commend ? doth gold or ivory or purple ? be there anything that doth though never so common a a knife a flower or a tree ? xvii . if so be that the soul remain after death say they that will not believe it how be the air from all eternity able to contain them ? how be the earth say i ever from that time able to contain the body of them that be bury ? for a here the change and resolution of dead body into another kind of subsistence whatsoever it be make place for other dead body so the soul after death transfer into the air after they have converse there a while be either by way of transmutation or transfusion or conflagration receive again into that original rational substance from which all others do proceed and so give way to those soul who before couple and associate unto body now begin to subsist single . this upon a supposition that the soul after death do for a while subsist single may be answer . and here besides the number of body so buried and contain by the earth we may far consider the number of several beast eat by u men and by other creature . for notwithstanding that such a multitude of them be daily consume and a it be bury in the body of the eater yet be the same place and body able to contain them by reason of their conversion partly into blood partly into air and fire . what in these thing be the speculation of truth ? to divide thing into that which be passive and material and that which be active and formal . xviii . not to wander out of the way but upon every motion and desire to perform that which be just and ever to be careful to attain to the true natural apprehension of every fancy that present itself . xix . whatsoever be expedient unto thee o world be expedient unto me nothing can either be 'unseasonable unto me or out of date which unto thee be seasonable . whatsoever thy season bear shall ever by me be esteem a happy fruit and increase . o nature ! from thee be all thing in thee all thing subsist and to thee all tend . could he say of athens thou lovely city of cecrops and shalt not thou say of the world thou lovely city of god ? . they will say commonly meddle not with many thing if thou wilt live cheerfully . certainly there be nothing well than for a man to confine himself to necessary action to such and so many only a reason in a creature that know itself bear for society will command and enjoin . this will not only procure that cheerfulness which from the goodness but that also which from the paucity of action doth usually proceed . for since it be so that most of those thing which we either speak or do be unnecessary if a man shall cut them off it must need follow that he shall thereby gain much leisure and save much trouble and therefore at every action a man must privately by way of admonition suggest unto himself what ? may not this that now i go about be of the number of unnecessary action ? neither must he use himself to cut off action only but thought and imagination also that be unnecessary for so will unnecessary consequent action the good be prevent and cut off . xxi . try also how a good man 's life of one who be well pleased with those thing whatsoever which among the common change and chance of this world fall to his own lot and share and can live well content and fully satisfy in the justice of his own proper present action and in the goodness of his disposition for the future will agree with thee . thou hast have experience of that other kind of life make now trial of this also . trouble not thyself any more henceforth reduce thyself unto perfect simplicity . doth any man offend ? it be against himself that he doth offend why should it trouble thee ? hath anything happen unto thee ? it be well whatsoever it be it be that which of all the common chance of the world from the very begin in the series of all other thing that have or shall happen be destinated and appoint unto thee . to comprehend all in a few word our life be short we must endeavour to gain the present time with best discretion and justice . use recreation with sobriety . xxii . either this world be a kosmoz or comely piece because all disposed and govern by certain order or if it be a mixture though confused yet still it be a comely piece . for be it possible that in thee there should be any beauty at all and that in the whole world there should be nothing but disorder and confusion ? and all thing in it too by natural different property one from another differenced and distinguish and yet all through diffuse and by natural sympathy one to another unite a they be ? xxiii . a black or malign disposition an effeminate disposition an hard inexorable disposition a wild inhuman disposition a sheepish disposition a childish disposition a blockish a false a scurril a fraudulent a tyrannical what then ? if he be a stranger in the world that know not the thing that be in it why not be a stranger as well that wonder at the thing that be do in it ? xxiv . he be a true fugitive that fly from reason by which men be sociable . he blind who can not see with the eye of his understanding . he poor that stand in need of another and hath not in himself all thing needful for this life . he an aposteme of the world who by be discontent with those thing that happen unto him in the world doth a it be apostatise and separate himself from common nature 's rational administration . for the same nature it be that bring this unto thee whatsoever it be that first bring thee into the world . he raise sedition in the city who by irrational action withdraw his own soul from that one and common soul of all rational creature . . there be who without so much a a coat and there be who without so much a a book doth put philosophy in practice . i be half naked neither have i bread to eat and yet i depart not from reason saith one . but i say i want the food of good teaching and instruction and yet i depart not from reason . xxvi . what art and profession soever thou hast learn endeavour to affect it and comfort thyself in it and pass the remainder of thy life a one who from his whole heart commit himself and whatsoever belongs unto him unto the god and a for men carry not thyself either tyrannically or servilely towards any . xxvii . consider in my mind for example 's sake the time of vespasian thou shalt see but the same thing some marry some bring up child some sick some die some fight some feast some merchandise some till some flatter some boast some suspect some undermine some wishing to die some fretting and murmur at their present estate some woo some hoard some seek after magistracy and some after kingdom . and be not that their age quite over and end ? again consider now the time of trajan . there likewise thou seest the very self same thing and that age also be now over and end . in the like manner consider other period both of time and of whole nation and see how many men after they have with all their might and main intend and prosecute some one worldly thing or other do soon after drop away and be resolve into the element . but especially thou must call to mind them whom thou thyself in thy lifetime hast know much distract about vain thing and in the meantime neglect to do that and closely and unseparably a fully satisfy with it to adhere unto it which their own proper constitution do require . and here thou must remember that thy carriage in every business must be accord to the worth and due proportion of it for so shalt thou not easily be tire out and vexed if thou shalt not dwell upon small matter longer than be fit . xxviii . those word which once be common and ordinary be now become obscure and obsolete and so the name of men once commonly know and famous be now become in a manner obscure and obsolete name . camillus cieso volesius leonnatus not long after scipio cato then augustus then adrianus then antoninus pius all these in a short time will be out of date and a thing of another world a it be become fabulous . and this i say of them who once shin a the wonder of their age for a for the rest no sooner be they expire than with them all their fame and memory . and what be it then that shall always be remember ? all be vanity . what be it that we must bestow our care and diligence upon ? even upon this only that our mind and will be just that our action be charitable that our speech be never deceitful or that our understand be not subject to error that our inclination be always set to embrace whatsoever shall happen unto u as necessary as usual a ordinary a flow from such a beginning and such a fountain from which both thou thyself and all thing be . willingly therefore and wholly surrender up thyself unto that fatal concatenation yield up thyself unto the fate to be dispose of at their pleasure . xxix . whatsoever be now present and from day to day hath it existence all object of memory and the mind and memory themselves incessantly consider all thing that be have their be by change and alteration . use thyself therefore often to meditate upon this that the nature of the universe delight in nothing more than in alter those thing that be and in make others like unto them . so that we may say that whatsoever be be but a it be the seed of that which shall be . for if thou think that that only be seed which either the earth or the womb receiveth thou art very simple . . thou art now ready to die and yet hast thou not attain to that perfect simplicity thou art yet subject to many trouble and perturbation not yet free from all fear and suspicion of external accident nor yet either so meekly disposed towards all men a thou shouldest or so affected a one whose only study and only wisdom be to be just in all his action . xxxi . behold and observe what be the state of their rational part and those that the world doth account wise see what thing they fly and be afraid of and what thing they hunt after . xxxii . in another man 's mind and understand thy evil can not subsist nor in any proper temper or distemper of the natural constitution of thy body which be but a it be the coat or cottage of thy soul . wherein then but in that part of thee wherein the conceit and apprehension of any misery can subsist ? let not that part therefore admit any such conceit and then all be well . though thy body which be so near it should either be cut or burn or suffer any corruption or putrefaction yet let that part to which it belong to judge of these be still at rest that be let her judge this that whatsoever it be that equally may happen to a wicked man and to a good man be neither good nor evil . for that which happen equally to him that live accord to nature and to him that doth not be neither accord to nature nor against it and by consequent neither good nor bad . xxxiii . ever consider and think upon the world a be but one living substance and have but one soul and how all thing in the world be terminate into one sensitive power and be do by one general motion a it be and deliberation of that one soul and how all thing that be concur in the cause of one another 's be and by what manner of connection and concatenation all thing happen . xxxiv . what art thou that good and divine part except but a epictetus say well a wretched soul appoint to carry a carcass up and down ? . to suffer change can be no hurt a no benefit it be by change to attain to be . the age and time of the world be a it be a flood and swift current consisting of the thing that be bring to pass in the world . for as soon a anything hath appear and be pass away another succeed and that also will presently out of sight . xxxvi . whatsoever doth happen in the world be in the course of nature a usual and ordinary a a rise in the spring and fruit in summer . of the same nature be sickness and death slander and lying in wait and whatsoever else ordinarily doth unto fool use to be occasion either of joy or sorrow . that whatsoever it be that come after doth always very naturally and a it be familiarly follow upon that which be before . for thou must consider the thing of the world not a a loose independent number consist merely of necessary event but a a discreet connection of thing orderly and harmoniously dispose . there be then to be see in the thing of the world not a bare succession but an admirable correspondence and affinity . xxxvii . let that of heraclitus never be out of thy mind that the death of earth be water and the death of water be air and the death of air be fire and so on the contrary . remember him also who be ignorant whither the way do lead and how that reason be the thing by which all thing in the world be administer and which men be continually and most inwardly conversant with yet be the thing which ordinarily they be most in opposition with and how those thing which daily happen among them cease not daily to be strange unto them and that we should not either speak or do anything a men in their sleep by opinion and bare imagination for then we think we speak and do and that we must not be a child who follow their father 's example for best reason allege their bare successive tradition from our forefather we have receive it . xxxviii . even a if any of the god should tell thee thou shalt certainly die to morrow or next day thou wouldst not except thou wert extremely base and pusillanimous take it for a great benefit rather to die the next day after than to morrow for ala what be the difference ! so for the same reason think it no great matter to die rather many year after than the very next day . xxxix . let it be thy perpetual meditation how many physician who once look so grim and so theatrically shrink their brow upon their patient be dead and go themselves . how many astrologer after that in great ostentation they have foretell the death of some others how many philosopher after so many elaborate tract and volume concern either mortality or immortality how many brave captain and commander after the death and slaughter of so many how many king and tyrant after they have with such horror and insolency abuse their power upon men 's life a though themselves have be immortal how many that i may so speak whole city both men and town helice pompeii herculaneum and others innumerable be dead and go . run them over also whom thou thyself one after another hast know in thy time to drop away . such and such a one take care of such and such a one 's burial and soon after be bury himself . so one so another and all thing in a short time . for herein lieth all indeed ever to look upon all worldly thing a thing for their continuance that be but for a day and for their worth most vile and contemptible a for example what be man ? that which but the other day when he be conceive be vile snivel and within few day shall be either an embalmed carcass or mere ash . thus must thou accord to truth and nature throughly consider how man 's life be but for a very moment of time and so depart meek and content even a if a ripe olive fall should praise the ground that bare her and give thanks to the tree that beget her . . thou must be like a promontory of the sea against which though the wave beat continually yet it both itself stand and about it be those swell wave still and quiet . xli . oh wretched i to whom this mischance be happen ! nay happy i to whom this thing be happen i can continue without grief neither wound by that which be present nor in fear of that which be to come . for a for this it might have happen unto any man but any man have such a thing befallen him could not have continue without grief . why then should that rather be an unhappiness than this a happiness ? but however canst thou o man ! term that unhappiness which be no mischance to the nature of man i canst thou think that a mischance to the nature of man which be not contrary to the end and will of his nature ? what then hast thou learn be the will of man 's nature ? doth that then which hath happen unto thee hinder thee from be just ? or magnanimous ? or temperate ? or wise ? or circumspect ? or true ? or modest ? or free ? or from anything else of all those thing in the present enjoying and possession whereof the nature of man a then enjoy all that be proper unto her be fully satisfy ? now to conclude upon all occasion of sorrow remember henceforth to make use of this dogma that whatsoever it be that hath happen unto thee be in very deed no such thing of itself a a misfortune but that to bear it generously be certainly great happiness . xlii . it be but an ordinary coarse one yet it be a good effectual remedy against the fear of death for a man to consider in his mind the example of such who greedily and covetously a it be do for a long time enjoy their life . what have they get more than they whose death have be untimely ? be not they themselves dead at the last ? a cadiciant 's fabius julianus lepidus or any other who in their lifetime have bury many be at the last buried themselves . the whole space of any man 's life be but little and as little a it be with what trouble with what manner of disposition and in the society of how wretched a body must it be pass ! let it be therefore unto thee altogether a a matter of indifferency . for if thou shalt look backward behold what an infinite chaos of time doth present itself unto thee and a infinite a chaos if thou shalt look forward . in that which be so infinite what difference can there be between that which liveth but three day and that which liveth three age ? xliii . let thy course ever be the most compendious way . the most compendious be that which be accord to nature that be in all both word and deed ever to follow that which be most sound and perfect . for such a resolution will free a man from all trouble strife dissembling and ostentation . the fifth book i. in the morning when thou findest thyself unwilling to rise consider with thyself presently it be to go about a man 's work that i be stir up . be i then yet unwilling to go about that for which i myself be bear and bring forth into this world ? or be i make for this to lay me down and make much of myself in a warm bed ? ' o but this be please . ' and be it then for this that thou wert born that thou mightest enjoy pleasure ? be it not in very truth for this that thou mightest always be busy and in action ? seest thou not how all thing in the world besides how every tree md plant how sparrow and ant spider and be how all in their kind be intent a it be orderly to perform whatsoever towards the preservation of this orderly universe naturally doth become and belong unto thin ? and wilt not thou do that which belong unto a man to do ? wilt not thou run to do that which thy nature doth require ? 'but thou must have some rest . ' yes thou must . nature hath of that also as well a of eating and drinking allow thee a certain stint . but thou guest beyond thy stint and beyond that which would suffice and in matter of action there thou comest short of that which thou mayest . it must needs be therefore that thou dost not love thyself for if thou didst thou wouldst also love thy nature and that which thy nature doth propose unto herself a her end . others as many a take pleasure in their trade and profession can even pine themselves at their work and neglect their body and their food for it and doest thou less honour thy nature than an ordinary mechanic his trade or a good dancer his art ? than a covetous man his silver and vainglorious man applause ? these to whatsoever they take an affection can be content to want their meat and sleep to further that every one which he affect and shall action tend to the common good of human society seem more vile unto thee or worthy of less respect and intention ? ii . how easy a thing be it for a man to put off from him all turbulent adventitious imagination and presently to be in perfect rest and tranquillity ! iii . think thyself fit and worthy to speak or to do anything that be accord to nature and let not the reproach or report of some that may ensue upon it ever deter thee . if it be right and honest to be speak or do undervalue not thyself so much a to be discourage from it . a for them they have their own rational over rule part and their own proper inclination which thou must not stand and look about to take notice of but go on straight whither both thine own particular and the common nature do lead thee and the way of both these be but one . iv . i continue my course by action accord to nature until i fall and cease breathe out my last breath into that air by which continually breathe in i do live and fall upon that earth out of whose gift and fruit my father gather his seed my mother her blood and my nurse her milk out of which for so many year i have be provide both of meat and drink . and lastly which beareth me that tread upon it and beareth with me that so many way do abuse it or so freely make use of it so many way to so many end . . no man can admire thee for thy sharp acute language such be thy natural disability that way . be it so yet there be many other good thing for the want of which thou canst not plead the want or natural ability . let them be see in thee which depend wholly from thee sincerity gravity laboriousness contempt of pleasure be not querulous be content with little be kind be free avoid all superfluity all vain prattle be magnanimous . doest not thou perceive how many thing there be which notwithstanding any pretence of natural indisposition and unfitness thou mightest have perform and exhibit and yet still thou doest voluntarily continue droop downwards ? or wilt thou say that it be through defect of thy natural constitution that thou art constrain to murmur to be base and wretched to flatter now to accuse and now to please and pacify thy body to be vainglorious to be so giddy head . and unsettle in thy thought ? nay witness be the god of all these thou mightest have be rid long ago only this thou must have be content with to have bear the blame of one that be somewhat slow and dull wherein thou must so exercise thyself a one who neither doth much take to heart this his natural defect nor yet pleaseth himself in it . vi . such there be who when they have do a good turn to any be ready to set them on the score for it and to require retaliation . others there be who though they stand not upon retaliation to require any yet they think with themselves nevertheless that such a one be their debtor and they know a their word be what they have do . others again there be who when they have do any such thing do not so much a know what they have do but be like unto the vine which beareth her grape and when once she hath borne her own proper fruit be content and seek for no further recompense . a a horse after a race and a hunting dog when he hath hunt and a bee when she hath make her honey look not for applause and commendation so neither doth that man that rightly doth understand his own nature when he hath do a good turn but from one doth proceed to do another even a the vine after she hath once borne fruit in her own proper season be ready for another time . thou therefore must be one of them who what they do barely do it without any further thought and be in a manner insensible of what they do . 'nay but ' will some reply perchance 'this very thing a rational man be bind unto to understand what it be that he doeth . ' for it be the property say they of one that be naturally sociable to be sensible that he doth operate sociably nay and to desire that the party him self that be sociably dealt with should be sensible of it too . i answer that which thou sayest be true indeed but the true meaning of that which be say thou dost not understand . and therefore art thou one of those first whom i mention . for they also be lead by a probable appearance of reason . but if thou dost desire to understand truly what it be that be say fear not that thou shalt therefore give over any sociable action . vii . the form of the athenian ' prayer do run thus ' o rain rain good jupiter upon all the ground and field that belong to the athenian . ' either we should not pray at all or thus absolutely and freely and not every one for himself in particular alone . viii . a we say commonly the physician hath prescribe unto this man rid unto another cold bath unto a third to go barefoot so it be alike to say the nature of the universe hath prescribe unto this man sickness or blindness or some loss or damage or some such thing . for a there when we say of a physician that he hath prescribed anything our meaning be that he hath appoint this for that a subordinate and conduce to health so here whatsoever doth happen unto any be ordain unto him a a thing subordinate unto the fate and therefore do we say of such thing that they do happen or fall together a of square stone when either in wall or pyramid in a certain position they fit one another and agree a it be in an harmony the mason say that they do sumbainein a if thou shouldest say fall together so that in the general though the thing be diver that make it yet the consent or harmony itself be but one . and a the whole world be make up of all the particular body of the world one perfect and complete body of the same nature that particular body so be the destiny of particular cause and event one general one of the same nature that particular cause be . what i now say even they that be mere idiot be not ignorant of for they say commonly touto eferen autw that be this his destiny hath bring upon him . this therefore be by the fate properly and particularly bring upon this a that unto this in particular be by the physician prescribed . these therefore let u accept of in like manner a we do those that be prescribe unto u our physician . for them also in themselves shall we find to contain many harsh thing but we nevertheless in hope of health and recovery accept of them . let the fulfilling and accomplishment of those thing which the common nature hath determine be unto thee a thy health . accept then and be please with whatsoever doth happen though otherwise harsh and un pleasing a tend to that end to the health and welfare of the universe and to jove 's happiness and prosperity . for this whatsoever it be should not have be produce have it not conduce to the good of the universe . for neither doth any ordinary particular nature bring anything to pass that be not to whatsoever be within the sphere of it own proper administration and government agreeable and subordinate . for these two consideration then thou must be well pleased with anything that doth happen unto thee . first because that for thee properly it be bring to pas and unto thee it be prescribe and that from the very beginning by the series and connection of the first cause it hath ever have a reference unto thee . and secondly because the good success and perfect welfare and indeed the very continuance of him that be the administrator of the whole doth in a manner depend on it . for the whole because whole therefore entire and perfect be maim and mutilate if thou shalt cut off anything at all whereby the coherence and contiguity a of part so of cause be maintain and preserve . of which certain it be that thou doest as much a lieth in thee cut off and in some sort violently take somewhat away as often a thou art displease with anything that happeneth . ix . be not discontent be not dishearten be not out of hope if often it succeed not so well with thee punctually and precisely to do all thing accord to the right dogma but be once cast off return unto them again and a for those many and more frequent occurrence either of worldly distraction or human infirmity which a a man thou canst not but in some measure be subject unto be not thou discontent with them but however love and affect that only which thou dust return unto a philosopher 's life and proper occupation after the most exact manner . and when thou dust return to thy philosophy return not unto it a the manner of some be after play and liberty a it be to their schoolmaster and pedagogue but a they that have sore eye to their sponge and egg or a another to his cataplasm or a others to their fomentation so shalt not thou make it a matter of ostentation at all to obey reason but of ease and comfort . and remember that philosophy requireth nothing of thee but what thy nature requireth and wouldest thou thyself desire anything that be not accord to nature ? for which of these sayest thou that which be accord to nature or against it be of itself more kind and pleasing ? be it not for that respect especially that pleasure itself be to so many men 's hurt and overthrow most prevalent because esteem commonly most kind and natural ? but consider well whether magnanimity rather and true liberty and true simplicity and equanimity and holiness whether these be not most kind and natural ? and prudency itself what more kind and amiable than it when thou shalt truly consider with thyself what it be through all the proper object of thy rational intellectual faculty currently to go on without any fall or stumble ? a for the thing of the world their true nature be in a manner so involved with obscurity that unto many philosopher and those no mean one they seem altogether incomprehensible and the stoic themselves though they judge them not altogether incomprehensible yet scarce and not without much difficulty comprehensible so that all assent of ours be fallible for who be he that be infallible in his conclusion ? from the nature of thing pas now unto their subject and matter how temporary how vile be they i such a may be in the power and possession of some abominable loose liver of some common strumpet of some notorious oppressor and extortioner . pas from thence to the disposition of them that thou doest ordinarily converse with how hardly do we bear even with the most loving and amiable ! that i may not say how hard it be for u to bear even with our own self in such obscurity and impurity of thing in such and so continual a flux both of the substance and time both of the motion themselves and thing move what it be that we can fasten upon either to honour and respect especially or seriously and studiously to seek after i can not so much a conceive for indeed they be thing contrary . . thou must comfort thyself in the expectation of thy natural dissolution and in the meantime not grieve at the delay but rest content in those two thing . first that nothing shall happen unto thee which be not accord to the nature of the universe . secondly that it be in thy power to do nothing against thine own proper god and inward spirit . for it be not in any man 's power to constrain thee to transgress against him . xi . what be the use that now at this present i make of my soul ? thus from time to time and upon all occasion thou must put this question to thyself what be now that part of mine which they call the rational mistress part employ about ? whose soul do i now properly posse ? a child 's ? or a youth 's ? a woman 's ? or a tyrant 's ? some brute or some wild beast 's soul ? xii . what those thing be in themselves which by the great part be esteem good thou mayest gather even from this . for if a man shall hear thing mention a good which be really good indeed such a be prudence temperance justice fortitude after so much heard and conceive he can not endure to hear of any more for the word good be properly speak of them . but a for those which by the vulgar be esteem good if he shall hear them mention a good he doth hearken for more . he be well content to hear that what be speak by the comedian be but familiarly and popularly speak so that even the vulgar apprehend the difference . for why be it else that this offend not and need not to be excuse when virtue be style good but that which be speak in commendation of wealth pleasure or honour we entertain it only a merrily and pleasantly speak ? proceed therefore and inquire further whether it may not be that those thing also which be mention upon the stage be merrily and with great applause of the multitude scoff at with this jest that they that possess them have not in all the world of their own such be their affluence and plenty so much a a place where to avoid their excrement . whether i say those ought not also in very deed to be much respect and esteem of a the only thing that be truly good . xiii . all that i consist of be either form or matter . no corruption can reduce either of these unto nothing for neither do i of nothing become a subsistent creature . every part of mine then will by mutation be dispose into a certain part of the whole world and that in time into another part and so in infinitum by which kind of mutation i also become what i be and so do they that beget me and they before them and so upwards in infinitum . for so we may be allow to speak though the age and government of the world be to some certain period of time limited and confine . xiv . reason and rational power be faculty which content themselves with themselves and their own proper operation . and a for their first inclination and motion that they take from themselves . but their progress be right to the end and object which be in their way a it be and lieth just before them that be which be feasible and possible whether it be that which at the first they propose to themselves or no . for which reason also such action be term katorqwseiz to intimate the directness of the way by which they be achieve . nothing must be think to belong to a man which doth not belong unto him a he be a man . these the event of purpose be not thing require in a man . the nature of man doth not profess any such thing . the final end and consummation of action be nothing at all to a man 's nature . the end therefore of a man or the summum bonum whereby that end be fulfil can not consist in the consummation of action purpose and intend . again concern these outward worldly thing be it so that any of them do properly belong unto man then would it not belong unto man to condemn them and to stand in opposition with them . neither would he be praiseworthy that can live without them or he good if these be good indeed who of his own accord doth deprive himself of any of them . but we see contrariwise that the more a man doth withdraw himself from these wherein external pomp and greatness doth consist or any other like these or the good he doth bear with the loss of these the good he be account . . such a thy thought and ordinary cogitation be such will thy mind be in time . for the soul doth a it be receive it tincture from the fancy and imagination . dye it therefore and thoroughly soak it with the assiduity of these cogitation . a for example . wheresoever thou mayest live there it be in thy power to live well and happy . but thou mayest live at the court there then also mayest thou live well and happy . again that which everything be make for he be also make unto that and can not but naturally incline unto it . that which anything doth naturally incline unto therein be his end . wherein the end of everything doth consist therein also doth his good and benefit consist . society therefore be the proper good of a rational creature . for that we be make for society it hath long since be demonstrate . or can any man make any question of this that whatsoever be naturally bad and inferior be ordinarily subordinate to that which be good ? and that those thing that be best be make one for another ? and those thing that have soul be good than those that have none ? and of those that have those best that have rational soul ? xvi . to desire thing impossible be the part of a mad man . but it be a thing impossible that wicked man should not commit some such thing . neither doth anything happen to any man which in the ordinary course of nature a natural unto him doth not happen . again the same thing happen unto others also . and truly if either he that be ignorant that such a thing hath happen unto him or he that be ambitious to be commend for his magnanimity can be patient and be not grieve be it not a grievous thing that either ignorance or a vain desire to please and to be commend should be more powerful and effectual than true prudence ? a for the thing themselves they touch not the soul neither can they have any access unto it neither can they of themselves any way either affect it or move it . for she herself alone can affect and move herself and accord a the dogma and opinion be which she doth vouchsafe herself so be those thing which a accessory have any co existence with her . xvii . after one consideration man be near unto u a we be bind to do them good and to bear with them . but a he may oppose any of our true proper action so man be unto me but a a thing indifferent even a the sun or the wind or some wild beast . by some of these it may be that some operation or other of mine may be hinder however of my mind and resolution itself there can be no let or impediment by reason of that ordinary constant both exception or reservation wherewith it inclineth and ready conversion of object from that which may not be to that which may be which in the prosecution of it inclination a occasion serve it doth observe . for by these the mind doth turn and convert any impediment whatsoever to be her aim and purpose . so that what before be the impediment be now the principal object of her working and that which before be in her way be now her ready way . xviii . honour that which be chief and most powerful in the world and that be it which make use of all thing and governs all thing . so also in thyself honour that which be chief and most powerful and be of one kind and nature with that which we now spake of . for it be the very same which be in thee turneth all other thing to it own use and by whom also thy life be govern . xix . that which doth not hurt the city itself can not hurt any citizen . this rule thou must remember to apply and make use of upon every conceit and apprehension of wrong . if the whole city be not hurt by this neither be i certainly . and if the whole be not why should i make it my private grievance ? consider rather what it be wherein he be overseen that be think to have do the wrong . again often meditate how swiftly all thing that subsist and all thing that be do in the world be carry away and a it be convey out of sight for both the substance themselves we see a a flood be in a continual flux and all action in a perpetual change and the cause themselves subject to a thousand alteration neither be there anything almost that may ever be say to be now settle and constant . next unto this and which follow upon it consider both the infiniteness of the time already past and the immense vastness of that which be to come wherein all thing be to be resolve and annihilate . art not thou then a very fool who for these thing art either puff up with pride or distract with care or canst find in thy heart to make such moan a for a thing that would trouble thee for a very long time ? consider the whole universe whereof thou art but a very little part and the whole age of the world together whereof but a short and very momentary portion be allot unto thee and all the fate and destinies together of which how much be it that come to thy part and share ! again another doth trespass against me . let him look to that . he be master of his own disposition and of his own operation . i for my part be in the meantime in possession of as much a the common nature would have me to possess and that which mine own nature would have me do i do . . let not that chief command part of thy soul be ever subject to any variation through any corporal either pain or pleasure neither suffer it to be mixed with these but let it both circumscribe itself and confine those affection to their own proper part and member . but if at any time they do reflect and rebound upon the mind and understanding a in an united and compact body it must need then must thou not go about to resist sense and feel it be natural . however let not thy understand to this natural sense and feeling which whether unto our flesh pleasant or painful be unto u nothing properly add an opinion of either good or bad and all be well . xxi . to live with the god . he liveth with the god who at all time affords unto them the spectacle of a soul both content and well pleased with whatsoever be afford or allot unto her and perform whatsoever be please to that spirit whom be part of himself jove hath appoint to every man a his overseer and governor . xxii . be not angry neither with him whose breath neither with him whose arm hole be offensive . what can he do ? such be his breath naturally and such be his arm hole and from such such an effect and such a smell must of necessity proceed . ' o but the man sayest thou hath understanding in him and might of himself know that he by stand near can not choose but offend . ' and thou also god bless thee ! hast understanding . let thy reasonable faculty work upon his reasonable faculty show him his fault admonish him . if he hearken unto thee thou hast cure him and there will be no more occasion of anger . xxiii . 'where there shall neither roarer be nor harlot . ' why so ? a thou dost purpose to live when thou hast retire thyself to some such place where neither roarer nor harlot be so mayest thou here . and if they will not suffer thee then mayest thou leave thy life rather than thy call but so a one that doth not think himself anyways wrong . only a one would say here be a smoke i will out of it . and what a great matter be this ! now till some such thing force me out i will continue free neither shall any man hinder me to do what i will and my will shall ever be by the proper nature of a reasonable and sociable creature regulate and direct . xxiv . that rational essence by which the universe be govern be for community and society and therefore hath it both make the thing that be bad for the best and hath ally and knit together those which be best a it be in an harmony . seest thou not how it hath sub ordinate and co ordinate ? and how it hath distribute unto everything accord to it worth ? and those which have the pre eminency and superiority above all hath it unite together into a mutual consent and agreement . . how hast thou carry thyself hitherto towards the god ? towards thy parent ? towards thy brother ? towards thy wife ? towards thy child ? towards thy master ? thy foster father ? thy friend ? thy domestic ? thy servant ? be it so with thee that hitherto thou hast neither by word or deed wrong any of them ? remember withal through how many thing thou hast already pass and how many thou hast be able to endure so that now the legend of thy life be full and thy charge be accomplish . again how many truly good thing have certainly by thee be discern ? how many pleasures how many pain hast thou pass over with contempt ? how many thing eternally glorious hast thou despise ? towards how many perverse unreasonable men hast thou carry thyself kindly and discreetly ? xxvi . why should imprudent unlearned soul trouble that which be both learned and prudent ? and which be that that be so ? she that understandeth the beginning and the end and hath the true knowledge of that rational essence that passeth through all thing subsist and through all age be ever the same disposing and dispensing a it be this universe by certain period of time . xxvii . within a very little while thou wilt be either ash or a sceletum and a name perchance and perchance not so much a a name . and what be that but an empty sound and a rebound echo ? those thing which in this life be dear unto u and of most account they be in themselves but vain putrid contemptible . the most weighty and serious if rightly esteem but a puppy bite one another or untoward child now laugh and then cry . a for faith and modesty and justice and truth they long since a one of the poet hath it have abandon this spacious earth and retire themselves unto heaven . what be it then that doth keep thee here if thing sensible be so mutable and unsettled ? and the sens so obscure and so fallible ? and our souls nothing but an exhalation of blood ? and to be in credit among such be but vanity ? what be it that thou dost stay for ? an extinction or a translation either of them with a propitious and contented mind . but still that time come what will content thee ? what else but to worship and praise the god and to do good unto men . to bear with them and to forbear to do them any wrong . and for all external thing belong either to this thy wretched body or life to remember that they be neither thine nor in thy power . xxviii . thou mayest always speed if thou wilt but make choice of the right way if in the course both of thine opinion and action thou wilt observe a true method . these two thing be common to the soul a of god so of men and of every reasonable creature first that in their own proper work they can not be hinder by anything and secondly that their happiness doth consist in a disposition to and in the practice of righteousness and that in these their desire be terminate . xxix . if this neither be my wicked act nor an act anyways depend from any wickedness of mine and that by it the public be not hurt what doth it concern me ? and wherein can the public be hurt ? for thou must not altogether be carry by conceit and common opinion a for help thou must afford that unto them after thy best ability and a occasion shall require though they sustain damage but in these middle or worldly thing but however do not thou conceive that they be truly hurt thereby for that be not right . but a that old foster father in the comedy be now to take his leave doth with a great deal of ceremony require his foster child 's rhombus or rattle top remembering nevertheless that it be but a rhombus so here also do thou likewise . for indeed what be all this pleading and public bawling for at the court ? o man hast thou forget what those thing be ! yea but they be thing that others much care for and highly esteem of . wilt thou therefore be a fool too ? once i be let that suffice . . let death surprise rue when it will and where it will i may be a happy man nevertheless . for he be a happy man who in his lifetime dealeth unto himself a happy lot and portion . a happy lot and portion be good inclination of the soul good desire good action . the sixth book i. the matter itself of which the universe doth consist be of itself very tractable and pliable . that rational essence that doth govern it hath in itself no cause to do evil . it hath no evil in itself neither can it do anything that be evil neither can anything be hurt by it . and all thing be do and determine accord to it will and prescript . ii . be it all one unto thee whether half frozen or well warm whether only slumber or after a full sleep whether discommended or commend thou do thy duty or whether die or do somewhat else for that also 'to die ' must among the rest be reckon a one of the duty and action of our life . iii . look in let not either the proper quality or the true worth of anything pas thee before thou hast fully apprehend it . iv . all substance come soon to their change and either they shall be resolve by way of exhalation if so be that all thing shall be reunite into one substance or a others maintain they shall be scatter and disperse . a for that rational essence by which all thing be govern a it best understandeth itself both it own disposition and what it doth and what matter it hath to do with and accordingly doth all thing so we that do not no wonder if we wonder at many thing the reason whereof we can not comprehend . . the best kind of revenge be not to become like unto them . vi . let this be thy only joy and thy only comfort from one sociable kind action without intermission to pass unto another god be ever in thy mind . vii . the rational commanding part a it alone can stir up and turn itself so it maketh both itself to be and everything that happeneth to appear unto itself a it will itself . viii . accord to the nature of the universe all thing particular be determine not accord to any other nature either about compassing and containing or within disperse and contain or without depend . either this universe be a mere confused mass and an intricate context of thing which shall in time be scatter and disperse again or it be an union consisting of order and administer by providence . if the first why should i desire to continue any longer in this fortuit confusion and commixtion ? or why should i take care for anything else but that as soon a may be i may be earth again ? and why should i trouble myself any more whilst i seek to please the god ? whatsoever i do dispersion be my end and will come upon me whether i will or no . but if the latter be then be not i religious in vain then will i be quiet and patient and put my trust in him who be the governor of all . ix . whensoever by some present hard occurrence thou art constrain to be in some sort trouble and vexed return unto thyself as soon a may be and be not out of tune long than thou must need . for so shalt thou be the good able to keep thy part another time and to maintain the harmony if thou dost use thyself to this continually once out presently to have recourse unto it and to begin again . . if it be that thou hadst at one time both a stepmother and a natural mother live thou wouldst honour and respect her also nevertheless to thine own natural mother would thy refuge and recourse be continually . so let the court and thy philosophy be unto thee . have recourse unto it often and comfort thyself in her by whom it be that those other thing be make tolerable unto thee and thou also in those thing not intolerable unto others . xi . how marvellous useful it be for a man to represent unto himself meat and all such thing that be for the mouth under a right apprehension and imagination ! a for example this be the carcass of a fish this of a bird and this of a hog . and again more generally this phalernum this excellent highly commended wine be but the bare juice of an ordinary grape . this purple robe but sheep 's hair dye with the blood of a shellfish . so for coitus it be but the attrition of an ordinary base entrail and the excretion of a little vile snivel with a certain kind of convulsion accord to hippocrates his opinion . how excellent useful be these lively fancy and representation of thing thus penetrate and pass through the object to make their true nature know and apparent ! this must thou use all thy life long and upon all occasion and then especially when matter be apprehend a of great worth and respect thy art and care must be to uncover them and to behold their vileness and to take away from them all those serious circumstance and expression under which they make so grave a show . for outward pomp and appearance be a great juggler and then especially art thou most in danger to be beguile by it when to a man 's think thou most seemest to be employ about matter of moment . xii . see what crate pronounceth concern xenocrates himself . xiii . those thing which the common sort of people do admire be most of them such thing a be very general and may be comprehend under thing merely natural or naturally affect and qualify a stone wood fig vines olive . those that be admire by them that be more moderate and restrain be comprehend under thing animate a flock and herd . those that be yet more gentle and curious their admiration be commonly confine to reasonable creature only not in general a they be reasonable but a they be capable of art or of some craft and subtile invention or perchance barely to reasonable creature a they that delight in the possession of many slave . but he that honour a reasonable soul in general a it be reasonable and naturally sociable doth little regard anything else and above all thing be careful to preserve his own in the continual habit and exercise both of reason and sociableness and thereby doth co operate with him of whose nature he doth also participate god . xiv . some thing hasten to be and others to be no more . and even whatsoever now be some part thereof hath already perish . perpetual flux and alteration renew the world a the perpetual course of time doth make the age of the world of itself infinite to appear always fresh and new . in such a flux and course of all thing what of these thing that hasten so fast away should any man regard since among all there be not any that a man may fasten and fix upon ? a if a man would settle his affection upon some ordinary sparrow living by him who be no sooner see than out of sight . for we must not think otherwise of our life than a a mere exhalation of blood or of an ordinary respiration of air . for what in our common apprehension be to breathe in the air and to breathe it out again which we do daily so much be it and no more at once to breathe out all thy respirative faculty into that common air from whence but lately a be but from yesterday and to day thou didst first breathe it in and with it life . . not vegetative spiration it be not surely which plant have that in this life should be so dear unto u nor sensitive respiration the proper life of beast both tame and wild nor this our imaginative faculty nor that we be subject to be lead and carry up and down by the strength of our sensual appetite or that we can gather and live together or that we can fee for that in effect be no good than that we can void the excrement of our food . what be it then that should be dear unto u ? to hear a clatter noise ? if not that then neither to be applaud by the tongue of men . for the praise of many tongue be in effect no good than the clattering of so many tongue . if then neither applause what be there remain that should be dear unto thee ? this i think that in all thy motion and action thou be move and restrain accord to thine own true natural constitution and construction only . and to this even ordinary art and profession do lead u . for it be that which every art doth aim at that whatsoever it be that be by art effect and prepare may be fit for that work that it be prepare for . this be the end that he that dresseth the vine and he that take upon him either to tame colt or to train up dog doth aim at . what else doth the education of child and all learn profession tend unto ? certainly then it be that which should be dear unto u also . if in this particular it go well with thee care not for the obtaining of other thing . but be it so that thou canst not but respect other thing also ? then canst not thou truly be free ? then canst thou not have self content then wilt thou ever be subject to passion . for it be not possible but that thou must be envious and jealous and suspicious of them whom thou knowest can bereave thee of such thing and again a secret underminer of them whom thou seest in present possession of that which be dear unto thee . to be short he must of necessity be full of confusion within himself and often accuse the god whosoever stand in need of these thing . but if thou shalt honour and respect thy mind only that will make thee acceptable towards thyself towards thy friend very tractable and conformable and concordant with the god that be accept with praise whatsoever they shall think good to appoint and allot unto thee . xvi . under above and about be the motion of the element but the motion of virtue be none of those motion but be somewhat more excellent and divine . whose way to speed and prosper in it must be through a way that be not easily comprehend . xvii . who can choose but wonder at them ? they will not speak well of them that be at the same time with them and live with them yet they themselves be very ambitious that they that shall follow whom they have never see nor shall ever see should speak well of them . a if a man should grieve that he hath not be commend by them that live before him . xviii . do not ever conceive anything impossible to man which by thee can not or not without much difficulty be effect but whatsoever in general thou canst conceive possible and proper unto any man think that very possible unto thee also . xix . suppose that at the palestra somebody hath all to tear thee with his nail and hath break thy head . well thou art wound . yet thou dost not exclaim thou art not offend with him . thou dost not suspect him for it afterwards a one that watcheth to do thee a mischief . yea even then though thou dost thy best to save thyself from him yet not from him a an enemy . it be not by way of any suspicious indignation but by way of gentle and friendly declination . keep the same mind and disposition in other part of thy life also . for many thing there be which we must conceit and apprehend a though we have have to do with an antagonist at the palestra . for a i say it be very possible for u to avoid and decline though we neither suspect nor hate . . if anybody shall reprove me and shall make it apparent unto me that in any either opinion or action of mine i do err i will most gladly retract . for it be the truth that i seek after by which i be sure that never any man be hurt and a sure that he be hurt that continueth in any error or ignorance whatsoever . xxi . i for my part will do what belong unto me a for other thing whether thing unsensible or thing irrational or if rational yet deceive and ignorant of the true way they shall not trouble or distract me . for a for those creature which be not endue with reason and all other thing and matter of the world whatsoever i freely and generously a one endued with reason of thing that have none make use of them . and a for men towards them a naturally partaker of the same reason my care be to carry myself sociably . but whatsoever it be that thou art about remember to call upon the god . and a for the time how long thou shalt live to do these thing let it be altogether indifferent unto thee for even three such hour be sufficient . xxii . alexander of macedon and he that dress his mule when once dead both come to one . for either they be both resume into those original rational essence from whence all thing in the world be propagate or both after one fashion be scatter into atom . xxiii consider how many different thing whether they concern our body or our soul in a moment of time come to pass in every one of u and so thou wilt not wonder if many more thing or rather all thing that be do can at one time subsist and coexist in that both one and general which we call the world . xxiv . if any should put this question unto thee how this word antoninus be write wouldst thou not presently fix thine intention upon it and utter out in order every letter of it ? and if any shall begin to gainsay thee and quarrel with thee about it wilt thou quarrel with him again or rather go on meekly a thou hast begin until thou hast number out every letter ? here then likewise remember that every duty that belong unto a man doth consist of some certain letter or number a it be to which without any noise or tumult keep thyself thou must orderly proceed to thy proposed end forbear to quarrel with him that would quarrel and fall out with thee . . be it not a cruel thing to forbid men to affect those thing which they conceive to agree best with their own nature and to tend most to their own proper good and behoof ? but thou after a sort deniest them this liberty as often a thou art angry with them for their sin . for surely they be lead unto those sin whatsoever they be a to their proper good and commodity . but it be not so thou wilt object perchance . thou therefore teach them well and make it appear unto them but be not thou angry with them . xxvi . death be a cessation from the impression of the sens the tyranny of the passion the error of the mind and the servitude of the body . xxvii . if in this kind of life thy body be able to hold out it be a shame that thy soul should faint first and give over take heed l of a philosopher thou become a mere caesar in time and receive a new tincture from the court . for it may happen if thou dost not take heed . keep thyself therefore truly simple good sincere grave free from all ostentation a lover of that which be just religious kind tender hearted strong and vigorous to undergo anything that become thee . endeavour to continue such a philosophy hadst thou wholly and constantly apply thyself unto it would have make and secure thee . worship the god procure the welfare of men this life be short . charitable action and a holy disposition be the only fruit of this earthly life . xxviii . do all thing a becometh the disciple of antoninus pius . remember his resolute constancy in thing that be do by him accord to reason his equability in all thing his sanctity the cheerfulness of his countenance his sweetness and how free he be from all vainglory how careful to come to the true and exact knowledge of matter in hand and how he would by no mean give over till he do fully and plainly understand the whole state of the business and how patiently and without any contestation he would bear with them that do unjustly condemn him how he would never be over hasty in anything nor give ear to slander and false accusation but examine and observe with best diligence the several action and disposition of men . again how he be no backbiter nor easily frighten nor suspicious and in his language free from all affectation and curiosity and how easily he would content himself with few thing a lodge bed clothing and ordinary nourishment and attendance . how able to endure labour how patient able through his spare diet to continue from morning to even without any necessity of withdraw before his accustomed hour to the necessity of nature his uniformity and constancy in matter of friendship . how he would bear with them that with all boldness and liberty oppose his opinion and even rejoice if any man could better advise him and lastly how religious he be without superstition . all these thing of him remember that whensoever thy last hour shall come upon thee it may find thee a it do him ready for it in the possession of a good conscience . xxix . stir up thy mind and recall thy wit again from thy natural dream and vision and when thou art perfectly awake and canst perceive that they be but dream that trouble thee a one newly awaken out of another kind of sleep look upon these worldly thing with the same mind a thou didst upon those that thou sawest in thy sleep . . i consist of body and soul . unto my body all thing be indifferent for of itself it can not affect one thing more than another with apprehension of any difference a for my mind all thing which be not within the verge of her own operation be indifferent unto her and for her own operation those altogether depend of her neither do she busy herself about any but those that be present for a for future and past operation those also be now at this present indifferent unto her . xxxi . as long a the foot doth that which belongeth unto it to do and the hand that which belong unto it their labour whatsoever it be be not unnatural . so a man as long a he doth that which be proper unto a man his labour can not be against nature and if it be not against nature then neither be it hurtful unto him . but if it be so that happiness do consist in pleasure how come notorious robber impure abominable liver parricide and tyrant in so large a measure to have their part of pleasure ? xxxii . dost thou not see how even those that profess mechanic art though in some respect they be no good than mere idiot yet they stick close to the course of their trade neither can they find in their heart to decline from it and be it not a grievous thing that an architect or a physician shall respect the course and mystery of their profession more than a man the proper course and condition of his own nature reason which be common to him and to the god ? xxxiii . asia europe what be they but a corner of the whole world of which the whole sea be but a one drop and the great mount athos but a a clod a all present time be but a one point of eternity . all petty thing all thing that be soon altered soon perish . and all thing come from one begin either all severally and particularly deliberate and resolve upon by the general ruler and governor of all or all by necessary consequence . so that the dreadful hiatus of a gaping lion and all poison and all hurtful thing be but a the thorn and the mire the necessary consequence of goodly fair thing . think not of these therefore a thing contrary to those which thou dost much honour and respect but consider in thy mind the true fountain of all . xxxiv he that seeth the thing that be now hath see all that either be ever or ever shall be for all thing be of one kind and all like one unto another . meditate often upon the connection of all thing in the world and upon the mutual relation that they have one unto another . for all thing be after a sort fold and involve one within another and by these mean all agree well together . for one thing be consequent unto another by local motion by natural conspiration and agreement and by substantial union or reduction of all substance into one . . fit and accommodate thyself to that estate and to those occurrence which by the destiny have be annex unto thee and love those men whom thy fate it be to live with but love them truly . an instrument a tool an utensil whatsoever it be if it be fit for the purpose it be make for it be a it should be though he perchance that make and fit it be out of sight and go . but in thing natural that power which hath frame and fit them be and abideth within them still for which reason she ought also the more to be respect and we be the more obliged if we may live and pass our time accord to her purpose and intention to think that all be well with u and accord to our own mind . after this manner also and in this respect it be that he that be all in all doth enjoy his happiness . xxxvi . what thing soever be not within the proper power and jurisdiction of thine own will either to compass or avoid if thou shalt propose unto thyself any of those thing a either good or evil it must needs be that accord a thou shalt either fall into that which thou dost think evil or miss of that which thou dost think good so wilt thou be ready both to complain of the god and to hate those men who either shall be so indeed or shall by thee be suspect a the cause either of thy missing of the one or fall into the other . and indeed we must need commit many evil if we incline to any of these thing more or less with an opinion of any difference . but if we mind and fancy those thing only as good and bad which wholly depend of our own will there be no more occasion why we should either murmur against the god or be at enmity with any man . xxxvii . we all work to one effect some willingly and with a rational apprehension of what we do others without any such knowledge . a i think heraclitus in a place speaketh of them that sleep that even they do work in their kind and do confer to the general operation of the world . one man therefore doth co operate after one sort and another after another sort but even he that doth murmur and to his power doth resist and hinder even he as much a any doth co operate . for of such also do the world stand in need . now do thou consider among which of these thou wilt rank thyself . for a for him who be the administrator of all he will make good use of thee whether thou wilt or no and make thee a a part and member of the whole so to co operate with him that whatsoever thou doest shall turn to the furtherance of his own counsel and resolution . but be not thou for shame such a part of the whole a that vile and ridiculous verse which chrysippus in a place doth mention be a part of the comedy . xxxviii . doth either the sun take upon him to do that which belong to the rain ? or his son aesculapius that which unto the earth doth properly belong ? how be it with every one of the star in particular ? though they all differ one from another and have their several charge and function by themselves do they not all nevertheless concur and co operate to one end ? xxxix . if so be that the god have deliberate in particular of those thing that should happen unto me i must stand to their deliberation a discrete and wise . for that a god should be an imprudent god be a thing hard even to conceive and why should they resolve to do me hurt ? for what profit either unto them or the universe which they specially take care for could arise from it ? but if so be that they have not deliberate of me in particular certainly they have of the whole in general and those thing which in consequence and coherence of this general deliberation happen unto me in particular i be bind to embrace and accept of . but if so be that they have not deliberate at all which indeed be very irreligious for any man to believe for then let u neither sacrifice nor pray nor respect our oath neither let u any more use any of those thing which we persuade of the presence and secret conversation of the god among u daily use and practise but i say if so be that they have not indeed either in general or particular deliberate of any of those thing that happen unto u in this world yet god be thank that of those thing that concern myself it be lawful for me to deliberate myself and all my deliberation be but concern that which may be to me most profitable . now that unto every one be most profitable which be accord to his own constitution and nature . and my nature be to be rational in all my action and a a good and natural member of a city and commonwealth towards my fellow member ever to be sociably and kindly dispose and affect . my city and country a i be antoninus be rome a a man the whole world . those thing therefore that be expedient and profitable to those city be the only thing that be good and expedient for me . . whatsoever in any kind doth happen to any one be expedient to the whole . and thus much to content u might suffice that it be expedient for the whole in general . but yet this also shalt thou generally perceive if thou dost diligently take heed that whatsoever doth happen to any one man or men ... . and now i be content that the word expedient should more generally be understood of those thing which we otherwise call middle thing or thing indifferent a health wealth and the like . xli . a the ordinary show of the theatre and of other such place when thou art present with them affect thee a the same thing still see and in the same fashion make the sight ingrateful and tedious so must all the thing that we see all our life long affect u . for all thing above and below be still the same and from the same cause . when then will there be an end ? xlii . let the several death of men of all sort and of all sort of profession and of all sort of nation be a perpetual object of thy thought ... so that thou mayst even come down to philistio phoebus and origanion . pas now to other generation . thither shall we after many change where so many brave orator be where so many grave philosopher heraclitus pythagoras socrates . where so many hero of the old time and then so many brave captain of the latter time and so many king . after all these where eudoxus hipparchus archimedes where so many other sharp generous industrious subtile peremptory disposition and among others even they that have be the great scoffer and deriders of the frailty and brevity of this our human life a menippus and others as many a there have be such a he . of all these consider that they long since be all dead and go . and what do they suffer by it ! nay they that have not so much a a name remain what be they the bad for it ? one thing there be and that only which be worth our while in this world and ought by u much to be esteem and that be accord to truth and righteousness meekly and lovingly to converse with false and unrighteous men . xliii . when thou wilt comfort and cheer thyself call to mind the several gift and virtue of them whom thou dost daily converse with a for example the industry of the one the modesty of another the liberality of a third of another some other thing . for nothing can so much rejoice thee a the resemblance and parallel of several virtue visible and eminent in the disposition of those who live with thee especially when all at once as near a may be they represent themselves unto thee . and therefore thou must have them always in a readiness . xliv . dost thou grieve that thou dost weigh but so many pound and not three hundred rather ? just as much reason hast thou to grieve that thou must live but so many year and not longer . for a for bulk and substance thou dost content thyself with that proportion of it that be allot unto thee so shouldst thou for time . . let u do our best endeavour to persuade them but however if reason and justice lead thee to it do it though they be never so much against it . but if any shall by force withstand thee and hinder thee in it convert thy virtuous inclination from one object unto another from justice to content equanimity and cheerful patience so that what in the one be thy hindrance thou mayst make use of it for the exercise of another virtue and remember that it be with due exception and reservation that thou didst at first incline and desire . for thou didst not set thy mind upon thing impossible . upon what then ? that all thy desire might ever be moderate with this due kind of reservation . and this thou hast and mayst always obtain whether the thing desire be in thy power or no . and what do i care for more if that for which i be bear and bring forth into the world to rule all my desire with reason and discretion may be ? xlvi . the ambitious supposeth another man 's act praise and applause to be his own happiness the voluptuous his own sense and feeling but he that be wise his own action . xlvii . it be in thy power absolutely to exclude all manner of conceit and opinion a concern this matter and by the same mean to exclude all grief and sorrow from thy soul . for a for the thing and object themselves they of themselves have no such power whereby to beget and force upon u any opinion at all . xlviii . use thyself when any man speak unto thee so to hearken unto him a that in the interim thou give not way to any other thought that so thou mayst as far a be possible seem fix and fasten to his very soul whosoever he be that speak unto thee . xlix . that which be not good for the bee hive can not be good for the bee . . will either passenger or patient find fault and complain either the one if they be well carry or the others if well cure ? do they take care for any more than this the one that their shipmaster may bring them safe to land and the other that their physician may effect their recovery ? li . how many of them who come into the world at the same time when i do be already go out of it ? lii . to them that be sick of the jaundice honey seem bitter and to them that be bite by a mad dog the water terrible and to child a little ball seem a fine thing . and why then should i be angry ? or do i think that error and false opinion be less powerful to make men transgress than either choler be immoderate and excessive to cause the jaundice or poison to cause rage ? liii . no man can hinder thee to live a thy nature doth require . nothing can happen unto thee but what the common good of nature doth require . liv . what manner of men they be whom they seek to please and what to get and by what action how soon time will cover and bury all thing and how many it hath already bury ! the seventh book i. what be wickedness ? it be that which many time and often thou hast already see and know in the world . and so oft a anything doth happen that might otherwise trouble thee let this memento presently come to thy mind that it be that which thou hast already often see and know . generally above and below thou shalt find but the same thing . the very same thing whereof ancient story middle age story and fresh story be full whereof town be full and house full . there be nothing that be new . all thing that be be both usual and of little continuance . ii . what fear be there that thy dogma or philosophical resolution and conclusion should become dead in thee and lose their proper power and efficacy to make thee live happy as long a those proper and correlative fancy and representation of thing on which they mutually depend which continually to stir up and revive be in thy power be still keep fresh and alive ? it be in my power concern this thing that be happen what soever it be to conceit that which be right and true . if it be why then be i troubled ? those thing that be without my understanding be nothing to it at all and that be it only which doth properly concern me . be always in this mind and thou wilt be right . iii . that which most men would think themselves most happy for and would prefer before all thing if the god would grant it unto them after their death thou mayst whilst thou liv grant unto thyself to live again . see the thing of the world again a thou hast already see them . for what be it else to live again ? public show and solemnity with much pomp and vanity stage play flock and herd conflict and contention a bone thrown to a company of hungry cur a bait for greedy fish the painfulness and continual burden bearing of wretched ant the running to and fro of terrified mouse little puppet draw up and down with wire and nerve these be the object of the world among all these thou must stand steadfast meekly affect and free from all manner of indignation with this right ratiocination and apprehension that a the worth be of those thing which a man doth affect so be in very deed every man 's worth more or less . iv . word after word every one by itself must the thing that be speak be conceive and understood and so the thing that be do purpose after purpose every one by itself likewise . and a in matter of purpose and action we must presently see what be the proper use and relation of every one so of word must we be a ready to consider of every one what be the true meaning and signification of it accord to truth and nature however it be take in common use . . be my reason and understanding sufficient for this or no ? if it be sufficient without any private applause or public ostentation a of an instrument which by nature i be provide of i will make use of it for the work in hand a of an instrument which by nature i be provide of . if it be not and that otherwise it belong not unto me particularly a a private duty i will either give it over and leave it to some other that can better effect it or i will endeavour it but with the help of some other who with the joint help of my reason be able to bring somewhat to pass that will now be seasonable and useful for the common good . for whatsoever i do either by myself or with some other the only thing that i must intend be that it be good and expedient for the public . for a for praise consider how many who once be much commend be now already quite forget yea they that commend them how even they themselves be long since dead and go . be not therefore ashamed whensoever thou must use the help of others . for whatsoever it be that lieth upon thee to effect thou must propose it unto thyself a the scaling of wall be unto a soldier . and what if thou through either lameness or some other impediment art not able to reach unto the top of the battlement alone which with the help of another thou mayst wilt thou therefore give it over or go about it with less courage and alacrity because thou canst not effect it all alone ? vi . let not thing future trouble thee . for if necessity so require that they come to pass thou shalt whensoever that be be provide for them with the same reason by which whatsoever be now present be make both tolerable and acceptable unto thee . all thing be link and knit together and the knot be sacred neither be there anything in the world that be not kind and natural in regard of any other thing or that hath not some kind of reference and natural correspondence with whatsoever be in the world besides . for all thing be rank together and by that decency of it due place and order that each particular doth observe they all concur together to the making of one and the same kosmos ed or world a if you say a comely piece or an orderly composition . for all thing throughout there be but one and the same order and through all thing one and the same god the same substance and the same law . there be one common reason and one common truth that belong unto all reasonable creature for neither be there save one perfection of all creature that be of the same kind and partaker of the same reason . vii . whatsoever be material doth soon vanish away into the common substance of the whole and whatsoever be formal or whatsoever doth animate that which be material be soon resume into the common reason of the whole and the fame and memory of anything be soon swallow up by the general age and duration of the whole . viii . to a reasonable creature the same action be both accord to nature and accord to reason . ix . straight of itself not make straight . . a several member in one body unite so be reasonable creature in a body divide and disperse all make and prepare for one common operation . and this thou shalt apprehend the good if thou shalt use thyself often to say to thyself i be meloz or a member of the mass and body of reasonable substance . but if thou shalt say i be meroz or a part thou dost not yet love men from thy heart . the joy that thou takest in the exercise of bounty be not yet ground upon a due ratiocination and right apprehension of the nature of thing . thou dost exercise it a yet upon this ground barely a a thing convenient and fit not a do good to thyself when thou dost good unto others . xi . of thing that be external happen what will to that which can suffer by external accident . those thing that suffer let them complain themselves if they will a for me as long a i conceive no such thing that that which be happen be evil i have no hurt and it be in my power not to conceive any such thing . xii . whatsoever any man either doth or saith thou must be good not for any man 's sake but for thine own nature 's sake a if either gold or the emerald or purple should ever be say to themselves whatsoever any man either doth or saith i must still be an emerald and i must keep my colour . xiii . this may ever be my comfort and security my understanding that ruleth over all will not of itself bring trouble and vexation upon itself . this i say it will not put itself in any fear it will not lead itself into any concupiscence . if it be in the power of any other to compel it to fear or to grieve it be free for him to use his power . but sure if itself do not of itself through some false opinion or supposition incline itself to any such disposition there be no fear . for a for the body why should i make the grief of my body to be the grief of my mind ? if that itself can either fear or complain let it . but a for the soul which indeed can only be truly sensible of either fear or grief to which only it belong accord to it different imagination and opinion to admit of either of these or of their contrary thou mayst look to that thyself that it suffer nothing . induce her not to any such opinion or persuasion . the understanding be of itself sufficient unto itself and need not if itself doth not bring itself to need any other thing besides itself and by consequent a it need nothing so neither can it be trouble or hinder by anything if itself doth not trouble and hinder itself . xiv . what be rv nflovia or happiness but a o d wv or a good da rnon or spirit ? what then dost thou do here o opinion ? by the god i adjure thee that thou get thee go a thou earnest for i need thee not . thou earnest indeed unto me accord to thy ancient wonted manner . it be that that all men have ever be subject unto . that thou camest therefore i be not angry with thee only begone now that i have find thee what thou art . . be any man so foolish a to fear change to which all thing that once be not owe their be ? and what be it that be more pleasing and more familiar to the nature of the universe ? how couldst thou thyself use thy ordinary hot bath should not the wood that heateth them first be change ? how couldst thou receive any nourishment from those thing that thou hast eat if they should not be change ? can anything else almost that be useful and profitable be bring to pass without change ? how then dost not thou perceive that for thee also by death to come to change be a thing of the very same nature and a necessary for the nature of the universe ? xvi . through the substance of the universe a through a torrent pas all particular body be all of the same nature and all joint worker with the universe itself a in one of our body so many member among themselves . how many such a chrysippus how many such a socrates how many such a epictetus hath the age of the world long since swallow up and devour ? let this be it either men or business that thou hast occasion to think of to the end that thy thought be not distract and thy mind too earnestly set upon anything upon every such occasion presently come to thy mind . of all my thought and care one only thing shall be the object that i myself do nothing which to the proper constitution of man either in regard of the thing itself or in regard of the manner or of the time of do be contrary . the time when thou shalt have forget all thing be at hand . and that time also be at hand when thou thyself shalt be forget by all . whilst thou art apply thyself to that especially which unto man a he be a mart be most proper and agreeable and that be for a man even to love them that transgress against him . this shall be if at the same time that any such thing doth happen thou call to mind that they be thy kinsman that it be through ignorance and against their will that they sin and that within a very short while after both thou and he shall be no more . but above all thing that he hath not do thee any hurt for that by him thy mind and understanding be not make bad or more vile than it be before . xvii . the nature of the universe of the common substance of all thing a it be of so much wax hath now perchance form a horse and then destroy that figure hath new temper and fashion the matter of it into the form and substance of a tree then that again into the form and substance of a man and then that again into some other . now every one of these doth subsist but for a very little while . a for dissolution if it be no grievous thing to the chest or trunk to be join together why should it be more grievous to be put asunder ? xviii . an angry countenance be much against nature and it be oftentimes the proper countenance of them that be at the point of death . but be it so that all anger and passion be so thoroughly quench in thee that it be altogether impossible to kindle it any more yet herein must not thou rest satisfy but far endeavour by good consequence of true ratiocination perfectly to conceive and understand that all anger and passion be against reason . for if thou shalt not be sensible of thine innocence if that also shall be go from thee the comfort of a good conscience that thou doest all thing accord to reason what shouldest thou live any long for ? all thing that now thou seest be but for a moment . that nature by which all thing in the world be administer will soon bring change and alteration upon them and then of their substance make other thing like unto them and then soon after others again of the matter and substance of these that so by these mean the world may still appear fresh and new . xix . whensoever any man doth trespass against other presently consider with thyself what it be that he do suppose to be good what to be evil when he do trespass . for this when thou knowest thou wilt pity him thou wilt have no occasion either to wonder or to be angry . for either thou thyself dust yet live in that error and ignorance a that thou dust suppose either that very thing that he doth or some other like worldly thing to be good and so thou art bound to pardon him if he have do that which thou in the like case wouldst have do thyself . or if so be that thou dost not any more suppose the same thing to be good or evil that he doth how canst thou but be gentle unto him that be in an error ? . fancy not to thyself thing future a though they be present but of those that be present take some aside that thou takest most benefit of and consider of them particularly how wonderfully thou wouldst want them if they be not present . but take heed withal l that whilst thou dust settle thy contentment in thing present thou grow in time so to overprize them a that the want of them whensoever it shall so fall out should be a trouble and a vexation unto thee . wind up thyself into thyself . such be the nature of thy reasonable command part a that if it exercise justice and have by that mean tranquillity within itself it doth rest fully satisfy with itself without any other thing . xxi . wipe off all opinion stay the force and violence of unreasonable lust and affection circumscribe the present time examine whatsoever it be that be happen either to thyself or to another divide all present object either in that which be formal or material think of the last hour . that which thy neighbour hath commit where the guilt of it lieth there let it rest . examine in order whatsoever be speak . let thy mind penetrate both into the effect and into the cause . rejoice thyself with true simplicity and modesty and that all middle thing between virtue and vice be indifferent unto thee . finally love mankind obey god . xxii . all thing saith he be by certain order and appointment . and what if the element only . it will suffice to remember that all thing in general be by certain order and appointment or if it be but few . and a concern death that either dispersion or the atom or annihilation or extinction or translation will ensue . and a concern pain that that which be intolerable be soon end by death and that which hold long must needs be tolerable and that the mind in the meantime which be all in all may by way of interclusion or interception by stop all manner of commerce and sympathy with the body still retain it own tranquillity . thy understanding be not make worse by it . a for those part that suffer let them if they can declare their grief themselves . a for praise and commendation view their mind and understand what estate they be in what kind of thing they fly and what thing they seek after and that as in the seaside whatsoever be before to be see be by the continual succession of new heap of sand cast up one upon another soon hid and cover so in this life all former thing by those which immediately succeed . xxiii . out of plato . 'he then whose mind be endow with true magnanimity who hath accustom himself to the contemplation both of all time and of all thing in general can this mortal life thinkest thou seem any great matter unto him ? it be not possible answer he . then neither will such a one account death a grievous thing ? by no mean . ' xxiv . out of antisthenes . 'it be a princely thing to do well and to be ill speak of . it be a shameful thing that the face should be subject unto the mind to be put into what shape it will and to be dress by it a it will and that the mind should not bestow so much care upon herself a to fashion herself and to dress herself a best becometh her . ' . out of several poet and comic . 'it will but little avail thee to turn thine anger and indignation upon the thing themselves that have fall across unto thee . for a for them they be not sensible of it c. thou shalt but make thyself a laugh stock both unto the god and men c. our life be reap like a ripe ear of corn one be yet stand and another be down c. but if so be that i and my child be neglect by the god there be some reason even for that c. as long a right and equity be of my side c. not to lament with them not to tremble c. ' xxvi . out of plato . 'my answer full of justice and equity should be this thy speech be not right o man ! if thou supposest that he that be of any worth at all should apprehend either life or death a a matter of great hazard and danger and should not make this rather his only care to examine his own action whether just or unjust whether action of a good or of a wicked man c. for thus in very truth stand the case o ye men of athens . what place or station soever a man either hath chosen to himself judge it best for himself or be by lawful authority put and settle in therein do i think all appearance of danger notwithstanding that he should continue a one who feareth neither death nor anything else so much a he feareth to commit anything that be vicious and shameful c. but o noble sir consider i pray whether true generosity and true happiness do not consist in somewhat else rather than in the preservation either of our or other men 's life . for it be not the part of a man that be a man indeed to desire to live long or to make much of his life whilst he liveth but rather he that be such will in these thing wholly refer himself unto the god and believe that which every woman can tell him that no man can escape death the only thing that he take thought and care for be this that what time he liveth he may live as well and as virtuously a he can possibly c. to look about and with the eye to follow the course of the star and planet a though thou wouldst run with them and to mind perpetually the several change of the element one into another . for such fancy and imagination help much to purge away the dross and filth of this our earthly life ' c. that also be a fine passage of plato 's where he speaketh of worldly thing in these word 'thou must also a from some high place look down a it be upon the thing of this world a flock army husbandmen 's labours marriage divorce generation deaths the tumult of court and place of judicature desert place the several nation of barbarian public festival mourning fair market . ' how all thing upon earth be pell mell and how miraculously thing contrary one to another concur to the beauty and perfection of this universe . xxvii . to look back upon thing of former age a upon the manifold change and conversion of several monarchy and commonwealth . we may also foresee thing future for they shall all be of the same kind neither be it possible that they should leave the tune or break the concert that be now begin a it be by these thing that be now do and bring to pass in the world . it come all to one therefore whether a man be a spectator of the thing of this life but forty year or whether he see them ten thousand year together for what shall he see more ? 'and a for those part that come from the earth they shall return unto the earth again and those that come from heaven they also shall return unto those heavenly place . ' whether it be a mere dissolution and unbinding of the manifold intricacy and entanglement of the confused atom or some such dispersion of the simple and incorruptible element ... 'with meat and drink and diver charm they seek to divert the channel that they might not die . yet must we need endure that blast of wind that cometh from above though we toil and labour never so much . ' xxviii . he hath a strong body and be a good wrestler than i. what then ? be he more bountiful ? be he more modest ? doth he bear all adverse chance with more equanimity or with his neighbour 's offence with more meekness and gentleness than i ? xxix . where the matter may be effect agreeably to that reason which both unto the god and men be common there can be no just cause of grief or sorrow . for where the fruit and benefit of an action well begin and prosecute accord to the proper constitution of man may be reap and obtain or be sure and certain it be against reason that any damage should there be suspect . in all place and at all time it be in thy power religiously to embrace whatsoever by god 's appointment be happen unto thee and justly to converse with those men whom thou hast to do with and accurately to examine every fancy that present itself that nothing may slip and steal in before thou hast rightly apprehend the true nature of it . . look not about upon other men 's mind and understanding but look right on forward whither nature both that of the universe in those thing that happen unto thee and thine in particular in those thing that be do by thee doth lead and direct thee . now every one be bind to do that which be consequent and agreeable to that end which by his true natural constitution he be ordain unto . a for all other thing they be ordain for the use of reasonable creature a in all thing we see that that which be bad and inferior be make for that which be well . reasonable creature they be ordain one for another . that therefore which be chief in every man 's constitution be that he intend the common good . the second be that he yield not to any lust and motion of the flesh . for it be the part and privilege of the reasonable and intellective faculty that she can so bind herself a that neither the sensitive nor the appetitive faculty may not anyways prevail upon her . for both these be brutish . and therefore over both she challengeth mastery and can not anyways endure if in her right temper to be subject unto either . and this indeed most justly . for by nature she be ordain to command all in the body . the third thing proper to man by his constitution be to avoid all rashness and precipitancy and not to be subject to error . to these thing then let the mind apply herself and go straight on without any distraction about other thing and she hath her end and by consequent her happiness . xxxi . a one who have live and be now to die by right whatsoever be yet remain bestow that wholly a a gracious overplus upon a virtuous life . love and affect that only whatsoever it be that happeneth and be by the fate appoint unto thee . for what can be more reasonable ? and a anything doth happen unto thee by way of cross or calamity call to mind presently and set before thine eye the example of some other men to whom the self same thing do once happen likewise . well what do they ? they grieve they wonder they complain . and where be they now ? all dead and go . wilt thou also be like one of them ? or rather leave to men of the world whose life both in regard of themselves and them that they converse with be nothing but mere mutability or men of a fickle mind a fickle body ever change and soon change themselves let it be thine only care and study how to make a right use of all such accident . for there be good use to be make of them and they will prove fit matter for thee to work upon if it shall be both thy care and thy desire that whatsoever thou doest thou thyself mayst like and approve thyself for it . and both these see that thou remember well accord a the diversity of the matter of the action that thou art about shall require . look within within be the fountain of all good . such a fountain where spring water can never fail so thou dig still deep and deep . xxxii . thou must use thyself also to keep thy body fix and steady free from all loose fluctuant either motion or posture . and a upon thy face and look thy mind hath easily power over them to keep them to that which be grave and decent so let it challenge the same power over the whole body also . but so observe all thing in this kind a that it be without any manner of affectation . xxxiii . the art of true living in this world be more like a wrestler 's than a dancer 's practice . for in this they both agree to teach a man whatsoever fall upon him that he may be ready for it and that nothing may cast him down . xxxiv . thou must continually ponder and consider with thyself what manner of men they be and for their mind and understanding what be their present estate whose good word and testimony thou dost desire . for then neither wilt thou see cause to complain of them that offend against their will or find any want of their applause if once thou dost but penetrate into the true force and ground both of their opinion and of their desire . 'no soul saith he be willingly bereft of the truth ' and by consequent neither of justice or temperance or kindness and mildness nor of anything that be of the same kind . it be most needful that thou shouldst always remember this . for so shalt thou be far more gentle and moderate towards all men . . what pain soever thou art in let this presently come to thy mind that it be not a thing whereof thou needest to be ashamed neither be it a thing whereby thy understanding that hath the government of all can be make bad . for neither in regard of the substance of it nor in regard of the end of it which be to intend the common good can it alter and corrupt it . this also of epicurus mayst thou in most pain find some help of that it be 'neither intolerable nor eternal ' so thou keep thyself to the true bound and limit of reason and give not way to opinion . this also thou must consider that many thing there be which oftentimes unsensibly trouble and vex thee a not arm against them with patience because they go not ordinarily under the name of pain which in very deed be of the same nature as pain a to slumber unquietly to suffer heat to want appetite when therefore any of these thing make thee discontent check thyself with these word now hath pain give thee the foil thy courage hath fail thee . xxxvi . take heed l at any time thou stand so affected though towards unnatural evil men a ordinary men be commonly one towards another . xxxvii . how know we whether socrates be so eminent indeed and of so extraordinary a disposition ? for that he die more gloriously that he dispute with the sophist more subtilty that he watch in the frost more assiduously that be command to fetch innocent salaminius he refuse to do it more generously all this will not serve . nor that he walk in the street with much gravity and majesty a be object unto him by his adversary which nevertheless a man may well doubt of whether it be so or no or which above all the rest if so be that it be true a man would well consider of whether commendable or dis commendable . the thing therefore that we must inquire into be this what manner of soul socrates have whether his disposition be such a that all that he stand upon and sought after in this world be barely this that he might ever carry himself justly towards men and holily towards the god . neither vex himself to no purpose at the wickedness of others nor yet ever condescend to any man 's evil fact or evil intention through either fear or engagement of friendship . whether of those thing that happen unto him by god 's appointment he neither do wonder at any when it do happen or think it intolerable in the trial of it . and lastly whether he never do suffer his mind to sympathise with the sens and affection of the body . for we must not think that nature hath so mixed and temper it with the body a that she hath not power to circumscribe herself and by herself to intend her own end and occasion . xxxviii . for it be a thing very possible that a man should be a very divine man and yet be altogether unknown . this thou must ever be mindful of a of this also that a man 's true happiness doth consist in very few thing . and that although thou dost despair that thou shalt ever be a good either logician or naturalist yet thou art never the further off by it from be either liberal or modest or charitable or obedient unto god . xxxix . free from all compulsion in all cheerfulness and alacrity thou mayst run out thy time though men should exclaim against thee never so much and the wild beast should pull in sunder the poor member of thy pampered mass of flesh . for what in either of these or the like case should hinder the mind to retain her own rest and tranquillity consist both in the right judgment of those thing that happen unto her and in the ready use of all present matter and occasion ? so that her judgment may say to that which be befall her by way of cross this thou art in very deed and accord to thy true nature notwithstanding that in the judgment of opinion thou dust appear otherwise and her discretion to the present object thou art that which i seek for . for whatsoever it be that be now present shall ever be embrace by me a a fit and seasonable object both for my reasonable faculty and for my sociable or charitable inclination to work upon . and that which be principal in this matter be that it may be refer either unto the praise of god or to the good of men . for either unto god or man whatsoever it be that doth happen in the world hath in the ordinary course of nature it proper reference neither be there anything that in regard of nature be either new or reluctant and intractable but all thing both usual and easy . . then hath a man attain to the estate of perfection in his life and conversation when he so spend every day a if it be his last day never hot and vehement in his affection nor yet so cold and stupid a one that have no sense and free from all manner of dissimulation . xli . can the god who be immortal for the continuance of so many age bear without indignation with such and so many sinner a have ever be yea not only so but also take such care for them that they want nothing and dust thou so grievously take on a one that could bear with them no longer thou that art but for a moment of time ? yea thou that art one of those sinner thyself ? a very ridiculous thing it be that any man should dispense with vice and wickedness in himself which be in his power to restrain and should go about to suppress it in others which be altogether impossible . xlii . what object soever our reasonable and sociable faculty doth meet with that affords nothing either for the satisfaction of reason or for the practice of charity she worthily doth think unworthy of herself . xliii . when thou hast do well and another be benefit by thy action must thou like a very fool look for a third thing besides a that it may appear unto others also that thou hast do well or that thou mayest in time receive one good turn for another ? no man useth to be weary of that which be beneficial unto him . but every action accord to nature be beneficial . be not weary then of do that which be beneficial unto thee whilst it be so unto others . xliv . the nature of the universe do once certainly before it be create whatsoever it hath do since deliberate and so resolve upon the creation of the world . now since that time whatsoever it be that be and happen in the world be either but a consequent of that one and first deliberation or if so be that this rule rational part of the world take any thought and care of thing particular they be surely his reasonable and principal creature that be the proper object of his particular care and providence . this often think upon will much conduce to thy tranquillity . the eighth book i. this also among other thing may serve to keep thee from vainglory if thou shalt consider that thou art now altogether incapable of the commendation of one who all his life long or from his youth at least hath live a philosopher 's life . for both unto others and to thyself especially it be well know that thou hast do many thing contrary to that perfection of life . thou hast therefore be confound in thy course and henceforth it will be hard for thee to recover the title and credit of a philosopher . and to it also be thy call and profession repugnant . if therefore thou dost truly understand what it be that be of moment indeed a for thy fame and credit take no thought or care for that let it suffice thee if all the rest of thy life be it more or less thou shalt live a thy nature requireth or accord to the true and natural end of thy making . take pain therefore to know what it be that thy nature requireth and let nothing else distract thee . thou hast already have sufficient experience that of those many thing that hitherto thou hast err and wander about thou couldst not find happiness in any of them . not in syllogism and logical subtilties not in wealth not in honour and reputation not in pleasure . in none of all these . wherein then be it to be find ? in the practice of those thing which the nature of man a he be a man doth require . how then shall he do those thing ? if his dogma or moral tenet and opinion from which all motion and action do proceed be right and true . which be those dogma ? those that concern that which be good or evil a that there be nothing truly good and beneficial unto man but that which make him just temperate courageous liberal and that there be nothing truly evil and hurtful unto man but that which causeth the contrary effect . ii . upon every action that thou art about put this question to thyself how will this when it be do agree with me ? shall i have no occasion to repent of it ? yet a very little while and i be dead and go and all thing be at end . what then do i care for more than this that my present action whatsoever it be may be the proper action of one that be reasonable whose end be the common good who in all thing be rule and govern by the same law of right and reason by which god himself be . iii . alexander caius pompeius what be these to diogenes heraclitus and socrates ? these penetrate into the true nature of thing into all cause and all subject and upon these do they exercise their power and authority . but a for those a the extent of their error be so far do their slavery extend . iv . what they have do they will still do although thou shouldst hang thyself . first let it not trouble thee . for all thing both good and evil come to pass accord to the nature and general condition of the universe and within a very little while all thing will be at an end no man will be remember a now of africanus for example and augustus it be already come to pass . then secondly fix thy mind upon the thing itself look into it and remember thyself that thou art bound nevertheless to be a good man and what it be that thy nature requireth of thee a thou art a man be not divert from what thou art about and speak that which seemeth unto thee most just only speak it kindly modestly and without hypocrisy . . that which the nature of the universe doth busy herself about be that which be here to transfer it thither to change it and thence again to take it away and to carry it to another place . so that thou needest not fear any new thing . for all thing be usual and ordinary and all thing be dispose by equality . vi . every particular nature hath content when in it own proper course it speed . a reasonable nature doth then speed when first in matter of fancy and imagination it give no consent to that which be either false uncertain . secondly when in all it motion and resolution it take it level at the common good only and that it desireth nothing and flieth from nothing bet what be in it own power to compass or avoid . and lastly when it willingly and gladly embraceth whatsoever be dealt and appoint unto it by the common nature . for it be part of it even a the nature of any one leaf be part of the common nature of all plant and tree . but that the nature of a leaf be part of a nature both unreasonable and unsensible and which in it proper end may be hinder or which be servile and slavish whereas the nature of man be part of a common nature which can not be hinder and which be both reasonable and just . from whence also it be that accord ing to the worth of everything she doth make such equal distribution of all thing a of duration substance form operation and of event and accident . but herein consider not whether thou shalt find this equality in everything absolutely and by itself but whether in all the particular of some one thing take together and compare with all the particular of some other thing and them together likewise . vii . thou hast no time nor opportunity to read . what then ? hast thou not time and opportunity to exercise thyself not to wrong thyself to strive against all carnal pleasure and pain and to aet the upper hand of them to contemn honour and vainglory and not only not to be angry with them whom towards thee thou doest find unsensible and unthankful but also to have a care of them still and of their welfare ? viii . forbear henceforth to complain of the trouble of a courtly life either in public before others or in private by thyself . ix . repentance be an inward and self reprehension for the neglect or omission of somewhat that be profitable . now whatsoever be good be also profitable and it be the part of an honest virtuous man to set by it and to make reckoning of it accordingly . but never do any honest virtuous man repent of the neglect or omission of any carnal pleasure no carnal pleasure then be either good or profitable . . this what be it in itself and by itself accord to it proper constitution ? what be the substance of it ? what be the matter or proper use ? what be the form or efficient cause ? what be it for in this world and how long will it abide ? thus must thou examine all thing that present themselves unto thee . xi . when thou art hard to be stir up and awake out of thy sleep admonish thyself and call to mind that to perform action tend to the common good be that which thine own proper constitution and that which the nature of man do require . but to sleep be common to unreasonable creature also . and what more proper and natural yea what more kind and pleasing than that which be accord to nature ? xii . a every fancy and imagination present itself unto thee consider if it be possible the true nature and the proper quality of it and reason with thyself about it . xiii . at thy first encounter with any one say presently to thyself this man what be his opinion concern that which be good or evil ? a concern pain pleasure and the cause of both concern honour and dishonour concern life and death ? thus and thus . now if it be no wonder that a man should have such and such opinion how can it be a wonder that he should do such and such thing ? i will remember then that he can not but do a he doth hold those opinion that he doth . remember that a it be a shame for any man to wonder that a fig tree should bear fig so also to wonder that the world should bear anything whatsoever it be which in the ordinary course of nature it may bear . to a physician also and to a pilot it be a shame either for the one to wonder that such and such a one should have an ague or for the other that the wind should prove contrary . xiv . remember that to change thy mind upon occasion and to follow him that be able to rectify thee be equally ingenuous a to find out at the first what be right and just without help . for of thee nothing be require ti be beyond the extent of thine own deliberation and jun . merit and of thine own understanding . . if it be thine act and in thine own power wouldest thou do it ? if it be not whom dost tin accuse ? the atom or the god ? for to do either the part of a mad man . thou must therefore blame nobody but if it be in thy power redress what be amiss if it be not to what end be it to complain ? for nothing should be do but to some certain end . xvi . whatsoever dieth and falleth however and wheresoever it die and fall it can not fall out of the world here it have it abode and change here also shall it have it dissolution into it proper element . the same be the world 's element and the element of which thou dost consist . and they when they be change they murmur not why shouldest thou ? xvii . whatsoever be be make for something a a horse a vine . why wonderest thou ? the sun itself will say of itself i be make for something and so hath every god it proper function . what then be then make for ? to disport and delight thyself ? see how even common sense and reason can not brook it . xviii . nature hath it end as well in the end and final consummation of anything that be a in the begin nine and continuation of it . xix . a one that tosseth up a ball . and what be a ball the good if the motion of it be upwards or the bad if it be downwards or if it chance to fall upon the ground ? so for the bubble if it continue what it the good ? and if it dissolve what be it the bad and so be it of a candle too . and so must thou reason with thyself both in matter of fame and in matter of death . for a for the body itself the subject of death wouldest thou know the vileness of it ? turn it about that thou mayest behold it the bad side upwards as well a in it more ordinary pleasant shape how doth it look when it be old and wither ? when sick and pain ? when in the act of lust and fornication ? and a for fame . this life be short . both he that praiseth and he that be praise he that remembers and he that be remember will soon be dust and ash . besides it be but in one corner of this part of the world that thou art praise and yet in this corner thou hast not the joint praise of all men no nor scarce of any one constantly . and yet the whole earth itself what be it but a one point in regard of the whole world ? . that which must be the subject of thy consideration be either the matter itself or the dogma or the operation or the true sense and signification . xxi . most justly have these thing happen unto thee why dost not thou amend ? o but thou hadst rather become good to morrow than to be so to day . xxii . shall i do it ? i will so the end of my action be to do good unto men . doth anything by way of cross or adversity happen unto me ? i accept it with reference unto the god and their providence the fountain of all thing from which whatsoever come to pass doth hang and depend . xxiii . by one action judge of the rest this bath which usually take up so much of our time what be it ? oil sweat filth or the sordes of the body an excrementitious viscosity the excrement of oil and other ointment use about the body and mixed with the sordes of the body all base and loathsome . and such almost be every part of our life and every worldly object . xxiv . lucilla bury verus then be lucilla herself bury by others . so secunda maximus then secunda herself . so epitynchanus diotimus then epitynchanus himself . so antoninus pius faustina his wife then antoninus himself . this be the course of the world . first celer adrianus then adrianus himself . and those austere one those that foretell other men 's death those that be so proud and stately where be they now ? those austere one i mean such a be charax and demetrius the platonic and eudaemon and others like unto those . they be all but for one day all dead and go long since . some of them no sooner dead than forgotten . others soon turn into fable . of others even that which be fabulous be now long since forget . this thereafter thou must remember that whatsoever thou art compound of shall soon be disperse and that thy life and breath or thy soul shall either be no more or shall ranslated sp . and appoint to some certain place and station . . the true joy of a man be to do that which properly belong unto a man . that which be most proper unto a man be first to be kindly affected towards them that be of the same kind and nature a he be himself to contemn all sensual motion and appetite to discern rightly all plausible fancy and imagination to contemplate the nature of the universe both it and thing that be do in it . in which kind of contemplation three several relation be to be observe the first to the apparent secondary cause . the second to the first original cause god from whom originally proceed whatsoever doth happen in the world . the third and last to them that we live and converse with what use may be make of it to their use and benefit . xxvi . if pain be an evil either it be in regard of the body and that can not be because the body of itself be altogether insensible or in regard of the soul but it be in the power of the soul to preserve her own peace and tranquillity and not to suppose that pain be evil . for all judgment and deliberation all prosecution or aversation be from within whither the sense of evil except it be let in by opinion can not penetrate . xxvii . wipe off all idle fancy and say unto thyself incessantly now if i will it be in my power to keep out of this my soul all wickedness all lust and concupiscence all trouble and confusion . but on the contrary to behold and consider all thing accord to their true nature and to carry myself towards everything accord to it true worth . remember then this thy power that nature hath give thee . xxviii . whether thou speak in the senate or whether thou speak to any particular let thy speech in always grave and modest . but thou must not openly and vulgarly observe that sound and exact form of speak concern that which be truly good and truly civil the vanity of the world and of worldly men which otherwise truth and reason doth prescribe . xxix . augustus his court his wife his daughter his nephew his son in law his sister agrippa his kinsman his domestic his friend areus maecenas his slayer of beast for sacrifice and divination there thou hast the death of a whole court together . proceed now on to the rest that have be since that of augustus . hath death dwelt with them otherwise though so many and so stately whilst they live than it doth use to deal with any one particular man ? consider now the death of a whole kindred and family a of that of the pompey a that also that useth to be write upon some monument he be the last of his own kindred . o what care do his predecessor take that they might leave a successor yet behold at last one or other must of necessity be the last . here again therefore consider the death of a whole kindred . . contract thy whole life to the measure and proportion of one single action . and if in every particular action thou dost perform what be fit to the utmost of thy power let it suffice thee . and who can hinder thee but that thou mayest perform what be fit ? but there may be some outward let and impediment . not any that can hinder thee but that whatsoever thou dost thou may do it justly temperately and with the praise of god . yea but there may be somewhat whereby some operation or other of thine may be hinder . and then with that very thing that doth hind thou mayest he well pleased and so by this gentle and equanimious conversion of thy mind unto that which may be instead of that which at first thou didst intend in the room of that former action there succeedeth another which agree as well with this contraction of thy life that we now speak of . xxxi . receive temporal blessing without ostentation when they be sent and thou shalt be able to part with them with all readiness and facility when they be take from thee again . xxxii . if ever thou sawest either a hand or a foot or a head lying by itself in some place or other a cut off from the rest of the body such must thou conceive him to make himself as much a in him lieth that either be offend with anything that be happen whatsoever it be and a it be divide himself from it or that commit anything against the natural law of mutual correspondence and society among men or he that commit any act of uncharitableness . whosoever thou art thou art such thou art cast forth i know not whither out of the general unity which be accord to nature . thou go bear indeed a part but now thou hast cut thyself off . however herein be matter of joy and exultation that thou mayst be unite again . god hath not grant it unto any other part that once separate and cut off it might be reunite and come together again . but behold that goodness how great and immense it be ! which hath so much esteem man . a at first he be so make that he need not except he would himself have divide himself from the whole so once divide and cut off it hath so provided and order it that if he would himself he might return and grow together again and be admit into it former rank and place of a part a he be before . xxxiii . a almost all her other faculty and property the nature of the universe hath impart unto every reasonable creature so this in particular we have receive from her that a whatsoever doth oppose itself unto her and doth withstand her in her purpose and intention she doth though against it will and intention bring it about to herself to serve herself of it in the execution of her own destinated end and so by this though not intend co operation of it with herself make it part of herself whether it will or no . so may every reasonable creature what cross and impediment soever it meet with in the course of this mortal life it may use them a fit and proper object to the furtherance of whatsoever it intend and absolutely propose unto itself a it natural end and happiness . xxxiv . let not the general representation unto thyself of the wretchedness of this our mortal life trouble thee . let not thy mind wander up and down and heap together in her thought the many trouble and grievous calamity which thou art a subject unto a any other . but a everything in particular doth happen put this question unto thyself and say what be it that in this present matter seem unto thee so intolerable ? for thou wilt be ashamed to confess it . then upon this presently call to mind that neither that which be future nor that which be past can hurt thee but that only which be present . and that also be much lessen if thou dost lightly circumscribe it and then check thy mind if for so little a while a mere instant it can not hold out with patience . . what ? be either panthea or pergamus abide to this day by their master ' tomb ? or either chabrias or diotimus by that of adrianus ? o foolery ! for what if they do would their master be sensible of it ? or if sensible would they be glad of it ? or if glad be these immortal ? be not it appoint unto them also both men and woman to become old in time and then to die ? and these once dead what would become of these former ? and when all be do what be all this for but for a mere bag of blood and corruption ? xxxvi . if thou beest quick sight be so in matter of judgment and best discretion saith he . xxxvii . in the whole constitution of man i see not any virtue contrary to justice whereby it may be resist and oppose . but one whereby pleasure and voluptuousness may be resist and oppose i see continence . xxxviii . if thou canst but withdraw conceit and opinion concerning that which may seem hurtful and offensive thou thyself art as safe a safe may be . thou thyself ? and who be that ? thy reason . 'yea but i be not reason . ' well be it so . however let not thy reason or understanding admit of grief and if there be anything in thee that be grieve let that whatsoever it be conceive it own grief if it can . xxxix . that which be a hindrance of the sens be an evil to the sensitive nature . that which be a hindrance of the appetitive and prosecutive faculty be an evil to the sensitive nature . a of the sensitive so of the vegetative constitution whatsoever be a hindrance unto it be also in that respect an evil unto the same . and so likewise whatsoever be a hindrance unto the mind and understanding must needs be the proper evil of the reasonable nature . now apply all those thing unto thyself . do either pain or pleasure seize on thee ? let the sens look to that . hast thou meet with some obstacle or other in thy purpose and intention ? if thou didst propose without due reservation and exception now hath thy reasonable part receive a blow indeed but if in general thou didst propose unto thyself what soever might be thou art not thereby either hurt nor properly hinder . for in those thing that properly belong unto the mind she can not be hinder by any man . it be not fire nor iron nor the power of a tyrant nor the power of a slandering tongue nor anything else that can penetrate into her . . if once round and solid there be no fear that ever it will change . xli . why should i grieve myself who never do willingly grieve any other ! one thing rejoice one and another thing another . a for me this be my joy if my understanding be right and sound a neither averse from any man nor refuse any of those thing which a a man i be subject unto if i can look upon all thing in the world meekly and kindly accept all thing and carry myself towards everything accord to to true worth of the thing itself . xlii . this time that be now present bestow thou upon thyself . they that rather hunt for fame after death do not consider that those men that shall be hereafter will be even such a these whom now they can so hardly bear with . and besides they also will be mortal men . but to consider the thing in itself if so many with so many voice shall make such and such a sound or shall have such and such an opinion concern thee what be it to thee ? xliii . take me and throw me where thou wilt i be indifferent . for there also i shall have that spirit which be within me propitious that be well pleased and fully content both in that constant disposition and with those particular action which to it own proper constitution be suitable and agreeable . xliv . be this then a thing of that worth that for it my soul should suffer and become bad than it be ? a either basely deject or disordinately affect or confound within itself or terrify ? what can there be that thou shouldest so much esteem ? . nothing can happen unto thee which be not incidental unto thee a thou art a man . a nothing can happen either to an ox a vine or to a stone which be not incidental unto them unto every one in his own kind . if therefore nothing can happen unto anything which be not both usual and natural why art thou displease ? sure the common nature of all would not bring anything upon any that be intolerable . if therefore it be a thing external that cause thy grief know that it be not that properly that doth cause it but thine own conceit and opinion concern the thing which thou mayest rid thyself of when thou wilt . but if it be somewhat that be amiss in thine own disposition that doth grieve thee mayest thou not rectify thy moral tenet and opinion . but if it grieve thee that thou doest not perform that which seemeth unto thee right and just why doest not thou choose rather to perform it than to grieve ? but somewhat that be strong than thyself doth hinder thee . let it not grieve thee then if it be not thy fault that the thing be not perform . 'yea but it be a thing of that nature a that thy life be not worth the while except it may be perform . ' if it be so upon condition that thou be kindly and lovingly disposed towards all men thou mayest be go . for even then as much a at any time art thou in a very good estate of performance when thou doest die in charity with those that be an obstacle unto thy performance . xlvi . remember that thy mind be of that nature a that it becometh altogether unconquerable when once recollect in herself she seek no other content than this that she can not be force yea though it so fall out that it be even against reason itself that it cloth bandy . how much less when by the help of reason she be able to judge of thing with discretion ? and therefore let thy chief fort and place of defence be a mind free from passion . a strong place whereunto to make his refuge and so to become impregnable and well fortify than this hath no man . he that seeth not this be unlearned . he that seeth it and betaketh not himself to this place of refuge be unhappy . xlvii . keep thyself to the first bare and naked apprehension of thing a they present themselves unto thee and add not unto them . it be report unto thee that such a one speaketh ill of thee . well that he speaketh ill of thee so much be report . but that thou art hurt thereby be not report that be the addition of opinion which thou must exclude . i see that my child be sick . that he be sick i see but that he be in danger of his life also i see it not . thus thou must use to keep thyself to the first motion and apprehension of thing a they present themselves outwardly and add not unto them from within thyself through mere conceit and opinion . or rather add unto them hut a one that understandeth the true nature of all thing that happen in the world . xlviii . be the cucumber bitter ? set it away . bramble be in the way ? avoid them . let this suffice . add not presently speak unto thyself what serve these thing for in the world ? for this one that be acquaint with the mystery of nature will laugh at thee for it a a carpenter would or a shoemaker if meeting in either of their shop with some shaving or small remnant of their work thou shouldest blame them for it . and yet those men it be not for want of a place where to throw them that they keep them in their shop for a while but the nature of the universe hath no such out place but herein doth consist the wonder of her art and skill that she have once circumscribe herself within some certain bound and limit whatsoever be within her that seem either corrupt or old or unprofitable she can change it into herself and of these very thing can make new thing so that she needeth not to seek elsewhere out of herself either for a new supply of matter and substance or for a place where to throw out whatsoever be irrecoverably putrid and corrupt . thus she a for place so for matter and art be herself sufficient unto herself . xlix . not to be slack and negligent or loose and wanton in thy action nor contentious and troublesome in thy conversation nor to rove and wander in thy fancy and imagination . not basely to contract thy soul nor boisterously to sally out with it or furiously to launch out a it be nor ever to want employment . . 'they kill me they cut my flesh they persecute my person with curse . ' what then ? may not thy mind for all this continue pure prudent temperate just ? a a fountain of sweet and clear water though she be curse by some stander by yet do her spring nevertheless still run a sweet and clear a before yea though either dirt or dung be throw in yet be it no sooner thrown than disperse and she clear . she can not be dye or infect by it . what then must i do that i may have within myself an overflow fountain and not a well ? beget thyself by continual pain and endeavour to true liberty with charity and true simplicity and modesty . li . he that knoweth not what the world be knoweth not where he himself be . and he that knoweth not what the world be make for can not possibly know either what be the quality or what be the nature of the world . now he that in either of these be to seek for what he himself be make be ignorant also . what then dost thou think of that man who proposeth unto himself a a matter of great moment the noise and applause of men who both where they be and what they be themselves be altogether ignorant ? dost thou desire to be commend of that man who thrice in one hour perchance doth himself curse himself ? dost thou desire to please him who pleaseth not himself ? or dost thou think that he pleaseth himself who doth use to repent himself almost of everything that he doth ? lii . not only now henceforth to have a common breath or to hold correspondency of breath with that air that compasseth u about but to have a common mind or to hold correspondency of mind also with that rational substance which compasseth all thing . for that also be of itself and of it own nature if a man can but draw it in a he should everywhere diffuse and passeth through all thing no less than the air doth if a man can but suck it in . liii . wickedness in general doth not hurt the world . particular wickedness doth not hurt any other only unto him it be hurtful whosoever he be that offend unto whom in great favour and mercy it be grant that whensoever he himself shall but first desire it he may be presently deliver of it . unto my free will my neighbour 's free will whoever he be a his life or his bode be altogether indifferent . for though we be all make one for another yet have our mind and understanding each of them their own proper and limited jurisdiction . for else another man 's wickedness might be my evil which god would not have that it might not be in another man 's power to make me unhappy which nothing now can do but mine own wickedness . liv . the sun seemeth to be shed abroad . and indeed it be diffuse but not effuse . for that diffusion of it be a r jo tc or an extension . for therefore be the beam of it call i m ' from the word kteiveo oa to be stretch out and extended . now what a sunbeam be thou mayest know if thou observe the light of the sun when through some narrow hole it pierceth into some room that be dark . for it be always in a direct line . and a by any solid body that it meet with in the way that be not penetrable by air it be divide and abrupted and yet neither slide off or fall down but stayeth there nevertheless such must the diffusion in the mind be not an effusion but an extension . what obstacles and impediment soever she meeteth within her way she must not violently and by way of an impetuous onset light upon them neither must she fall down but she must stand and give light unto that which doth admit of it . for a for that which doth not it be it own fault and loss if it bereave itself of her light . . he that feareth death either feareth that he shall have no sense at all or that his sens will not be the same . whereas he should rather comfort himself that either no sense at all and so no sense of evil or if any sense then another life and so no death properly . lvi . all men be make one for another either then teach them well or bear with them . lvii . the motion of the mind be not a the motion of a dart . for the mind when it be wary and cautelous and by way of diligent circumspection turneth herself many way may then as well be say to go straight on to the object a when it useth no such circumspection . lviii . to pierce and penetrate into the estate of every one 's understanding that thou hast to do with as also to make the estate of thine own open and penetrable to any other . the ninth book i. he that be unjust be also impious . for the nature of the universe have make all reasonable creature one for another to the end that they should do one another good more or less accord to the several person and occasion but in nowise hurt one another it be manifest that he that doth transgress against this her will be guilty of impiety towards the most ancient and venerable of all the deity . for the nature of the universe be the nature the common parent of all and therefore piously to be observe of all thing that be and that which now be to whatsoever first be and give it it be hath relation of blood and kindred . she be also call truth and be the first cause of all truth . he therefore that willingly and wittingly doth lie be impious in that he doth receive and so commit injustice but he that against his will in that he disagreeth from the nature of the universe and in that strive with the nature of the world he doth in his particular violate the general order of the world . for he doth no good than strive and war against it who contrary to his own nature applieth himself to that which be contrary to truth . for nature have before furnish him with instinct and opportunity sufficient for the attainment of it which he have hitherto neglect be not now able to discern that which be false from that which be true . he also that pursues after pleasure a that which be truly good and fly from pain a that which be truly evil be impious . for such a one must of necessity oftentimes accuse that common nature a distribute many thing both unto the evil and unto the good not accord to the desert of either a unto the bad oftentimes pleasure and the cause of pleasure so unto the good pain and the occasion of pain . again he that feareth pain and cross in this world feareth some of those thing which some time or other must need happen in the world . and that we have already show to be impious . and he that pursueth after pleasure will not spare to compass his desire to do that which be unjust and that be manifestly impious . now those thing which unto nature be equally indifferent for she have not create both both pain and pleasure if both have not be unto her equally indifferent they that will live accord to nature must in those thing a be of the same mind and disposition that she be be a equally indifferent . whosoever therefore in either matter of pleasure and pain death and life honour and dishonour which thing nature in the administration of the world indifferently doth make use of be not a indifferent it be apparent that he be impious . when i say that common nature doth indifferently make use of them my meaning be that they happen indifferently in the ordinary course of thing which by a necessary consequence whether a principal or accessory come to pass in the world accord to that first and ancient deliberation of providence by which she from some certain beginning do resolve upon the creation of such a world conceive then in her womb a it be some certain rational generative seed and faculty of thing future whether subject change succession both such and such and just so many . ii . it be indeed more happy and comfortable for a man to depart out of this world have live all his life long clear from all falsehood dissimulation voluptuousness and pride . but if this can not be yet it be some comfort for a man joyfully to depart a weary and out of love with those rather than to desire to live and to continue long in those wicked course . hath not yet experience taught thee to fly from the plague ? for a far great plague be the corruption of the mind than any certain change and distemper of the common air can be . this be a plague of creature a they be live creature but that of men a they be men or reasonable . iii . thou must not in matter of death carry thyself scornfully but a one that be well pleased with it a be one of those thing that nature hath appoint . for what thou dost conceive of these of a boy to become a young man to wax old to grow to ripen to get teeth or a beard or grey hair to beget to bear or to be deliver or what other action soever it be that be natural unto man accord to the several season of his life such a thing be it also to be dissolve . it be therefore the part of a wise man in matter of death not in any wise to carry himself either violently or proudly but patiently to wait for it a one of nature 's operation that with the same mind a now thou dost expect when that which yet be but an embryo in thy wife 's belly shall come forth thou mayst expect also when thy soul shall fall off from that outward coat or skin wherein a a child in the belly it lieth involve and shut up . but thou desirest a more popular and though not so direct and philosophical yet a very powerful and penetrative recipe against the fear of death nothing can make they more willing to part with thy life than if thou shalt consider both what the subject themselves be that thou shalt part with and what manner of disposition thou shalt no more have to do with . true it be that offend with them thou must not be by no mean but take care of them and meekly bear with them however this thou mayst remember that whensoever it happen that thou depart it shall not be from men that hold the same opinion that thou dost . for that indeed if it be so be the only thing that might make thee averse from death and willing to continue here if it be thy hap to live with men that have obtain the same belief that thou hast . but now what a toil it be for thee to live with men of different opinion thou seest so that thou hast rather occasion to say hasten i thee pray o death lest i also in time forget myself . iv . he that sinneth sinneth unto himself . he that be unjust hurt himself in that he make himself bad than he be before . not he only that committeth but he also that omitteth something be oftentimes unjust . . if my present apprehension of the object be right and my present action charitable and this towards whatsoever doth proceed from god be my present disposition to be well pleased with it it sufficeth . vi . to wipe away fancy to use deliberation to quench concupiscence to keep the mind free to herself . vii . of all unreasonable creature there be but one unreasonable soul and of all that be reasonable but one reasonable soul divide betwixt them all . a of all earthly thing there be but one earth and but one light that we see by and but one air that we breathe in as many a either breathe or see . now whatsoever partakes of some common thing naturally affect and incline unto that whereof it be part be of one kind and nature with it . whatsoever be earthly presseth downwards to the common earth . whatsoever be liquid would flow together . and whatsoever be airy would be together likewise . so that without some obstacle and some kind of violence they can not well be keep asunder . whatsoever be fiery doth not only by reason of the elementary fire tend upwards but here also be so ready to join and to burn together that whatsoever doth want sufficient moisture to make resistance be easily set on fire . whatsoever therefore be partaker of that reasonable common nature naturally doth a much and more long after his own kind . for by how much in it own nature it excel all other thing by so much more be it desirous to be join and unite unto that which be of it own nature . a for unreasonable creature then they have not long be but presently begin among them swarm and flock and brood of young one and a kind of mutual love and affection . for though but unreasonable yet a kind of soul these have and therefore be that natural desire of union more strong and intense in them a in creature of a more excellent nature than either in plant or stone or tree . but among reasonable creature begin commonwealth friendships family public meeting and even in their war convention and truce . now among them that be yet of a more excellent nature a the star and planet though by their nature far distant one from another yet even among them begin some mutual correspondency and unity . so proper be it to excellency in a high degree to affect unity a that even in thing so far distant it could operate unto a mutual sympathy . but now behold what be now come to pass . those creature that be reasonable be now the only creature that have forget their natural affection and inclination of one towards another . among them alone of all other thing that be of one kind there be not to be find a general disposition to flow together . but though they fly from nature yet be they stopt in their course and apprehend . do they what they can nature doth prevail . and so shalt thou confess if thou dost observe it . for sooner mayst thou find a thing earthly where no earthly thing be than find a man that naturally can live by himself alone . viii . man god the world every one in their kind bear some fruit . all thing have their proper time to bear . though by custom the word itself be in a manner become proper unto the vine and the like yet be it so nevertheless a we have say . a for reason that beareth both common fruit for the use of others and peculiar which itself doth enjoy . reason be of a diffusive nature what itself be in itself it beget in others and so doth multiply . ix . either teach them good if it be in thy power or if it be not remember that for this use to bear with them patiently be mildness and goodness grant unto thee . the god themselves be good unto such yea and in some thing a in matter of health of wealth of honour be content often to further their endeavour so good and gracious be they . and mightest thou not be so too ? or tell me what doth hind thee ? . labour not a one to whom it be appoint to be wretched nor a one that either would be pity or admire but let this be thine only care and desire so always and in all thing to prosecute or to forbear a the law of charity or mutual society doth require . xi . this day i do come out of all my trouble . nay i have cast out all my trouble it should rather be for that which trouble thee whatsoever it be be not without anywhere that thou shouldest come out of it but within in thine own opinion from whence it must be cast out before thou canst truly and constantly be at ease . xii . all those thing for matter of experience be usual and ordinary for their continuance but for a day and for their matter most base and filthy . a they be in the day of those whom we have bury so be they now also and no otherwise . xiii . the thing themselves that affect u they stand without door neither know anything themselves nor able to utter anything unto others concern themselves . what then be it that passeth verdict on them ? the understanding . xiv . a virtue and wickedness consist not in passion but in action so neither doth the true good or evil of a reasonable charitable man consist in passion but in operation and action . . to the stone that be cast up when it come down it be no hurt unto it a neither benefit when it doth ascend . xvi . sift their mind and understanding and behold what men they be whom thou dost stand in fear of what they shall judge of thee what they themselves judge of themselves . xvii . all thing that be in the world be always in the estate of alteration . thou also art in a perpetual change yea and under corruption too in some part and so be the whole world . xviii . it be not thine but another man 's sin . why should it trouble thee ? let him look to it whose sin it be . xix . of an operation and of a purpose there be an end or of an action and of a purpose we say commonly that it be at an end from opinion also there be an absolute cessation which be a it be the death of it . in all this there be no hurt . apply this now to a man 's age a first a child then a youth then a young man then an old man every change from one age to another be a kind of death and all this while here no matter of grief yet . pas now unto that life first that which thou livedst under thy grandfather then under thy mother then under thy father . and thus when through the whole course of thy life hitherto thou hast find and observe many alteration many change many kind of ending and cessation put this question to thyself what matter of grief or sorrow dost thou find in any of these ? or what doest thou suffer through any of these ? if in none of these then neither in the end and consummation of thy whole life which be also but a cessation and change . . a occasion shall require either to thine own understanding or to that of the universe or to his whom thou hast now to do with let thy refuge be with all speed . to thine own that it resolve upon nothing against justice . to that of the universe that thou mayest remember part of whom thou art . of his that thou mayest consider whether in the estate of ignorance or of knowledge . and then also must thou call to mind that he be thy kinsman . xxi . a thou thyself whoever thou art be make for the perfection and consummation be a member of it of a common society so must every action of thine tend to the perfection and consummation of a life that be truly sociable . what action soever of thine therefore that either immediately or afar off hath not reference to the common good that be an exorbitant and disorderly action yea it be seditious a one among the people who from such and such a consent and unity should factiously divide and separate himself . xxii . child 's anger mere babel wretched soul bear up dead body that they may not have their fall so soon even a it be in that common dirge song . xxiii . go to the quality of the cause from which the effect doth proceed . behold it by itself bare and naked separate from all that be material . then consider the utmost bound of time that that cause thus and thus qualify can subsist and abide . xxiv . infinite be the trouble and misery that thou hast already be put to by reason of this only because that for all happiness it do not suffice thee or that thou didst not account it sufficient happiness that thy understanding do operate accord to it natural constitution . . when any shall either impeach thee with false accusation or hatefully reproach thee or shall use any such carriage towards thee get thee presently to their mind and understanding and look in them and behold what manner of men they be . thou shalt see that there be no such occasion why it should trouble thee what such a they be think of thee . yet must thou love them still for by nature they be thy friend . and the god themselves in those thing that they seek from them a matter of great moment be well content all manner of way a by dream and oracle to help them as well a others . xxvi . up and down from one age to another go the ordinary thing of the world be still the same . and either of everything in particular before it come to pass the mind of the universe doth consider with itself and deliberate and if so then submit for shame unto the determination of such an excellent understanding or once for all it do resolve upon all thing in general and since that whatsoever happen happens by a necessary consequence and all thing indivisibly in a manner and inseparably hold one of another . in sum either there be a god and then all be well or if all thing go by chance and fortune yet mayest thou use thine own providence in those thing that concern thee properly and then art thou well . xxvii . within a while the earth shall cover u all and then she herself shall have her change . and then the course will be from one period of eternity unto another and so a perpetual eternity . now can any man that shall consider with himself in his mind the several rolling or succession of so many change and alteration and the swiftness of all these ruling can he otherwise but contemn in his heart and despise all worldly thing ? the cause of the universe be a it be a strong torrent it carrieth all away . xxviii . and these your profess politician the only true practical philosopher of the world a they think of themselves so full of affected gravity or such professed lover of virtue and honesty what wretches be they in very deed how vile and contemptible in themselves ? o man ! what ado doest thou keep ? do what thy nature doth now require . resolve upon it if thou mayest and take no thought whether anybody shall know it or no . yea but sayest thou i must not expect a plato 's commonwealth . if they profit though never so little i must be content and think much even of that little progress . doth then any of them forsake their former false opinion that i should think they profit ? for without a change of opinion alas ! what be all that ostentation but mere wretchedness of slavish mind that groan privately and yet would make a show of obedience to reason and truth ? go too now and tell me of alexander and philippus and demetrius phalereus . whether they understand what the common nature requireth and could rule themselves or no they know best themselves . but if they keep a life and swagger i god be thank be not bind to imitate them . the effect of true philosophy be unaffected simplicity and modesty . persuade me not to ostentation and vainglory . xxix . from some high place a it be to look down and to behold here flock and there sacrifice without number and all kind of navigation some in a rough and stormy sea and some in a calm the general difference or different estate of thing some that be now first upon be the several and mutual relation of those thing that be together and some other thing that be at their last . their life also who be long ago and theirs who shall be hereafter and the present estate and life of those many nation of barbarian that be now in the world thou must likewise consider in thy mind . and how many there be who never so much a heard of thy name how many that will soon forget it how many who but even now do commend thee within a very little while perchance will speak ill of thee . so that neither fame nor honour nor anything else that this world doth afford be worth the while . the sum then of all whatsoever doth happen unto thee whereof god be the cause to accept it contentedly whatsoever thou doest whereof thou thyself art the cause to do it justly which will be if both in thy resolution and in thy action thou have no further end than to do good unto others a be that which by thy natural constitution a a man thou art bound unto . . many of those thing that trouble and straiten thee it be in thy power to cut off a wholly depend from mere conceit and opinion and then thou shalt have room enough . xxxi . to comprehend the whole world together in thy mind and the whole course of this present age to represent it unto thyself and to fix thy thought upon the sudden change of every particular object . how short the time be from the generation of anything unto the dissolution of the same but how immense and infinite both that which be before the generation and that which after the generation of it shall be . all thing that thou seest will soon be perish and they that see their corruption will soon vanish away themselves . he that dieth a hundred year old and he that dieth young shall come all to one . xxxii . what be their mind and understanding and what the thing that they apply themselves unto what do they love and what do they hate for ? fancy to thyself the estate of their soul openly to be see . when they think they hurt them shrewdly whom they speak ill of and when they think they do them a very good turn whom they commend and extol o how full be they then of conceit and opinion ! xxxiii . loss and corruption be in very deed nothing else but change and alteration and that be it which the nature of the universe doth most delight in by which and accord to which whatsoever be do be well do . for that be the estate of worldly thing from the beginning and so shall it ever be . or wouldest thou rather say that all thing in the world have go ill from the beginning for so many age and shall ever go ill ? and then among so many deity could no divine power be find all this while that could rectify the thing of the world ? or be the world to incessant woe and misery for ever condemn ? xxxiv . how base and putrid every common matter be ! water dust and from the mixture of these bone and all that loathsome stuff that our body do consist of so subject to be infect and corrupt . and again those other thing that be so much prize and admire a marble stone what be they but a it be the kernel of the earth ? gold and silver what be they but a the more gross faeces of the earth ? thy most royal apparel for matter it be but a it be the hair of a silly sheep and for colour the very blood of a shell fish of this nature be all other thing . thy life itself be some such thing too a mere exhalation of blood and it also apt to be change into some other common thing . . will this querulousness this murmuring this complaining and dissembling never be at an end ? what then be it that troubleth thee ? doth any new thing happen unto thee ? what doest thou so wonder at ? at the cause or the matter ? behold either by itself be either of that weight and moment indeed ? and besides these there be not anything . but thy duty towards the god also it be time thou shouldst acquit thyself of it with more goodness and simplicity . xxxvi . it be all one to see these thing for a hundred of year together or but for three year . xxxvii . if he have sin his be the harm not mine . but perchance he hath not . xxxviii . either all thing by the providence of reason happen unto every particular a a part of one general body and then it be against reason that a part should complain of anything that happen for the good of the whole or if accord to epicurus atom be the cause of all thing and that life be nothing else but an accidentary confusion of thing and death nothing else but a mere dispersion and so of all other thing what doest thou trouble thyself for ? xxxix . sayest thou unto that rational part thou art dead corruption hath take hold on thee ? doth it then also void excrement ? doth it like either oxen or sheep graze or feed that it also should be mortal as well a the body ? . either the god can do nothing for u at all or they can still and allay all the distraction and distemper of thy mind . if they can do nothing why doest thou pray ? if they can why wouldst not thou rather pray that they will grant unto thee that thou mayst neither fear nor lust after any of those worldly thing which cause these distraction and distemper of it ? why not rather that thou mayst not at either their absence or presence be grieve and discontent than either that thou mayst obtain them or that thou mayst avoid them ? for certainly it must needs be that if the god can help u in anything they may in this kind also . but thou wilt say perchance 'in those thing the god have give me my liberty and it be in mine own power to do what i will . ' but if thou mayst use this liberty rather to set thy mind at true liberty than wilfully with baseness and servility of mind to affect those thing which either to compass or to avoid be not in thy power wert not thou good ? and a for the god who hath tell thee that they may not help u up even in those thing that they have put in our own power ? whether it be so or no thou shalt soon perceive if thou wilt but try thyself and pray . one prayeth that he may compass his desire to lie with such or such a one pray thou that thou mayst not lust to lie with her . another how he may be rid of such a one pray thou that thou mayst so patiently bear with him a that thou have no such need to be rid of him . another that he may not lose his child . pray thou that thou mayst not fear to lose him . to this end and purpose let all thy prayer be and see what will be the event . xli . 'in my sickness ' saith epicurus of himself 'my discourse be not concern the nature of my disease neither be that to them that come to visit me the subject of my talk but in the consideration and contemplation of that which be of especial weight and moment be all my time bestow and spend and among others in this very thing how my mind by a natural and unavoidable sympathy partaking in some sort with the present indisposition of my body might nevertheless keep herself free from trouble and in present possession of her own proper happiness . neither do i leave the ordering of my body to the physician altogether to do with me what they would a though i expect any great matter from them or a though i think it a matter of such great consequence by their mean to recover my health for my present estate methought like me very well and give me good content . ' whether therefore in sickness if thou chance to sicken or in what other kind of extremity soever endeavour thou also to be in thy mind so affect a he doth report of himself not to depart from thy philosophy for anything that can befall thee nor to give ear to the discourse of silly people and mere naturalist . xlii . it be common to all trade and profession to mind and intend that only which now they be about and the instrument whereby they work . xliii . when at any time thou art offend with any one 's impudency put presently this question to thyself 'what ? be it then possible that there should not be any impudent men in the world ! certainly it be not possible . ' desire not then that which be impossible . for this one thou must think whosoever he be be one of those impudent one that the world can not be without . so of the subtile and crafty so of the perfidious so of every one that offendeth must thou ever be ready to reason with thyself . for whilst in general thou dost thus reason with thyself that the kind of them must needs be in the world thou wilt be the good able to use meekness towards every particular . this also thou shalt find of very good use upon every such occasion presently to consider with thyself what proper virtue nature hath furnish man with against such a vice or to encounter with a disposition vicious in this kind . a for example against the unthankful it hath give goodness and meekness a an antidote and so against another vicious in another kind some other peculiar faculty . and generally be it not in thy power to instruct him good that be in an error ? for whosoever sinneth doth in that decline from his purposed end and be certainly deceive and again what art thou the worse for his sin ? for thou shalt not find that any one of these against whom thou art incense hath in very deed do anything whereby thy mind the only true subject of thy hurt and evil can be make bad than it be . and what a matter of either grief or wonder be this if he that be unlearned do the deed of one that be unlearn ? should not thou rather blame thyself who when upon very good ground of reason thou mightst have think it very probable that such a thing would by such a one be commit didst not only not foresee it but moreover dost wonder at it that such a thing should be . but then especially when thou dost find fault with either an unthankful or a false man must thou reflect upon thyself . for without all question thou thyself art much in fault if either of one that be of such a disposition thou didst expect that he should be true unto thee or when unto any thou didst a good turn thou didst not there bound thy thought a one that have obtain his end nor didst not think that from the action itself thou hadst receive a full reward of the good that thou hadst do . for what wouldst thou have more ? unto him that be a man thou hast do a good turn doth not that suffice thee ? what thy nature require that hast thou do . must thou be reward for it ? a if either the eye for that it seeth or the foot that they go should require satisfaction . for a these be by nature appoint for such an use can challenge no more than that they may work accord to their natural constitution so man be bear to do good unto others whensoever he doth a real good unto any by help them out of error or though but in middle thing a in matter of wealth life preferment and the like doth help to further their desire he doth that for which he be make and therefore can require no more . the tenth book i. o my soul the time i trust will be when thou shalt be good simple single more open and visible than that body by which it be enclose . thou wilt one day be sensible of their happiness whose end be love and their affection dead to all worldly thing . thou shalt one day be full and in want of no external thing not seek pleasure from anything either living or insensible that this world can afford neither wanting time for the continuation of thy pleasure nor place and opportunity nor the favour either of the weather or of men . when thou shalt have content in thy present estate and all thing present shall add to thy content when thou shalt persuade thyself that thou hast all thing all for thy good and all by the providence of the god and of thing future also shalt be a confident that all will do well a tend to the maintenance and preservation in some sort of his perfect welfare and happiness who be perfection of life of goodness and beauty who beget all thing and containeth all thing in himself and in himself doth recollect all thing from all place that be dissolve that of them he may beget others again like unto them . such one day shall be thy disposition that thou shalt be able both in regard of the god and in regard of men so to fit and order thy conversation a neither to complain of them at any time for anything that they do nor to do anything thyself for which thou mayest justly be condemn . ii . a one who be altogether govern by nature let it be thy care to observe what it be that thy nature in general doth require . that do if thou find not that thy nature a thou art a living sensible creature will be the bad for it thou mayest proceed . next then thou must examine what thy nature a thou art a living sensible creature doth require . and that whatsoever it be thou mayest admit of and do it if thy nature a thou art a reasonable living creature will not be the bad for it . now whatsoever be reasonable be also sociable keep thyself to these rule and trouble not thyself about idle thing . iii . whatsoever doth happen unto thee thou art naturally by thy natural constitution either able or not able to bear . if thou beest able be not offend but bear it accord to thy natural constitution or a nature hath enable thee . if thou beest not able be not offend . for it will soon make an end of thee and itself whatsoever it be at the same time end with thee . but remember that whatsoever by the strength of opinion ground upon a certain apprehension of both true profit and duty thou canst conceive tolerable that thou art able to bear that by thy natural constitution . iv . him that offend to teach with love and meek ness and to show him his error . but if thou canst not then to blame thyself or rather not thyself neither if thy will and endeavour have not be want . . whatsoever it be that happen unto thee it be that which from all time be appoint unto thee . for by the same coherence of cause by which thy substance from all eternity be appoint to be be also whatsoever should happen unto it destinated and appoint . vi . either with epicurus we must fondly imagine the atom to be the cause of all thing or we must need grant a nature . let this then be thy first ground that thou art part of that universe which be govern by nature . then secondly that to those part that be of the same kind and nature a thou art thou hast relation of kindred . for of these if i shall always be mindful first a i be a part i shall never be displease with anything that fall to my particular share of the common chance of the world . for nothing that be behoveful unto the whole can be truly hurtful to that which be part of it . for this be the common privilege of all nature that they contain nothing in themselves that be hurtful unto them it can not be that the nature of the universe whose privilege beyond other particular nature be that she can not against her will by any high external cause be constrain should beget anything and cherish it in her bosom that should tend to her own hurt and prejudice . a then i bear in mind that i be a part of such an universe i shall not be displease with anything that happen . and a i have relation of kindred to those part that be of the same kind and nature that i be so i shall be careful to do nothing that be prejudicial to the community but in all my deliberation shall they that be of my kind ever be and the common good that which all my intention and resolution shall drive unto a that which be contrary unto it i shall by all mean endeavour to prevent and avoid . these thing once so fixed and conclude a thou wouldst think him a happy citizen whose constant study and practice be for the good and benefit of his fellow citizen and the carriage of the city such towards him that he be well pleased with it so must it need be with thee that thou shalt live a happy life . vii . all part of the world all thing i mean that be contain within the whole world must of necessity at some time or other come to corruption . alteration i should say to speak truly and properly but that i may be the good understood i be content at this time to use that more common word . now say i if so be that this be both hurtful unto them and yet unavoidable would not thinkest thou the whole itself be in a sweet case all the part of it be subject to alteration yea and by their make itself fit for corruption a consist of thing different and contrary ? and do nature then either of herself thus project and purpose the affliction and misery of her part and therefore of purpose so make them not only that haply they might but of necessity that they should fall into evil or do not she know what she do when she make them ? for either of these two to say be equally absurd . but to let pass nature in general and to reason of thing particular accord to their own particular nature how absurd and ridiculous be it first to say that all part of the whole be by their proper natural constitution subject to alteration and then when any such thing doth happen a when one doth fall sick and dieth to take on and wonder a though some strange thing have happen ? though this besides might move not so grievously to take on when any such thing doth happen that whatsoever be dissolve it be dissolve into those thing whereof it be compound . for every dissolution be either a mere dispersion of the element into those element again whereof everything do consist or a change of that which be more solid into earth and of that which be pure and subtile or spiritual into air . so that by this mean nothing be lose but all resume again into those rational generative seed of the universe and this universe either after a certain period of time to lie consume by fire or by continual change to be renew and so for ever to endure . now that solid and spiritual that we speak of thou must not conceive it to be that very same which at first be when thou wert bear . for ala ! all this that now thou art in either kind either for matter of substance or of life hath but two or three day ago partly from meat eat and partly from air breathe in receive all it influx be the same then in no other respect than a running river maintain by the perpetual influx and new supply of water be the same . that therefore which thou hast since receive not that which come from thy mother be that which come to change and corruption . but suppose that that for the general substance and more solid part of it should still cleave unto thee never so close yet what be that to the proper quality and affection of it by which person be distinguish which certainly be quite different ? viii . now that thou hast take these name upon thee of good modest true of emfrwn sumfrwn uperfrwn take heed l at any time by do anything that be contrary thou be but improperly so call and lose thy right to these appellation . or if thou do return unto them again with all possible speed . and remember that the word emfrwn note unto thee an intent and intelligent consideration of every object that present itself unto thee without distraction . and the word emfrwn a ready and contented acceptation of whatsoever by the appointment of the common nature happen unto thee . and the word sumfrwn a super extension or a transcendent and outreaching disposition of thy mind whereby it passeth by all bodily pain and pleasure honour and credit death and whatsoever be of the same nature a matter of absolute indifferency and in no wise to be stand upon by a wise man . these then if inviolably thou shalt observe and shalt not be ambitious to be so call by others both thou thyself shalt become a new man and thou shalt begin a new life . for to continue such a hitherto thou hast be to undergo those distraction and distemper a thou must need for such a life a hitherto thou hast live be the part of one that be very foolish and be overfond of his life . whom a man might compare to one of those half eaten wretch match in the amphitheatre with wild beast who as full a they be all the body over with wound and blood desire for a great favour that they may be reserve till the next day then also and in the same estate to be expose to the same nail and teeth a before . away therefore ship thyself and from the trouble and distraction of thy former life convey thyself a it be unto these few name and if thou canst abide in them or be constant in the practice and possession of them continue there a glad and joyful a one that be translate unto some such place of bliss and happiness a that which by hesiod and plato be call the island of the bless by others call the elysian field . and whensoever thou findest thyself that thou art in danger of a relapse and that thou art not able to master and overcome those difficulty and temptation that present themselves in thy present station get thee into any private corner where thou mayst be well able . or if that will not serve forsake even thy life rather . but so that it be not in passion but in a plain voluntary modest way this be the only commendable action of thy whole life that thus thou art depart or this have be the main work and business of thy whole life that thou mightest thus depart . now for the good remembrance of those name that we have speak of thou shalt find it a very good help to remember the god as often a may be and that the thing which they require at our hand of a many of u a be by nature reasonable creation be not that with fair word and outward show of piety and devotion we should flatter them but that we should become like unto them and that a all other natural creature the fig tree for example the dog the bee both do all of them and apply themselves unto that which by their natural constitution be proper unto them so man likewise should do that which by his nature a he be a man belong unto him . ix . toy and foolery at home war abroad sometimes terror sometimes torpor or stupid sloth this be thy daily slavery . by little and little if thou doest not well look to it those sacred dogma will be blot out of thy mind . how many thing be there which when a a mere naturalist thou hast barely consider of accord to their nature thou doest let pas without any further use ? whereas thou shouldst in all thing so join action and contemplation that thou mightest both at the same time attend all present occasion to perform everything duly and carefully and yet so intend the contemplative part too that no part of that delight and pleasure which the contemplative knowledge of everything accord to it true nature doth of itself afford might be lose . or that the true and contemnplative knowledge of everything accord to it own nature might of itself action be subject to many let and impediment afford unto thee sufficient pleasure and happiness . not apparent indeed but not conceal . and when shalt thou attain to the happiness of true simplicity and unaffected gravity ? when shalt thou rejoice in the certain knowledge of every particular object accord to it true nature a what the matter and substance of it be what use it be for in the world how long it can subsist what thing it doth consist of who they be that be capable of it and who they that can give it and take it away ? . a the spider when it hath catch the fly that it hunt after be not little proud nor meanly conceited of herself a he likewise that hath catch an hare or hath take a fish with his net a another for the taking of a boar and another of a bear so may they be proud and applaud themselves for their valiant act against the sarmatai or northern nation lately defeat . for these also these famous soldier and warlike men if thou dost look into their mind and opinion what do they for the most part but hunt after prey ? xi . to find out and set to thyself some certain way and method of contemplation whereby thou mayest clearly discern and represent unto thyself the mutual change of all thing the one into the other . bear it in thy mind evermore and see that thou be throughly well exercise in this particular . for there be not anything more effectual to beget true magnanimity . xii . he hath get loose from the bond of his body and perceiving that within a very little while he must of necessity bid the world farewell and leave all these thing behind him he wholly apply himself a to righteousness in all his action so to the common nature in all thing that should happen unto him . and content himself with these two thing to do all thing justly and whatsoever god doth send to like well of it what others shall either say or think of him or shall do against him he doth not so much a trouble his thought with it . to go on straight whither right and reason direct him and by so do to follow god be the only thing that he do mind that his only business and occupation . xiii . what use be there of suspicion at all ? or why should thought of mistrust and suspicion concerning that which be future trouble thy mind at all ? what now be to be do if thou mayest search and inquiry into that what need thou care for more ? and if thou art well able to perceive it alone let no man divert thee from it . but if alone thou doest not so well perceive it suspend thine action and take advice from the best . and if there be anything else that doth hinder thee go on with prudence and discretion accord to the present occasion and opportunity still propose that unto thyself which thou doest conceive most right and just . for to hit that aright and to speed in the prosecution of it must needs be happiness since it be that only which we can truly and properly be say to miss of or miscarry in . xiv . what be that that be slow and yet quick ? merry and yet grave ? he that in all thing doth follow reason for his guide . . in the morning as soon a thou art awake when thy judgment before either thy affection or external object have work upon it be yet most free and impartial put this question to thyself whether if that which be right and just be do the do of it by thyself or by others when thou art not able thyself be a thing material or no . for sure it be not . and a for these that keep such a life and stand so much upon the praise or dispraise of other men hast thou forget what manner of men they be ? that such and such upon their bed and such at their board what their ordinary action be what they pursue after and what they fly from what theft and rapine they commit if not with their hand and foot yet with that more precious part of theirs their mind which would it but admit of them might enjoy faith modesty truth justice a good spirit . xvi . give what thou wilt and take away what thou wilt saith he that be well taught and truly modest to him that give and take away . and it be not out of a stout and peremptory resolution that he saith it but in mere love and humble submission . xvii . so live a indifferent to the world and all worldly object a one who liveth by himself alone upon some desert hill . for whether here or there if the whole world be but a one town it matter not much for the place . let them behold and see a man that be a man indeed live accord to the true nature of man . if they can not bear with me let them kill me . for good be it to die than so to live a they would have thee . xviii . make it not any longer a matter of dispute or discourse what be the sign and propriety of a good man but really and actually to be such . xix . ever to represent unto thyself and to set before thee both the general age and time of the world and the whole substance of it . and how all thing particular in respect of these be for their substance a one of the least seed that be and for their duration a the turning of the pestle in the mortar once about . then to fix thy mind upon every particular object of the world and to conceive it a it be indeed a already be in the state of dissolution and of change tend to some kind of either putrefaction or dispersion or whatsoever else it be that be the death a it be of everything in his own kind . . consider them through all action and occupation of their life a when they eat and when they sleep when they be in the act of necessary exoneration and when in the act of lust . again when they either be in their great exultation and in the middle of all their pomp and glory or be angry and displeased in great state and majesty a from an high place they chide and rebuke . how base and slavish but a little while ago they be fain to be that they might come to this and within a very little while what will be their estate when death hath once seize upon them . xxi . that be best for every one that the common nature of all doth send unto every one and then be it best when she doth send it . xxii . the earth saith the poet doth often long after the rain . so be the glorious sky often as desirous to fall upon the earth which argue a mutual kind of love between them . and so say i doth the world bear a certain affection of love to whatsoever shall come to pass with thine affection shall mine concur o world . the same and no other shall the object of my longing be which be of thine . now that the world doth love it be true indeed so be it a commonly say and acknowledge ledged when accord to the greek phrase imitate by the latin of thing that use to be we say commonly that they love to be . xxiii . either thou dost continue in this kind of life and that be it which so long thou hast be use unto and therefore tolerable or thou doest retire or leave the world and that of thine own accord and then thou hast thy mind or thy life be cut off and then mayst thou rejoice that thou hast end thy charge . one of these must needs be . be therefore of good comfort . xxiv let it always appear and be manifest unto thee that solitariness and desert place by many philosopher so much esteem of and affect be of themselves but thus and thus and that all thing be them to them that live in town and converse with others a they be the same nature everywhere to be see and observe to them that have retire themselves to the top of mountain and to desert haven or what other desert and inhabited place soever . for anywhere it thou wilt mayest thou quickly find and apply that to thyself which plato saith of his philosopher in a place a private and retire saith he a if he be shut up and enclose about in some shepherd 's lodge on the top of a hill . there by thyself to put these question to thyself or to enter in these consideration what be my chief and principal part which hath power over the rest ? what be now the present estate of it a i use it and what be it that i employ it about ? be it now void of reason ir no ? be it free and separate or so affixed so congealed and grown together a it be with the flesh that it be sway by the motion and inclination of it ? . he that run away from his master be a fugitive . but the law be every man 's master . he therefore that forsake the law be a fugitive . so be he whosoever he be that be either sorry angry or afraid or for anything that either hath be be or shall be by his appointment who be the lord and governor of the universe . for he truly and properly be nomoz or the law a the only nemwn sp . or distributor and dispenser of all thing that happen unto any one in his lifetime whatsoever then be either sorry angry or afraid be a fugitive . xxvi . from man be the seed that once cast into the womb man hath no more to do with it . another cause succeedeth and undertake the work and in time bring a child that wonderful effect from such a beginning ! to perfection . again man let food down through his throat and that once down he hath no more to do with it . another cause succeedeth and distributeth this food into the sens and the affection into life and into strength and doth with it those other many and marvellous thing that belong unto man . these thing therefore that be so secretly and invisibly wrought and bring to pass thou must use to behold and contemplate and not the thing themselves only but the power also by which they be effect that thou mayst behold it though not with the eye of the body yet a plainly and visibly a thou canst see and discern the outward efficient cause of the depression and elevation of anything . xxvii . ever to mind and consider with thyself how all thing that now be have be heretofore much after the same sort and after the same fashion that now they be and so to think of those thing which shall be hereafter also . moreover whole dramata and uniform scene or scene that comprehend the life and action of men of one call and profession as many a either in thine own experience thou hast know or by read of ancient history a the whole court of adrianus the whole court of antoninus pius the whole court of philippus that of alexander that of croesus to set them all before thine eye . for thou shalt find that they be all but after one sort and fashion only that the actor be others . xxviii . a a pig that cry and fling when his throat be cut fancy to thyself every one to be that grief for any worldly thing and take on . such a one be he also who upon his bed alone doth bewail the misery of this our mortal life . and remember this that unto reasonable creature only it be grant that they may willingly and freely submit unto providence but absolutely to submit be a necessity impose upon all creature equally . xxix . whatsoever it be that thou goest about consider of it by thyself and ask thyself what ? because i shall do this no more when i be dead should therefore death seem grievous unto me ? . when thou art offend with any man 's transgression presently reflect upon thyself and consider what thou thyself art guilty of in the same kind . a that thou also perchance dost think it a happiness either to be rich or to live in pleasure or to be praise and commend and so of the rest in particular . for this if thou shalt call to mind thou shalt soon forget thine anger especially when at the same time this also shall concur in thy thought that he be constrain by his error and ignorance so to do for how can he choose as long a he be of that opinion ? do thou therefore if thou canst take away that from him that forceth him to do a he doth . xxxi . when thou seest satyro think of socraticus and eutyches or hymen and when euphrates think of eutychio and sylvanus when alciphron of tropaeophorus when xenophon of crito or severus . and when thou doest look upon thyself fancy unto thyself some one or other of the caesar and so for every one some one or other that hath be for estate and profession answerable unto him . then let this come to thy mind at the same time and where now be they all ? nowhere or anywhere ? for so shalt thou at all time be able to perceive how all worldly thing be but a the smoke that vanisheth away or indeed mere nothing . especially when thou shalt call to mind this also that whatsoever be once change shall never be again as long a the world endureth . and thou then how long shalt thou endure ? and why doth it not suffice thee if virtuously and a becometh thee thou mayest pas that portion of time how little soever it be that be allot unto thee ? xxxii . what a subject and what a course of life be it that thou doest so much desire to be rid of . for all these thing what be they but fit object for an understanding that beholdeth everything accord to it true nature to exercise itself upon ? be patient therefore until that a a strong stomach that turn all thing into his own nature and a a great fire that turneth in flame and light whatsoever thou doest cast into it thou have make these thing also familiar and a it be natural unto thee . xxxiii . let it not be in any man 's power to say truly of thee that thou art not truly simple or sincere and open or not good . let him be deceive whosoever he be that shall have any such opinion of thee . for all this doth depend of thee . for who be it that should hinder thee from be either truly simple or good ? do thou only resolve rather not to live than not to be such . for indeed neither doth it stand with reason that he should live that be not such . what then be it that may upon this present occasion accord to best reason and discretion either be say or do ? for whatsoever it be it be in thy power either to do it or to say it and therefore seek not any pretence a though thou wert hinder . thou wilt never cease groaning and complain until such time a that what pleasure be unto the voluptuous be unto thee to do in everything that present itself whatsoever may be do conformably and agreeably to the proper constitution of man or to man a he be a man . for thou must account that pleasure whatsoever it be that thou mayest do accord to thine own nature . and to do this every place will fit thee . unto the cylindrus or roller it be not grant to move everywhere accord to it own proper motion a neither unto the water nor unto the fire nor unto any other thing that either be merely natural or natural and sensitive but not rational for many thing there be that can hinder their operation . but of the mind and understand this be the proper privilege that accord to it own nature and a it will itself it can pass through every obstacle that it find and keep straight on forward . set therefore before thine eye this happiness and felicity of thy mind whereby it be able to pass through all thing and be capable of all motion whether a the fire upwards or a the stone downwards or a the cylindrus through that which be slop content thyself with it and seek not after any other thing . for all other kind of hindrance that be not hindrance of thy mind either they be proper to the body or merely proceed from the opinion reason not make that resistance that it should but basely and cowardly suffer itself to be foil and of themselves can neither wind nor do any hurt at all . else must he of necessity whosoever he be that meet with any of them become bad than he be before . for so be it in all other subject that that be think hurtful unto them whereby they be make worse . but here contrariwise man if he make that good use of them that he should be rather the good and the more praiseworthy for any of those kind of hindrance than otherwise . but generally remember that nothing can hurt a natural citizen that be not hurtful unto the city itself nor anything hurt the city that be not hurtful unto the law itself . but none of these casualty or external hindrance do hurt the law itself or be contrary to that course of justice and equity by which public society be maintain neither therefore do they hurt either city or citizen . xxxiv . a he that be bite by a mad dog be afraid of everything almost that he seeth so unto him whom the dogma have once bite or in whom true knowledge hath make an impression everything almost that he see or read be it never so short or ordinary doth afford a good memento to put him out of all grief and fear a that of the poet 'the wind blow upon the tree and their leaf fall upon the ground . then do the tree begin to bud again and by the spring time they put forth new branch . so be the generation of men some come into the world and others go out of it . ' of these leaf then thy child be . and they also that applaud thee so gravely or that applaud thy speech with that their usual acclamation axiopistwz o wisely speak i and speak well of thee a on the other side they that stick not to curse thee they that privately and secretly dispraise and deride thee they also be but leaf . and they also that shall follow in whose memory the name of men famous after death be preserve they be but leave neither . for even so be it of all these worldly thing . their spring come and they be put forth . then blow the wind and they go down . and then in lieu of them grow others out of the wood or common matter of all thing like unto them . but to endure but for a while be common unto all . why then shouldest thou so earnestly either seek after these thing or fly from them a though they should endure for ever ? yet a little while and thine eye will be close up and for him that carry thee to thy grave shall another mourn within a while after . . a good eye must be good to see whatsoever be to be see and not green thing only . for that be proper to sore eye . so must a good ear and a good smell be ready for whatsoever be either to be hear or smelt and a good stomach a indifferent to all kind of food a a millstone be to whatsoever she be make for to grind . a ready therefore must a sound understanding be for whatsoever shall happen . but he that saith o that my child might live ! and o that all men might commend me for whatsoever i do ! be an eye that seek after green thing or a teeth after that which be tender . xxxvi . there be not any man that be so happy in his death but that some of those that be by him when he die will be ready to rejoice at his supposed calamity . be it one that be virtuous and wise indeed ? will there not some one or other be find who thus will say to himself 'well now at last shall i be at rest from this pedagogue . he do not indeed otherwise trouble u much but i know well enough that in his heart he do much condemn u . ' thus will they speak of the virtuous . but a for u alas i how many thing be there for which there be many that glad would be to be rid of u . this therefore if thou shalt think of whensoever thou diest thou shalt die the more willingly when thou shalt think with thyself i be now to depart from that world wherein those that have be my near friend and acquaintance they whom i have so much suffer for so often pray for and for whom i have take such care even they would have me die hop that after my death they shall live happy than they do before . what then should any man desire to continue here any long ? nevertheless whensoever thou diest thou must not be less kind and loving unto them for it but a before see them continue to be their friend to wish them well and meekly and gently to carry thyself towards them but yet so that on the other side it make thee not the more unwilling to die . but a it fareth with them that die an easy quick death whose soul be soon separate from their body so must thy separation from them be . to these have nature join and annexed me now she part u i be ready to depart a from friend and kinsman but yet without either reluctancy or compulsion . for this also be accord to nature . xxxvii . use thyself as often a thou seest any man do anything presently if it be possible to say unto thyself what be this man 's end in this his action ? but begin this course with thyself first of all and diligently examine thyself concern whatsoever thou doest . xxxviii . remember that that which set a man at work and hath power over the affection to draw them either one way or the other way be not any external thing properly but that which be hide within every man 's dogma and opinion that that be rhetoric that be life that to speak true be man himself . a for thy body which a a vessel or a case compasseth thee about and the many and curious instrument that it hath annexed unto it let them not trouble thy thought . for of themselves they be but a a carpenter 's axe but that they be bear with u and naturally stick unto u . but otherwise without the inward cause that hath power to move them and to restrain them those part be of themselves of no more use unto u than the shuttle be of itself to the weaver or the pen to the writer or the whip to the coachman . the eleventh book i. the natural property and privilege of a reasonable soul be that she seeth herself that she can order and compose herself that she make herself a she will herself that she reap her own fruit whatsoever whereas plant tree unreasonable creature what fruit soever be it either fruit properly or analogically only they bear they bear them unto others and not to themselves . again whensoever and wheresoever sooner or later her life doth end she hath her own end nevertheless . for it be not with her a with dancer and player who if they be interrupt in any part of their action the whole action must needs be imperfect but she in what part of time or action soever she be surprise can make that which she hath in her hand whatsoever it be complete and full so that she may depart with that comfort ' i have live neither want i anything of that which properly do belong unto me . ' again she compasseth the whole world and penetrateth into the vanity and mere outside want substance and solidity of it and stretcheth herself unto the infiniteness of eternity and the revolution or restoration of all thing after a certain period of time to the same state and place a before she fetcheth about and doth comprehend in herself and considers withal and see clearly this that neither they that shall follow u shall see any new thing that we have not see nor they that go before anything more than we but that he that be once come to forty if he have any wit at all can in a manner for that they be all of one kind see all thing both past and future . a proper be it and natural to the soul of man to love her neighbour to be true and modest and to regard nothing so much a herself which be also the property of the law whereby by the way it appear that sound reason and justice come all to one and therefore that justice be the chief thing that reasonable creature ought to propose unto themselves a their end . ii . a pleasant song or dance the pancratiast 's exercise sport that thou art wont to be much take with thou shalt easily contemn if the harmonious voice thou shalt divide into so many particular sound whereof it doth consist and of every one in particular shall ask thyself whether this or that sound be it that doth so conquer thee . for thou wilt be ashamed of it . and so for shame if accordingly thou shalt consider it every particular motion and posture by itself and so for the wrestler 's exercise too . generally then whatsoever it be besides virtue and those thing that proceed from virtue that thou art subject to be much affect with remember presently thus to divide it and by this kind of division in each particular to attain unto the contempt of the whole . this thou must transfer and apply to thy whole life also . iii . that soul which be ever ready even now presently if need be from the body whether by way of extinction or dispersion or continuation in another place and estate to be separate how blessed and happy be it ! but this readiness of it it must proceed not from an obstinate and peremptory resolution of the mind violently and passionately set upon opposition a christian be wont but from a peculiar judgment with discretion and gravity so that others may be persuade also and draw to the like example but without any noise and passionate exclamation . iv . have i do anything charitably ? then be i benefit by it . see that this upon all occasion may present itself unto thy mind and never cease to think of it . what be thy profession ? to be good . and how should this be well bring to pass but by certain theorem and doctrine some concern the nature of the universe and some concern the proper and particular constitution of man ? . tragedy be at first brought in and institute to put men in mind of worldly chance and casualty that these thing in the ordinary course of nature do so happen that men that be much pleased and delight by such accident upon this stage would not by the same thing in a great stage be grieve and afflict for here you see what be the end of all such thing and that even they that cry out so mournfully to cithaeron must bear them for all their cry and exclamation as well a others . and in very truth many good thing be speak by these poet a that for example be an excellent passage 'but if so be that i and my two child be neglect by the god they have some reason even for that ' c. and again 'it will but little avail thee to storm and rage against the thing themselves ' c. again 'to reap one 's life a a ripe ear of corn ' and whatsoever else be to be find in them that be of the same kind . after the tragedy the ancient comedy be bring in which have the liberty to inveigh against personal vice be therefore through this her freedom and liberty of speech of very good use and effect to restrain men from pride and arrogancy . to which end it be that diogenes take also the same liberty . after these what be either the middle or new comedy admit for but merely or for the most part at least for the delight and pleasure of curious and excellent imitation ? 'it will steal away look to it ' c. why no man deny but that these also have some good thing whereof that may be one but the whole drift and foundation of that kind of dramatical poetry what be it else but a we have say ? vi . how clearly doth it appear unto thee that no other course of thy life could fit a true philosopher 's practice well than this very course that thou art now already in ? vii . a branch cut off from the continuity of that which be next unto it must needs be cut off from the whole tree so a man that be divide from another man be divide from the whole society . a branch be cut off by another but he that hat and be averse cut himself off from his neighbour and know not that at the same time he divide himself from the whole body or corporation . but herein be the gift and mercy of god the author of this society in that once cut off we may grow together and become part of the whole again . but if this happen often the misery be that the further a man be run in this division the harder he be to be reunite and restore again and however the branch which once cut of afterwards be graffed in gardener can tell you be not like that which sprout together at first and still continue in the unity of the body . viii . to grow together like fellow branch in matter of good correspondence and affection but not in matter of opinion . they that shall oppose thee in thy right course a it be not in their power to divert thee from thy good action so neither let it be to divert thee from thy good affection towards them . but be it thy care to keep thyself constant in both both in a right judgment and action and in true meekness towards them that either shall do their endeavour to hinder thee or at least will be displease with thee for what thou hast do . for to fail in either either in the one to give over for fear or in the other to forsake thy natural affection towards him who by nature be both thy friend and thy kinsman be equally base and much savouring of the disposition of a cowardly fugitive soldier . ix . it be not possible that any nature should be inferior unto art since that all art imitate nature . if this be so that the most perfect and general nature of all nature should in her operation come short of the skill of art be most improbable . now common be it to all art to make that which be bad for the good 's sake . much more then doth the common nature do the same . hence be the first ground of justice . from justice all other virtue have their existence . for justice can not be preserve if either we settle our mind and affection upon worldly thing or be apt to be deceive or rash and inconstant . . the thing themselves which either to get or to avoid thou art put to so much trouble come not unto thee themselves but thou in a manner go unto them . let then thine own judgment and opinion concern those thing be at rest and a for the thing themselves they stand still and quiet without any noise or stir at all and so shall all pursuing and fly cease . xi . then be the soul a empedocles doth liken it like unto a sphere or globe when she be all of one form and figure when she neither greedily stretcheth out herself unto anything nor basely contract herself or lie flat and deject but shineth all with light whereby she do see and behold the true nature both that of the universe and her own in particular . xii . will any contemn me ? let him look to that upon what ground he do it my care shall be that i may never be find either do or speak anything that doth truly deserve contempt . will any hate me ? let him look to that . i for my part will be kind and love unto all and even unto him that hat me whom soever he be will i be ready to show his error not by way of exprobation or ostentation of my patience but ingenuously and meekly such a be that famous phocion if so be that he do not dissemble . for it be inwardly that these thing must be that the god who look inwardly and not upon the outward appearance may behold a man truly free from all indignation and grief . for what hurt can it be unto thee whatsoever any man else doth as long a thou mayest do that which be proper and suitable to thine own nature ? wilt not thou a man wholly appoint to be both what and a the common good shall require accept of that which be now seasonable to the nature of the universe ? xiii . they contemn one another and yet they seek to please one another and whilest they seek to surpass one another in worldly pomp and greatness they most debase and prostitute themselves in their good part one to another . xiv . how rotten and insincere be he that saith i be resolve to carry myself hereafter towards you with all ingenuity and simplicity . o man what doest thou mean ! what need this profession of thine ? the thing itself will show it . it ought to be write upon thy forehead . no sooner thy voice be hear than thy countenance must be able to show what be in thy mind even a he that be love know presently by the look of his sweetheart what be in her mind . such must he be for all the world that be truly simple and good a he whose arm hole be offensive that whosoever stand by as soon a ever he come near him may a it be smell him whether he will or no . but the affectation of simplicity be nowise laudable . there be nothing more shameful than perfidious friendship . above all thing that must be avoid . however true goodness simplicity and kindness can not so be hide but that a we have already say in the very eyes and countenance they will show themselves . . to live happily be an inward power of the soul when she be affect with indifferency towards those thing that be by their nature indifferent . to be thus affected she must consider all worldly object both divide and whole remembering withal that no object can of itself beget any opinion in u neither can come to u but stand without still and quiet but that we ourselves beget and a it be print in ourselves opinion concern them . now it be in our power not to print them and if they creep in and lurk in some corner it be in our power to wipe them off . remember moreover that this care and circumspection of thine be to continue but for a while and then thy life will be at an end . and what should hinder but that thou mayest do well with all these thing ? for if they be accord to nature rejoice in them and let them be please and acceptable unto thee . but if they be against nature seek thou that which be accord to thine own nature and whether it be for thy credit or no use all possible speed for the attainment of it for no man ought to be blame for seek his own good and happiness . xvi . of everything thou must consider from whence it come of what thing it doth consist and into what it will be change what will be the nature of it or what it will be like unto when it be change and that it can suffer no hurt by this change . and a for other men 's either foolishness or wickedness that it may not trouble and grieve thee first generally thus what reference have i unto these ? and that we be all bear for one another 's good then more particularly after another consideration a a ram be first in a flock of sheep and a bull in a herd of cattle so be i bear to rule over them . begin yet high even from this if atom be not the beginning of all thing than which to believe nothing can be more absurd then must we need grant that there be a nature that doth govern the universe . if such a nature then be all bad thing make for the good 's sake and all good for one another 's sake . secondly what manner of men they be at board and upon their bed and so forth . but above all thing how they be force by their opinion that they hold to do what they do and even those thing that they do with what pride and self conceit they do them . thirdly that if they do these thing rightly thou hast no reason to be grieve . but if not rightly it must needs be that they do them against their will and through mere ignorance . for a accord to plato 's opinion no soul doth willingly err so by consequent neither doth it anything otherwise than it ought but against her will . therefore be they grieve whensoever they hear themselves charge either of injustice or unconscionableness or covetousness or in general of any injurious kind of deal towards their neighbour . fourthly that thou thyself doest transgress in many thing and art even such another a they be . and though perchance thou doest forbear the very act of some sin yet hast thou in thyself an habitual disposition to them but that either through fear or vainglory or some such other ambitious foolish respect thou art restrain . fifthly that whether they have sin or no thou doest not understand perfectly . for many thing be do by way of discreet policy and generally a man must know many thing first before he be able truly and judiciously to judge of another man 's action . sixthly that whensoever thou doest take on grievously or makest great woe little doest thou remember then that a man 's life be but for a moment of time and that within a while we shall all be in our graf . seventhly that it be not the sin and transgression themselves that trouble u properly for they have their existence in their mind and understanding only that commit them but our own opinion concern those sin . remove then and be content to part with that conceit of thine that it be a grievous thing and thou hast remove thine anger . but how should i remove it ? how ? reason with thyself that it be not shameful . for if that which be shameful be not the only true evil that be thou also wilt be drive whilest thou doest follow the common instinct of nature to avoid that which be evil to commit many unjust thing and to become a thief and anything that will make to the attainment of thy intend worldly end . eighthly how many thing may and do oftentimes follow upon such fit of anger and grief far more grievous in themselves than those very thing which we be so grieved or angry for . ninthly that meekness be a thing unconquerable if it be true and natural and not affect or hypocritical . for how shall even the most fierce and malicious that thou shalt conceive be able to hold on against thee if thou shalt still continue meek and love unto him and that even at that time when he be about to do thee wrong thou shalt be well disposed and in good temper with all meekness to teach him and to instruct him well ? a for example my son we be not bear for this to hurt and annoy one another it will be thy hurt not mine my son and so to show him forcibly and fully that it be so in very deed and that neither bee do it one to another nor any other creature that be naturally sociable . but this thou must do not scoffingly not by way of exprobation but tenderly without any harshness of word . neither must thou do it by way of exercise or ostentation that they that be by and hear thee may admire thee but so always that nobody be privy to it but himself alone yea though there be more present at the same time . these nine particular head a so many gift from the mus see that thou remember well and begin one day whilest thou art yet alive to be a man indeed . but on the other side thou must take heed as much to flatter them a to be angry with them for both be equally uncharitable and equally hurtful . and in thy passion take it presently to thy consideration that to be angry be not the part of a man but that to be meek and gentle a it savour of more humanity so of more manhood . that in this there be strength and nerve or vigour and fortitude whereof anger and indignation be altogether void . for the nearer everything be unto unpassionateness the nearer it be unto power . and a grief doth proceed from weakness so doth anger . for both both he that be angry and that grieveth have receive a wound and cowardly have a it be yield themselves unto their affection . if thou wilt have a tenth also receive this tenth gift from hercules the guide and leader of the mus that be a mad man 's part to look that there should be no wicked men in the world because it be impossible . now for a man to brook well enough that there should be wicked men in the world but not to endure that any should transgress against himself be against all equity and indeed tyrannical . xvii . four several disposition or inclination there be of the mind and understand which to be aware of thou must carefully observe and whensoever thou doest discover them thou must rectify them say to thyself concern every one of them this imagination be not necessary this be uncharitable this thou shalt speak a another man 's slave or instrument than which nothing can be more senseless and absurd for the fourth thou shalt sharply check and upbraid thyself for that thou doest suffer that more divine part in thee to become subject and obnoxious to that more ignoble part of thy body and the gross lust and concupiscence thereof . xviii . what portion soever either of air or fire there be in thee although by nature it tend upwards submit nevertheless to the ordinance of the universe it abide here below in this mixed body . so whatsoever be in thee either earthy or humid although by nature it tend downwards yet be it against it nature both raise upwards and stand or consistent . so obedient be even the element themselves to the universe abide patiently wheresoever though against their nature they be place until the sound a it be of their retreat and separation . be it not a grievous thing then that thy reasonable part only should be disobedient and should not endure to keep it place yea though it be nothing enjoin that be contrary unto it but that only which be accord to it nature ? for we can not say of it when it be disobedient a we say of the fire or air that it tend upwards towards it proper element for then go it the quite contrary way . for the motion of the mind to any injustice or incontinency or to sorrow or to fear be nothing else but a separation from nature . also when the mind be grieve for anything that be happen by the divine providence then doth it likewise forsake it own place . for it be ordain unto holiness and godliness which specially consist in an humble submission to god and his providence in all thing as well a unto justice these also be part of those duty which a naturally sociable we be bind unto and without which we can not happily converse one with another yea and the very ground and fountain indeed of all just action . xix . he that hath not one and the self same general end always as long a he liveth can not possibly be one and the self same man always . but this will not suffice except thou add also what ought to be this general end . for a the general conceit and apprehension of all those thing which upon no certain ground be by the great part of men deem good can not be uniform and agreeable but that only which be limited and restrain by some certain propriety and condition a of community that nothing be conceive good which be not commonly and publicly good so must the end also that we propose unto ourselves be common and sociable . for he that doth direct all his own private motion and purpose to that end all his action will be agreeable and uniform and by that mean will be still the same man . . remember the fable of the country mouse and the city mouse and the great fright and terror that this be put into . xxi . socrates be wont to call the common conceit and opinion of men the common bugbear of the world the proper terror of silly child . xxii . the lacedaemonians at their public spectacle be wont to appoint seat and form for their stranger in the shadow they themselves be content to sit anywhere . xxiii . what socrates answer unto perdiccas why he do not come unto him l of all death i should die the bad kind of death say he that be not able to requite the good that hath be do unto me . xxiv . in the ancient mystical letter of the ephesian there be an item that a man should always have in his mind some one or other of the ancient worthy . . the pythagoreans be wont betimes in the morning the first thing they do to look up unto the heaven to put themselves in mind of them who constantly and invariably do perform their task a also to put themselves in mind of orderliness or good order and of purity and of naked simplicity . for no star or planet hath any cover before it . xxvi . how socrates look when he be fain to gird himself with a skin xanthippe his wife have take away his clothes and carry them abroad with her and what he say to his fellow and friend who be ashamed and out of respect to him do retire themselves when they saw him thus deck . xxvii . in matter of write or read thou must needs be teach before thou can do either much more in matter of life . 'for thou art bear a mere slave to thy sens and brutish affection ' destitute without teach of all true knowledge and sound reason . xxviii . 'my heart smile within me . ' 'they will accuse even virtue herself with heinous and opprobrious word . ' xxix . a they that long after fig in winter when they can not be have so be they that long after child before they be grant them . . 'as often a a father kisseth his child he should say secretly with himself ' say epictetus 'tomorrow perchance shall he die . ' but these word be ominous . no word ominous say he that signify anything that be natural in very truth and deed not more ominous than this 'to cut down grape when they be ripe . ' green grape ripe grape dry grape or raisin so many change and mutation of one thing not into that which be not absolutely but rather so many several change and mutation not into that which hath no be at all but into that which be not yet in be . xxxi . 'of the free will there be no thief or robber ' out of epictetus whose be this also that we should find a certain art and method of assent and that we should always observe with great care and heed the inclination of our mind that they may always be with their due restraint and reservation always charitable and accord to the true worth of every present object . and a for earnest longing that we should altogether avoid it and to use averseness in those thing only that wholly depend of our own will . it be not about ordinary petty matter believe it that all our strife and contention be but whether with the vulgar we should be mad or by the help of philosophy wise and sober say he . xxxii . socrates say 'what will you have ? the soul of reasonable or unreasonable creature ? of reasonable . but what ? of those whose reason be sound and perfect ? or of those whose reason be vitiate and corrupt ? of those whose reason be sound and perfect . why then labour ye not for such ? because we have them already . what then do ye so strive and contend between you ? ' the twelfth book i. whatsoever thou doest hereafter aspire unto thou mayest even now enjoy and possess if thou doest not envy thyself thine own happiness . and that will be if thou shalt forget all that be past and for the future refer thyself wholly to the divine providence and shalt bend and apply all thy present thought and intention to holiness and righteousness . to holiness in accept willingly whatsoever be send by the divine providence a be that which the nature of the universe hath appoint unto thee which also hath appoint thee for that whatsoever it be . to righteousness in speak the truth freely and without ambiguity and in do all thing justly and discreetly . now in this good course let not other men 's either wickedness or opinion or voice hinder thee no nor the sense of this thy pamper mass of flesh for let that which suffer look to itself . if therefore whensoever the time of thy depart shall come thou shalt readily leave all thing and shalt respect thy mind only and that divine part of thine and this shall be thine only fear not that some time or other thou shalt cease to live but thou shalt never begin to live accord to nature then shalt thou be a man indeed worthy of that world from which thou hadst thy begin then shalt thou cease to be a stranger in thy country and to wonder at those thing that happen daily a thing strange and unexpected and anxiously to depend of diver thing that be not in thy power . ii . god behold our mind and understanding bare and naked from these material vessel and outside and all earthly dross . for with his simple and pure understanding he pierceth into our inmost and purest part which from his a it be by a water pipe and channel first flow and issue . this if thou also shalt use to do thou shalt rid thyself of that manifold luggage wherewith thou art round about encumber . for he that do regard neither his body nor his clothing nor his dwell nor any such external furniture must need gain unto himself great rest and ease . three thing there be in all which thou doest consist of thy body thy life and thy mind . of these the two former be so far forth thine a that thou art bind to take care for them . but the third alone be that which be properly thine . if then thou shalt separate from thyself that be from thy mind whatsoever other men either do or say or whatsoever thou thyself hast heretofore either do or say and all troublesome thought concern the future and whatsoever a either belong to thy body or life be without the jurisdiction of thine own will and whatsoever in the ordinary course of human chance and accident doth happen unto thee so that thy mind keep herself loose and free from all outward coincidental entanglement always in a readiness to depart shall live by herself and to herself do that which be just accept whatsoever doth happen and speak the truth always if i say thou shalt separate from thy mind whatsoever by sympathy might adhere unto it and all time both past and future and shalt make thyself in all point and respect like unto empedocles his allegorical sphere 'all round and circular ' c. and shalt think of no long life than that which be now present then shalt thou be truly able to pass the remainder of thy day without trouble and distraction nobly and generously disposed and in good favour and correspondency with that spirit which be within thee . iii . i have often wonder how it should come to pass that every man love himself best should more regard other men 's opinion concern himself than his own . for if any god or grave master stand by should command any of u to think nothing by himself but what he should presently speak out no man be able to endure it though but for one day . thus do we fear more what our neighbour will think of u than what we ourselves . iv . how come it to pass that the god have order all other thing so well and so lovingly should be overseen in this one only thing that whereas then hath be some very good men that have make many covenant a it be with god and by many holy action and outward service contract a kind of familiarity with him that these men when once they be dead should never be restore to life but be extinct for ever . but this thou mayest be sure of that this if it be so indeed would never have be so order by the god have it be fit otherwise . for certainly it be possible have it be more just so and have it be accord to nature the nature of the universe would easily have borne it . but now because it be not so if so be that it be not so indeed be therefore confident that it be not fit it should be so for thou seest thyself that now seek after this matter how freely thou doest argue and contest with god . but be not the god both just and good in the high degree thou durst not thus reason with them . now if just and good it could not be that in the creation of the world they should either unjustly or unreasonably oversee anything . . use thyself even unto those thing that thou doest at first despair of . for the left hand we see which for the most part lieth idle because not use yet doth it hold the bridle with more strength than the right because it hath be use unto it . vi . let these be the object of thy ordinary meditation to consider what manner of men both for soul and body we ought to be whensoever death shall surprise u the shortness of this our mortal life the immense vastness of the time that hath be before and will he after u the frailty of every worldly material object all these thing to consider and behold clearly in themselves all disguisement of external outside be remove and take away . again to consider the efficient cause of all thing the proper end and reference of all action what pain be in itself what pleasure what death what fame or honour how every man be the true and proper ground of his own rest and tranquillity and that no man can truly be hinder by any other that all be but conceit and opinion . a for the use of thy dogma thou must carry thyself in the practice of them rather like unto a pancratiastes or one that at the same time both fight and wrestle with hand and foot than a gladiator . for this if he lose his sword that he fight with he be go whereas the other hath still his hand free which he may easily turn and manage at his will . vii . all worldly thing thou must behold and consider divide them into matter form and reference or their proper end . viii . how happy be man in this his power that hath be grant unto him that he need not do anything but what god shall approve and that he may embrace contentedly whatsoever god doth send unto him ? ix . whatsoever doth happen in the ordinary course and consequence of natural event neither the god for it be not possible that they either wittingly or unwittingly should do anything amiss nor men for it be through ignorance and therefore against their will that they do anything amiss must be accuse . none then must be accuse . . how ridiculous and strange be he that wonder at anything that happen in this life in the ordinary course of nature ! xi . either fate and that either an absolute necessity and unavoidable decree or a placable and flexible providence or all be a mere casual confusion void of all order and government . if an absolute and unavoidable necessity why doest thou resist ? if a placable and exorable providence make thyself worthy of the divine help and assistance . if all be a mere confusion without any moderator or governor then hast thou reason to congratulate thyself that in such a general flood of confusion thou thyself hast obtain a reasonable faculty whereby thou mayest govern thine own life and action . but if thou beest carry away with the flood it must be thy body perchance or thy life or some other thing that belong unto them that be carry away thy mind and understanding can not . or should it be so that the light of a candle indeed be still bright and lightsome until it be put out and should truth and righteousness and temperance cease to shine in thee whilest thou thyself hast any be ? xii . at the conceit and apprehension that such and such a one hath sin thus reason with thyself what do i know whether this be a sin indeed a it seem to be ? but if it be what do i know but that he himself hath already condemn himself for it ? and that be all one a if a man should scratch and tear his own face an object of compassion rather than of anger . again that he that would not have a vicious man to sin be like unto him that would not have moisture in the fig nor child to welp nor a horse to neigh nor anything else that in the course of nature be necessary . for what shall he do that hath such an habit ? if thou therefore beest powerful and eloquent remedy it if thou canst . xiii . if it be not fit do it not . if it be not true speak it not . ever maintain thine own purpose and resolution free from all compulsion and necessity . xiv . of everything that present itself unto thee to consider what the true nature of it be and to unfold it a it be by divide it into that which be formal that which be material the true use or end of it and the just time that it be appoint to last . . it be high time for thee to understand that there be somewhat in thee well and more divine than either thy passion or thy sensual appetite and affection . what be now the object of my mind be it fear or suspicion or lust or any such thing ? to do nothing rashly without some certain end let that be thy first care . the next to have no other end than the common good . for ala ! yet a little while and thou art no more no more will any either of those thing that now thou seest or of those men that now be live be any more . for all thing be by nature appoint soon to be change turned and corrupt that other thing might succeed in their room . xvi . remember that all be but opinion and all opinion depend of the mind . take thine opinion away and then a a ship that hath stricken in within the arm and mouth of the harbour a present calm all thing safe and steady a bay not capable of any storm and tempest a the poet hath it . xvii . no operation whatsoever it he cease for a while can be truly say to suffer any evil because it be at an end . neither can he that be the author of that operation for this very respect because his operation be at an end be say to suffer any evil . likewise then neither can the whole body of all our action which be our life if in time it cease be say to suffer any evil for this very reason because it be at an end nor he truly be say to have be ill affect that do put a period to this series of action . now this time or certain period depends of the determination of nature sometimes of particular nature a when a man dieth old but of nature in general however the part whereof thus change one after another the whole world still continue fresh and new . now that be ever best and most seasonable which be for the good of the whole . thus it appear that death of itself can neither be hurtful to any in particular because it be not a shameful thing for neither be it a thing that depend of our own will nor of itself contrary to the common good and generally a it be both expedient and seasonable to the whole that in that respect it must needs be good . it be that also which be bring unto u by the order and appointment of the divine providence so that he whose will and mind in these thing run along with the divine ordinance and by this concurrence of his will and mind with the divine providence be lead and drive along a it be by god himself may truly be term and esteem the oeo p poc or divinely lead and inspire . xviii . these three thing thou must have always in a readiness first concern thine own action whether thou doest nothing either idly or otherwise than justice and equity do require and concern those thing that happen unto thee externally that either they happen unto thee by chance or by providence of which two to accuse either be equally against reason . secondly what like unto our body be whilest yet rude and imperfect until they be animate and from their animation until their expiration of what thing they be compound and into what thing they shall be dissolve . thirdly how vain all thing will appear unto thee when from on high a it be look down thou shalt contemplate all thing upon earth and the wonderful mutability that they be subject unto consider withal the infinite both greatness and variety of thing aerial and thing celestial that be round about it . and that as often a thou shalt behold them thou shalt still see the same a the same thing so the same shortness of continuance of all those thing . and behold these be the thing that we be so proud and puff up for . xix . cast away from thee opinion and thou art safe . and what be it that hinders thee from casting of it away ? when thou art grieve at anything hast thou forgotten that all thing happen accord to the nature of the universe and that him only it concern who be in fault and moreover that what be now do be that which from ever hath be do in the world and will ever be do and be now do everywhere how nearly all men be allied one to another by a kindred not of blood nor of seed but of the same mind . thou hast also forget that every man 's mind partakes of the deity and issueth from thence and that no man can properly call anything his own no not his son nor his body nor his life for that they all proceed from that one who be the giver of all thing that all thing be but opinion that no man live properly but that very instant of time which be now present . and therefore that no man whensoever he dieth can properly be say to lose any more than an instant of time . . let thy thought ever run upon them who once for some one thing or other be move with extraordinary indignation who be once in the high pitch of either honour or calamity or mutual hatred and enmity or of any other fortune or condition whatsoever . then consider what 's now become of all those thing . all be turn to smoke all to ash and a mere fable and perchance not so much a a fable . a also whatsoever be of this nature a fabius catulinus in the field lucius lupus and stertinius at baiae tiberius at caprem and velius rufus and all such example of vehement prosecution in worldly matter let these also run in thy mind at the same time and how vile every object of such earnest and vehement prosecution be and how much more agreeable to true philosophy it be for a man to carry himself in every matter that offer itself justly and moderately a one that followeth the god with all simplicity . for for a man to be proud and high conceited that he be not proud and high conceited be of all kind of pride and presumption the most intolerable . xxi . to them that ask thee where hast thou see the god or how knowest thou certainly that there be god that thou art so devout in their worship ? i answer first of all that even to the very eye they be in some manner visible and apparent . secondly neither have i ever see mine own soul and yet i respect and honour it . so then for the god by the daily experience that i have of their power and providence towards myself and others i know certainly that they be and therefore worship them . xxii . herein doth consist happiness of life for a man to know thoroughly the true nature of everything what be the matter and what be the form of it with all his heart and soul ever to do that which be just and to speak the truth . what then remaineth but to enjoy thy life in a course and coherence of good action one upon another immediately succeed and never interrupt though for never so little a while ? xxiii . there be but one light of the sun though it be intercept by wall and mountain and other thousand object . there be but one common substance of the whole world though it be conclude and restrain into several different body in number infinite . there be but one common soul though divide into innumerable particular essence and nature . so be there but one common intellectual soul though it seem to be divide . and a for all other part of those general which we have mention a either sensitive soul or subject these of themselves a naturally irrational have no common mutual reference one unto another though many of them contain a mind or reasonable faculty in them whereby they be rule and govern . but of every reasonable mind this the particular nature that it hath reference to whatsoever be of her own kind and desireth to be united neither can this common affection or mutual unity and correspondency be here intercept or divide or confine to particular a those other common thing be . xxiv . what doest thou desire ? to live long . what ? to enjoy the operation of a sensitive soul or of the appetitive faculty ? or wouldst thou grow and then decrease again ? wouldst thou long be able to talk to think and reason with thyself ? which of all these seem unto thee a worthy object of thy desire ? now if of all these thou doest find that they be but little worth in themselves proceed on unto the last which be in all thing to follow god and reason . but for a man to grieve that by death he shall be deprive of any of these thing be both against god and reason . . what a small portion of vast and infinite eternity it be that be allow unto every one of u and how soon it vanisheth into the general age of the world of the common substance and of the common soul also what a small portion be allot unto u and in what a little clod of the whole earth a it be it be that thou doest crawl . after thou shalt rightly have consider these thing with thyself fancy not anything else in the world any more to be of any weight and moment but this to do that only which thine own nature doth require and to conform thyself to that which the common nature doth afford . xxvi . what be the present estate of my understanding ? for herein lieth all indeed . a for all other thing they be without the compass of mine own will and if without the compass of my will then be they a dead thing unto me and a it be mere smoke . xxvii . to stir up a man to the contempt of death this among other thing be of good power and efficacy that even they who esteem pleasure to be happiness and pain misery do nevertheless many of them contemn death as much a any . and can death be terrible to him to whom that only seem good which in the ordinary course of nature be seasonable ? to him to whom whether his action be many or few so they be all good be all one and who whether he behold the thing of the world be always the same either for many year or for few year only be altogether indifferent ? o man ! a a citizen thou hast live and converse in this great city the world . whether just for so many year or no what be it unto thee ? thou hast live thou mayest be sure as long a the law and order of the city require which may be the common comfort of all . why then should it be grievous unto thee if not a tyrant nor an unjust judge but the same nature that bring thee in doth now send thee out of the world ? a if the praetor should fairly dismiss him from the stage whom he have take in to act a while . oh but the play be not yet at an end there be but three act yet act of it ? thou hast well say for in matter of life three act be the whole play . now to set a certain time to every man 's acting belongs unto him only who a first he be of thy composition so be now the cause of thy dissolution . a for thyself thou hast to do with neither . go thy way then well pleased and content for so be he that dismisseth thee . appendix correspondence of . aurelius antoninus and . cornelius fronto ' . cornelius fronto be a roman by descent but of provincial birth be native to cirta in numidia . thence he migrate to rome in the reign of hadrian and become the most famous rhetorician of his day . a a pleader and orator he be count by his contemporary hardly inferior to tully himself and a a teacher his aid be seek for the noble youth of rome . to him be entrust the education of . aurelius and of his colleague . verus in their boyhood and he be reward for his effort by a seat in the senate and the consular rank a. . . by the exercise of his profession he become wealthy and if he speak of his mean a not great he must be compare his wealth with the grandee of rome not with the ordinary citizen . before the present century nothing be know of the work of fronto except a grammatical treatise but in cardinal mai publish a number of letter and some short essay of fronto which he have discover in a palimpsest at milan . other part of the same ms. he find later in the vatican the whole be collect reference be make to the edition of naber leipzig tr bner . ad verum imp . aur . caes . ii . and edit in the year . we now possess part of his correspondence with antoninus pius with . aurelius with . verus and with certain of his friend and also several rhetorical and historical fragment . though none of the more ambitious work of fronto have survive there be enough to give proof of his power . never be a great literary reputation less deserve . it would be hard to conceive of anything more vapid than the style and conception of these letter clearly the man be a pedant without imagination or taste . such indeed be the age he live in and it be no marvel that he be like to his age . but there must have be more in him than mere pedantry there be indeed a heart in the man which marcus found and he find also a tongue which could speak the truth . fronto 's letter be by no mean free from exaggeration and laudation but they do not show that loathsome flattery which fill the roman court . he really admire what he praise and his way of say so be not unlike what often pass for criticism at the present day . he be not afraid to reprove what he think amiss and the astonishment of marcus at this will prove if proof be need that he be not use to plain deal . how happy i be he write that my friend marcus cornelius so distinguish a an orator and so noble a a man think me worth praise and blame . in another place he deem himself blest because pronto have teach him to speak the truth although the context show him to be speak of expression it be still a point in favour of pronto . a sincere heart be good than literary taste and if fronto have not do his duty by the young prince it be not easy to understand the friendship which remain between them up to the last . ad . caes iii . ad . caes iii . an example of the frankness which be between them be give by a difference they have over the case of herodes atticus . herodes be a greek rhetorician who have a school at rome and marcus aurelius be among his pupil . both marcus and the emperor antoninus have a high opinion of herodes and all we know go to prove he be a man of high character and princely generosity . when quite young he be make administrator of the free city in asia nor be it surprise to find that he make bitter enemy there indeed a just ruler be sure to make enemy . the end of it be that an athenian deputation head by the orator theodotus and demostratus make serious accusation against his honour . there be no need to discuss the merit of the case here suffice it to say herodes succeed in defend himself to the satisfaction of the emperor . pronto appear to have take the delegate ' part and to have accept a brief for the prosecution urge to some extent by personal consideration and in this cause marcus aurelius write to fronto a follow 'aurelius caesar to his friend fronto greet . ' i know you have often tell me you be anxious to find how you might best please me . now be the time now you can increase my love towards you if it can be increase . a trial be at hand in which people seem likely not only to hear your speech with pleasure but to see your indignation with impatience . i see no one who dare give you a hint in the matter for those who be less friendly prefer to see you act with some inconsistency and those who be more friendly fear to seem too friendly to your opponent if they should dissuade you from your accusation then again in case you have prepare something neat for the occasion they can not endure to rob you of your harangue by silence you . therefore whether you think me a rash counsellor or a bold boy or too kind to your opponent not because i think it good i will offer my counsel with some caution . but why have i say offer my counsel ? no i demand it from you i demand it boldly and if i succeed i promise to remain under your obligation . what ? you will say if i be attackt shall i not pay tit for tat ? ah but you will get great glory if even when attackt you answer nothing . indeed if he begin it answer a you will and you will have fair excuse but i have demand of him that he shall not begin and i think i have succeed . i love each of you accord to your merit and i know that lie be educate in the house of p. calvisius my grandfather and that i be educate by you therefore i be full of anxiety that this most disagreeable business shall be manage as honourably a possible . i trust you may approve my advice for my intention you will approve . at least i prefer to write unwisely rather than to be silent unkindly . ' ad . caes ii . . fronto reply thank the prince for his advice and promising that he will confine himself to the fact of the case . but he point out that the charge bring against herodes be such that they can hardly be make agreeable amongst them be spoliation violence and murder . however he be willing even to let some of these drop if it be the prince 's pleasure . to this marcus return the follow answer 'this one thing my dear fronto be enough to make me truly grateful to you that so far from reject my counsel you have even approve it . a to the question you raise in your kind letter my opinion be this all that concern the case which you be support must be clearly bring forward what concern your own feeling though you may have have just provocation should be leave unsaid . ' the story do credit to both . fronto show no loss of temper at the interference nor shrink from state his case with frankness and marcus with forbearance remarkable in a prince do not command that his friend be leave unmolested but merely stipulate for a fair trial on the merit of the case . another example may be give from a letter of fronto 's here be something else quarrelsome and querulous . i have sometimes find fault with you in your absence somewhat seriously in the company of a few of my most intimate friend at time for example when you mixt in society with a more solemn look than be fit or would read book in the theatre or in a banquet nor do i absent myself from theatre or banquet when you do . then i use to call you a hard man no good company even disagreeable sometimes when anger get the good of me . but do any one else in the same banquet speak against you i could not endure to hear it with equanimity . thus it be easy for me to say something to your disadvantage myself than to hear others do it just a i could more easily bear to chastise my daughter gratia than to see her chastise by another . ' . ad . . caes . iii . . . iv . . the text be obscure the affection between them be clear from every page of the correspondence . a few instance be now give which be write at different period to my master . 'this be how i have past the last few day . my sister be suddenly seize with an internal pain so violent that i be horrify at her look my mother in her trepidation on that account accidentally bruise her side on a corner of the wall she and we be greatly troubled about that blow . for myself on go to rest i find a scorpion in my bed but i do not lie down upon him i kill him first . if you be get on good that be a consolation . my mother be easy now thank be to god . good bye best and sweet master . my lady sends you greet . ' 'what word can i find to fit my have luck or how shall i upbraid a it deserve the hard constraint which be lay upon me ? it tie me fast here troubled my heart be and beset by such anxiety nor do it allow me to make haste to my fronto my life and delight to be near him at such a moment of ill health in particular to hold his hand to chafe gently that identical foot so far a may be do without discomfort to attend him in the bath to support his step with my arm . ' 'this morning i do not write to you because i hear you be good and because i be myself engage in other business and i can not ever endure to write anything to you unless with mind at ease and untroubled and free . so if we be all right let me know what i desire you know and how properly i desire it i know . farewell my master always in every chance first in my mind a you deserve to be . my master see i be not asleep and i compel myself to sleep that you may not be angry with me . you gather i be write this late at night . ' ad . caes . v. . i. . iii . . 'what spirit do you suppose be in me when i remember how long it be since i have see you and why i have not see you and it may be i shall not see you for a few day yet while you be strengthen yourself a you must . so while you lie on the sick bed my spirit also will lie low anti whenas by god 's mercy you shall stand upright my spirit too will stand firm which be now burn with the strong desire for you . farewell soul of your prince your o my dear fronto most distinguished consul ! i yield you have conquer all who have ever love before you have conquer out and out in love 's contest . receive the victor 's wreath and the herald shall proclaim your victory aloud before your own tribunal . cornelius fronto consul win and be crown victor in the open international love race . but beaten though i may be i shall neither slacken nor relax my own zeal . well you shall love me more than any man love any other man but i who possess a faculty of love less strong shall love you more than any one else love you more indeed than you love yourself . gratia and i will have to fight for it i doubt i shall not get the good of her . for a plautus say her love be like rain whose big drop not only penetrate the dress but drench to the very marrow . ' marcus aurelius seem to have be about eighteen year of age when the correspondence begin fronto be some thirty year old . the systematic education of the young prince seem to have be finisht and pronto now act more a his adviser than his tutor . he recommend the prince to use simplicity in his public speech and to avoid affectation . marcus devote his attention to the old author who then have a great vogue at rome ennius plautus nawius and such orator a cato and gracchus . pronto urge on him the study of cicero whose letter he say be all worth reading . ad . caes . iii . . the writer sometimes use archaism such a quom which i render 'whenas ' . ad . caes . ii . . the writer parody the proclamation at the greek game the word also be greek . from internal evidence the letter be not arrange in order of time . see naher 's prolegomena p. xx . foil . ad . caes . iii . x. ad . caes ii . iii . ii . . when he wish to compliment marcus he declare one or other of his letter have the true tullian ring . marcus give his night to read when he ought to be sleep . he exercise himself in verse composition and on rhetorical theme . 'it be very nice of you ' he write to fronto 'to ask for my hexameter i would have send them at once if i have them by me . the fact be my secretary anicetus you know who i mean do not pack up any of my composition for me to take away with me . he know my weakness he be afraid that if i get hold of them i might as usual make smoke of them . however there be no fear for the hexameter . i must confess the truth to my master i love them . i study at night since the day be take up with the theatre . i be weary of an evening and sleepy in the daylight and so i do n't do much . yet i have make extract from sixty book five volume of them in these latter day . but when you read remember that the sixty include play of novius and farce and some little speech of scipio do n't be too much startle at the number . you remember your polemon but i pray you do not remember horace who have die with pollio as far a i be concern . farewell my dear and most affectionate friend most distinguished consul and my beloved master whom i have not see these two year . those who say two month count the day . shall i ever see you again ? ' sometimes fronto send him a theme to work up a thus ' . lucilius tribune of the people violently throw into prison a free roman citizen against the opinion of his colleague who demand his release . for this act he be brand by the censor . analyse the case and then take both side in turn attacking and defend . ' or again ' a roman consul doff his state robe don the gauntlet and kill a lion amongst the young men at the quinquatrus in full view of the people of rome . denunciation before the censor . ' the prince have a fair knowledge of greek and quote from homer plato euripides but for some reason fronto dissuade him from this study . his meditation be write in greek . he continue his literary study throughout his life and after he become emperor we still find him ask his adviser for copy of cicero 's letter by which he hop to improve his vocabulary . pronto help him with a supply of simile which it seem he do not think of readily . it be to be fear that the fount of marcus 's eloquence be pump up by artificial mean . ad . caes . ii . . he imply a in i. that he have cease to study horace . pollio be a grammarian who teach marcus . ad . caes . v. . . ep . gracae . ad anton . imp . ii . . some idea of his literary style may be gather from the letter which follow ' i hear polemo declaim the other day to say something of thing sublunary . if you ask what i thought of him listen . he seem to me an industrious farmer endow with the great skill who have cultivate a large estate for corn and vine only and indeed with a rich return of fine crop . but yet in that land of his there be no pompeian fig or arician vegetable no tarentine rise or please coppice or thick grove or shady plane tree all be for use rather than for pleasure such a one ought rather to commend but care not to love . a pretty bold idea be it not and rash judgment to pass censure on a man of such reputation ? but whenas i remember that i be write to you i think i be less bold than you would have me . 'in that point i be wholly undecided . 'there 's an unpremeditated hendecasyllable for you . so before i begin to poetize i 'll take an easy with you . farewell my heart 's desire your verus 's best beloved most distinguisht consul master most sweet . farewell i ever pray sweet soul . what a letter do you think you have write me i could make bold to say that never do she who bore me and nurst me write anything so delightful so honey sweet . and this do not come of your fine style and eloquence otherwise not my mother only but all who breathe . ' ad . caes ii . . to the pupil never be anything on earth so fine a his master 's eloquence on this theme marcus fairly bubble over with enthusiasm . 'well if the ancient greek ever write anything like this let those who know decide it for me if i dare say so i never read any invective of cato 's so fine a your encomtum . o if my lord could be sufficiently praise sufficiently praise he would have be undoubtedly by you ! this kind of thing be not do nowadays . it be easy to match pheidias easy to match apelles easier in a word to match demosthenes himself or cato himself than to match this finisht and perfect work . never have i read anything more refined anything more after the ancient type anything more delicious anything more latin . o happy you to be endow with eloquence so great ! o happy i to be tinder the charge of such a master ! o argument o arrangement o elegance o wit o beauty o word o brilliancy o subtilty o grace o treatment o everything ! mischief take me if you ought not to have a rod put in your hand one day a diadem on your brow a tribunal raise for you then the herald would summon u all why do i say u ? would summnon all those scholar and orator one by one you would beckon them forward with your rod and admonish them . hitherto i have have no fear of this admonition many thing help me to enter within your school . i write this in the utmost haste for whenas i be send you so kindly a letter from my lord what need a longer letter of mine ? farewell then glory of roman eloquence boast of your friend magnifico most delightful man most distinguished consul master most sweet . 'after this you will take care not to tell so many fib of me especially in the senate . a monstrous fine speech this be ! o if could kiss your head at every heading of it ! you have look down on all with a vengeance . this oration once read in vain shall we study in vain shall we toil in vain strain every nerve . farewell always most sweet master . ' ad . caes . ii . . the emperor antoninus pius be speak of a dominus vieus . this sentence be write in greek . several of these word be greek and the meaning be not quite clear . sometimes fronto descends from the height of eloquence to offer practical advice a when he suggest how marcus should deal with his suite . it be more difficult he admit to keep courtier in harmony than to tame lion with a lute but if it be to be do it must be by eradicate jealousy . 'do not let your friend ' say fronto ' 'envy each other or think that what you give to another be filch from them . keep away envy from your suite and you will find your friend kindly and harmonious . ' here and there we meet with allusion to his daily life which we could wish to be more frequent . he go to the theatre or the law court or take part in court ceremony but his heart be always with his book . the vintage season with it religious rite be always spend by antoninus pius in the country . the following letter give sonic notion of a day 's occupation at that time 'my dear master i be well . to day i study from the ninth hour of the night to the second hour of day after take food . i then put on my slipper and from time second to the third hour have a most enjoyable walk up and down before my chamber . then boot and cloak for so we be command to appear i go to wait upon my lord the emperor . we go a hunting do doughty deed hear a rumour that boar have be catch but there be nothing to see . however we climb a pretty steep hill and in the afternoon return home . i go straight to my book . off with the boot down with the cloak i spend a couple of hour in bed . i read cato 's speech on the property of pulchra and another in which he impeach a tribune . ho ho ! i hear you cry to your man off with you as fast a you can and bring me these speech from the library of apollo . no use to send i have those book with me too . you must get round the tiberian librarian you will have to spend something on the matter and when i return to town i shall expect to go share with him . well after read these speech i write a wretched trifle destine for drown or burn . no indeed my attempt at write do not come off at all to day the composition of a hunter or a vintager whose shout be echo through my chamber hateful and wearisome a the law court . what have i say ? yes it be rightly say for my master be an orator . i think i have catch cold whether from walk in slipper or from write badly i do not know . i be always annoy with phlegm but to day i seem to snivel more than usual . well i will pour oil on my head and go off to sleep . i do n't mean to put one drop in my lamp to day so weary be i from rid and sneeze . farewell dear and most beloved master whom i miss i may say more than rome it dl ' ad caes . iv . . ii . iv . . 'my beloved master i be well . i sleep a little more than usual for my slight cold which seem to be well again . so i spend the time from the eleventh hour of the night to the third of the day partly in read in cato 's agriculture partly in write not quite so badly a yesterday indeed . then after wait upon my father i soothe my throat with honey water eject it without swallow i might say gargle but i wo n't though i think the word be find in novius and elsewhere . after attend to my throat i go to my father and stood by his side a he sacrifice . then to luncheon . what do you think i have to eat ? a bit of bread so big while i watch others gobble boiled bean onion and fish full of roe . then we set to work at gather the grape with plenty of sweat and shouting and a the quotation run a few high hang cluster do we leave survivor of the vintage . after the sixth hour we return home . i do a little work and poor work at that . then i have a long gossip with my dear mother sit on the bed . my conversation be what do you think my friend fronto be do just now ? she say and what do you think of my friend gratia ? ' my turn now and what of our little gratia the sparrowkin ? after this kind of talk and an argument a to which of you love the other most the gong sound the signal that my father have go to the bath . we sup after ablution in the oil cellar i mean we sup after ablution not after ablution in the oil cellar and listen with enjoyment to the rustic gibe . after return before turn on my side to snore i do my task and give an account of the day to my delightful master whom if i could long for a little more i should not mind grow a trifle thinner . farewell fronto wherever you be honey sweet my darling my delight . why do i want you ? i can love you while far away . ' one anecdote put marcus before u in a new light fronto 's wife . fronto 's daughter ad . caes ii . . 'when my father return home from the vineyard i mount my horse a usual and rode on ahead some little way . well there on the road be a herd of sheep stand all crowd together a though the place be a desert with four dog and two shepherd but nothing else . then one shepherd say to another shepherd on see a number of horseman ' i say ' say he 'look you at those horseman they do a deal of robbery . ' when i hear this i clap spur to my horse and ride straight for the sheep . in consternation the sheep scatter hither and thither they be fleet and bleat . a shepherd throw his fork and the fork fall on the horseman who come next to me . we make our escape . ' we like marcus none the bad for this spice of mischief . another letter describe a visit to a country town and show the antiquarian spirit of the writer ' . caesar to his master . fronto greeting . 'after i enter the carriage after i take leave of you we make a journey comfortable enough but we have a few drop of rain to wet u . but before come to the country house we break our journey at anagnia a mile or so from the highroad . then we inspect that ancient town a miniature it be but have in it many antiquity temple and religious ceremony quite out of the way . there be not a corner without it shrine or fane or temple besides many book write on linen which belong to thing sacred . then on the gate a we come out be write twice a follow priest don the fell . i ask one of the inhabitant what that word be . he say it be the word in the hernican dialect for the victim 's skin which the priest put over his conical cap when he enter the city . i find out many other thing which i desire to know but the only thing i do not desire be that you should be absent from me that be my chief anxiety . now for yourself when you leave that place do you go to aurelia or to campania ? be sure to write to me and say whether you have open the vintage or carry a host of book to the country house this also whether you miss me i be foolish to ask it whenas you tell it me of yourself . now if you miss me and if you love me send me your letter often which be a comfort and consolation to me . indeed i should prefer ten time to read your letter than all the vine of gaurus or the marsians for these signian vine have grape too rank and fruit too sharp in the taste but i prefer wine to must for drinking . besides those grape be nice to eat dry than fresh ripe i vow i would rather tread them under foot than put my teeth in them . but i pray they may be gracious and forgiving and grant me free pardon for these jest of mine . farewell best friend dearest most learned sweet master . when you see the must ferment in the vat remember that just so in my heart the longing for you be gush and flow and bubble . good bye . ' ad verum . imp ii . s. fin . santentum make all allowance for conventional exaggeration it be clear from the correspondence that there be deep love between marcus and his preceptor . the letter cover several year in succession but soon after the birth of marcus 's daughter faustina there be a large gap . it do not follow that the letter cease entirely because we know part of the collection be lose but there be probably less intercourse between marcus and fronto after marcus take to the study of philosophy under the guidance of rusticus . when marcus succeed to the throne in the letter begin again with slightly increase formality on fronto 's part and they go on for some four year when fronto who have be continually complain of ill health appear to have die . one letter of the late period give some interesting particular of the emperor 's public life which be worth quote . fronto speaks of marcus 's victory and eloquence in the usual strain of high praise and then continue . 'the army when you take it in hand be sink in luxury and revelry and corrupt with long inactivity . at antiochia the soldier have be wont to applaud at the stage play know more of the garden at the near restaurant than of the battlefield . horse be hairy from lack of groom horseman smooth because their hair have be pull out by the root a rare thing it be to see a soldier with hair on arm or leg . moreover they be good drest than arm so much so that laelianus pontius a strict man of the old discipline break the cuirass of some of them with his finger tip and observed cushion on the horse ' back . at his direction the tuft be cut through and out of the horseman 's saddle come what appear to be feather pluckt from goose . few of the men could vault on horseback the rest clamber up with difficulty by aid of heel and knee and leg not many could throw a lance hurtle most do it without force or power a though they be thing of wool dicing be common in the camp sleep last all night or if they keep watch it be over the winecup . by what regulation to restrain such soldier a these and to turn them to honesty and industry do you not learn from hannibal 's sternness the discipline of africanus the act of metellus record in history . ad verum . imp . ii . i s.fin . a common mark of the effeminate at rome . after the preceptorial letter cease the others be concern with domestic event health and sickness visit or introduction birth or death . thus the empperor write to his old friend who have show some diffidence in seek an interview 'to my master . ' i have a serious grievance against you my dear master yet indeed my grief be more than my grievance because after so long a time i neither embrace you nor speak to you though you visit the palace and the moment after i have leave the prince my brother . i reproach my brother severely for not recall me nor durst he deny the fault . ' fronto again write on one occasion ' i have see your daughter . it be like see you and faustina in infancy so much that be charm her face have take from each of yours . ' or again at a late date i have see your chick most delightful sight that ever i saw in my life so like you that nothing be more like than the likeness ... . by the mercy of heaven they have a healthy colour and strong lung . one hold a piece of white bread like a little prince the other a common piece like a true philosopher son . ' ad verum . imp . aur . caes . i. . ad ant . imp i. . marcus we know be devote to his child . they be delicate in health in spite of fronto 's assurance and only one son survive the father . we find echo of this affection now and again in the letter . 'we have summer heat here still ' writes marcus 'but since my little girl be pretty well if i may say so it be like the brace climate of spring to u . ' when little faustina come back from the valley of the shadow of death her father at once write to inform fronto . the sympathy he ask he also give and a old age bring more and more infirmity marcus become even more solicitous for his beloved teacher . the poor old man suffer a heavy blow in the death of his grandson on which marcus write ' i have just hear of your misfortune . feel grieve a i do when one of your joint give you pain what do you think i feel dear master when you have pain of mind ? ' the old man 's reply in spite of a certain self consciousness be full of pathos . he recount with pride the event of a long and upright life in which he have wrong no man and live in harmony with his friend and family . his affectation fall away from him a the cry of pain be force from his heart 'many such sorrow have fortune visit me with all my life long . to pas by my other affliction i have lose five child under the most pitiful condition possible for the five i lose one by one when each be my only child suffer these blow of bereavement in such a manner that each child be bear to one already bereave . thus i ever lose my child without solace and get them amidst fresh grief ... .. ' the letter continue with reflection on the nature of death 'more to be rejoice at than bewail the young one dy ' and an arraignment of providence not without dignity wrung from him a it be by this last culminating misfortune . it conclude with a sum up of his life in protest against the blow which have fall on his grey head . ad . caes . v. iv . de nepote amissa de nepote amissa 'through my long life i have commit nothing which might bring dishonour or disgrace or shame no deed of avarice or treachery have i do in all my day 's nay but much generosity much kindness much truth and faithfulness have i show often at the risk of my own life . i have live in amity with my good brother whom i rejoice to see in possession of the high office by your father 's goodness and by your friendship at peace and perfect rest . the office which i have myself obtain i never strive for by any underhand mean . i have cultivate my mind rather than my body the pursuit of learn i have prefer to increase my wealth . i prefer to be poor rather than bind by any ' man 's obligation even to want rather than to beg . i have never be extravagant in spend money i have earn it sometimes because i must . i have scrupulously speak the truth and have be glad to hear it speak to me . i have think it good to be neglect than to fawn to be dumb than to feign to be seldom a friend than to be often a flatterer . have seek little deserved not little . so far a i could i have assist each accord to my mean . i have give help readily to the deserve fearlessly to the undeserving . no one by prove to be ungrateful have make me more slow to bestow promptly all benefit i could give nor have i ever be harsh to ingratitude . a fragmentary passage follow in which he appear to speak of his desire for a peaceful end and the desolation of his house . i have suffer long and painful sickness my beloved marcus . then i be visit by pitiful misfortune my wife i have lose my grandson i have lose in germany woe be me ! i have lose my decimanus . if i be make of iron at this tine i could write no more . ' it be noteworthy that in his meditation marcus aurelius mention fronto only once . all his literary study his oratory and criticism such a it be be forget and say he 'fronto teach me not to expect natural affection from the highly bear . ' fronto really say more than this that 'affection ' be not a roman quality nor have it a latin name . roman or not roman marcus find affection in fronto and if he outgrow his master 's intellectual training he never lose touch with the true heart of the man it be that which fronto 's name bring up to his remembrance not dissertation on compound verb or fatuous criticism of style . in the war against the catti . book i. . ad verum ii . note