the book of mormon the book of mormon an account write by the hand of mormon upon plate take from the plate of nephi wherefore it be an abridgment of the record of the people of nephi and also of the lamanites write to the lamanites who be a remnant of the house of israel and also to jew and gentile write by way of commandment and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation write and seal up and hide up unto the lord that they might not be destroy to come forth by the gift and power of god unto the interpretation thereof seal by the hand of moroni and hide up unto the lord to come forth in due time by way of the gentile the interpretation thereof by the gift of god . an abridgment take from the book of ether also which be a record of the people of jar who be scatter at the time the lord confound the language of the people when they be build a tower to get to heaven which be to show unto the remnant of the house of israel what great thing the lord hath do for their father and that they may know the covenant of the lord that they be not cast off forever and also to the convincing of the jew and gentile that jesus be the christ the eternal god manifest himself unto all nation and now if there be fault they be the mistake of men wherefore condemn not the thing of god that ye may be find spotless at the judgment seat of christ . translate by joseph smith jun . the testimony of three witness be it know unto all nation kindred tongue and people unto whom this work shall come that we through the grace of god the father and our lord jesus christ have see the plate which contain this record which be a record of the people of nephi and also of the lamanites their brother and also of the people of jared who come from the tower of which hath be speak . and we also know that they have be translate by the gift and power of god for his voice hath declare it unto u wherefore we know of a surety that the work be true . and we also testify that we have see the engraving which be upon the plate and they have be show unto u by the power of god and not of man . and we declare with word of soberness that an angel of god come down from heaven and he bring and lay before our eye that we behold and saw the plate and the engraving thereon and we know that it be by the grace of god the father and our lord jesus christ that we behold and bear record that these thing be true . and it be marvelous in our eye . nevertheless the voice of the lord command u that we should bear record of it wherefore to be obedient unto the commandment of god we bear testimony of these thing . and we know that if we be faithful in christ we shall rid our garment of the blood of all men and be find spotless before the judgment seat of christ and shall dwell with him eternally in the heaven . and the honor be to the father and to the son and to the holy ghost which be one god . amen . oliver cowdery david whitmer martin harris the testimony of eight witness be it know unto all nation kindred tongue and people unto whom this work shall come that joseph smith jun . the translator of this work have show unto u the plate of which hath be speak which have the appearance of gold and a many of the leaf a the say smith have translate we do handle with our hand and we also saw the engraving thereon all of which have the appearance of ancient work and of curious workmanship . and this we bear record with word of soberness that the say smith have show unto u for we have see and heft and know of a surety that the say smith have get the plate of which we have speak . and we give our name unto the world to witness unto the world that which we have see . and we lie not god bear witness of it . christian whitmer jacob whitmer peter whitmer jun . john whitmer hiram page joseph smith sen. hyrum smith samuel h. smith the first book of nephi his reign and ministry nephi an account of lehi and his wife sariah and his four son be call beginning at the eldest laman lemuel sam and nephi . the lord warn lehi to depart out of the land of jerusalem because he prophesieth unto the people concern their iniquity and they seek to destroy his life . he taketh three day ' journey into the wilderness with his family . nephi taketh his brother and returneth to the land of jerusalem after the record of the jew . the account of their suffering . they take the daughter of ishmael to wife . they take their family and depart into the wilderness . their suffering and affliction in the wilderness . the course of their travel . they come to the large water . nephi 's brother rebel against him . he confoundeth them and buildeth a ship . they call the name of the place bountiful . they cross the large water into the promised land and so forth . this be accord to the account of nephi or in other word i nephi write this record . nephi chapter nephi i nephi have be bear of goodly parent therefore i be taught somewhat in all the learning of my father and have see many affliction in the course of my day nevertheless have be highly favor of the lord in all my day yea have have a great knowledge of the goodness and the mystery of god therefore i make a record of my proceeding in my day . nephi yea i make a record in the language of my father which consist of the learning of the jew and the language of the egyptian . nephi and i know that the record which i make be true and i make it with mine own hand and i make it accord to my knowledge . nephi for it come to pass in the commencement of the first year of the reign of zedekiah king of judah my father lehi have dwell at jerusalem in all his day and in that same year there come many prophet prophesy unto the people that they must repent or the great city jerusalem must be destroy . nephi wherefore it come to pass that my father lehi a he go forth pray unto the lord yea even with all his heart in behalf of his people . nephi and it come to pass a he pray unto the lord there come a pillar of fire and dwelt upon a rock before him and he saw and heard much and because of the thing which he saw and hear he do quake and tremble exceedingly . nephi and it come to pass that he return to his own house at jerusalem and he cast himself upon his bed be overcome with the spirit and the thing which he have see . nephi and be thus overcome with the spirit he be carry away in a vision even that he saw the heaven open and he think he saw god sit upon his throne surround with numberless concourse of angel in the attitude of singing and praise their god . nephi and it come to pass that he saw one descend out of the midst of heaven and he behold that his luster be above that of the sun at noon day . nephi and he also saw twelve others follow him and their brightness do exceed that of the star in the firmament . nephi and they come down and go forth upon the face of the earth and the first come and stand before my father and give unto him a book and bid him that he should read . nephi and it come to pass that a he read he be fill with the spirit of the lord . nephi and he read say wo wo unto jerusalem for i have see thine abomination ! yea and many thing do my father read concern jerusalem that it should be destroy and the inhabitant thereof many should perish by the sword and many should be carry away captive into babylon . nephi and it come to pass that when my father have read and see many great and marvelous thing he do exclaim many thing unto the lord such a great and marvelous be thy work o lord god almighty ! thy throne be high in the heaven and thy power and goodness and mercy be over all the inhabitant of the earth and because thou art merciful thou wilt not suffer those who come unto thee that they shall perish ! nephi and after this manner be the language of my father in the praising of his god for his soul do rejoice and his whole heart be fill because of the thing which he have see yea which the lord have show unto him . nephi and now i nephi do not make a full account of the thing which my father hath write for he hath write many thing which he saw in vision and in dream and he also hath write many thing which he prophesy and spake unto his child of which i shall not make a full account . nephi but i shall make an account of my proceeding in my day . behold i make an abridgment of the record of my father upon plate which i have make with mine own hand wherefore after i have abridge the record of my father then will i make an account of mine own life . nephi therefore i would that ye should know that after the lord have show so many marvelous thing unto my father lehi yea concern the destruction of jerusalem behold he go forth among the people and begin to prophesy and to declare unto them concern the thing which he have both see and hear . nephi and it come to pass that the jew do mock him because of the thing which he testify of them for he truly testify of their wickedness and their abomination and he testify that the thing which he saw and heard and also the thing which he read in the book manifest plainly of the come of the messiah and also the redemption of the world . nephi and when the jew hear these thing they be angry with him yea even a with the prophet of old whom they have cast out and stoned and slain and they also seek his life that they might take it away . but behold i nephi will show unto you that the tender mercy of the lord be over all those whom he hath chosen because of their faith to make them mighty even unto the power of deliverance . nephi chapter nephi for behold it come to pass that the lord spake unto my father yea even in a dream and say unto him bless art thou lehi because of the thing which thou hast do and because thou hast be faithful and declare unto this people the thing which i command thee behold they seek to take away thy life . nephi and it come to pass that the lord command my father even in a dream that he should take his family and depart into the wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that he be obedient unto the word of the lord wherefore he do a the lord command him . nephi and it come to pass that he depart into the wilderness . and he leave his house and the land of his inheritance and his gold and his silver and his precious thing and take nothing with him save it be his family and provision and tent and depart into the wilderness . nephi and he come down by the border near the shore of the red sea and he travel in the wilderness in the border which be nearer the red sea and he do travel in the wilderness with his family which consist of my mother sariah and my elder brother who be laman lemuel and sam . nephi and it come to pass that when he have travel three day in the wilderness he pitch his tent in a valley by the side of a river of water . nephi and it come to pass that he build an altar of stone and make an offering unto the lord and give thanks unto the lord our god . nephi and it come to pass that he call the name of the river laman and it empty into the red sea and the valley be in the border near the mouth thereof . nephi and when my father saw that the water of the river empty into the fountain of the red sea he spake unto laman say o that thou mightest be like unto this river continually run into the fountain of all righteousness ! nephi and he also spake unto lemuel o that thou mightest be like unto this valley firm and steadfast and immovable in keep the commandment of the lord ! nephi now this he spake because of the stiffneckedness of laman and lemuel for behold they do murmur in many thing against their father because he be a visionary man and have lead them out of the land of jerusalem to leave the land of their inheritance and their gold and their silver and their precious thing to perish in the wilderness . and this they say he have do because of the foolish imagination of his heart . nephi and thus laman and lemuel be the eldest do murmur against their father . and they do murmur because they know not the dealing of that god who have create them . nephi neither do they believe that jerusalem that great city could be destroy accord to the word of the prophet . and they be like unto the jew who be at jerusalem who seek to take away the life of my father . nephi and it come to pass that my father do speak unto them in the valley of lemuel with power be fill with the spirit until their frame do shake before him . and he do confound them that they durst not utter against him wherefore they do a he command them . nephi and my father dwelt in a tent . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi be exceedingly young nevertheless be large in stature and also have great desire to know of the mystery of god wherefore i do cry unto the lord and behold he do visit me and do soften my heart that i do believe all the word which have be speak by my father wherefore i do not rebel against him like unto my brother . nephi and i spake unto sam make know unto him the thing which the lord have manifest unto me by his holy spirit . and it come to pass that he believe in my word . nephi but behold laman and lemuel would not hearken unto my word and be grieve because of the hardness of their heart i cry unto the lord for them . nephi and it come to pass that the lord spake unto me say bless art thou nephi because of thy faith for thou hast seek me diligently with lowliness of heart . nephi and inasmuch a ye shall keep my commandment ye shall prosper and shall be lead to a land of promise yea even a land which i have prepare for you yea a land which be choice above all other land . nephi and inasmuch a thy brother shall rebel against thee they shall be cut off from the presence of the lord . nephi and inasmuch a thou shalt keep my commandment thou shalt be make a ruler and a teacher over thy brother . nephi for behold in that day that they shall rebel against me i will curse them even with a sore curse and they shall have no power over thy seed except they shall rebel against me also . nephi and if it so be that they rebel against me they shall be a scourge unto thy seed to stir them up in the way of remembrance . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that i nephi return from speak with the lord to the tent of my father . nephi and it come to pass that he spake unto me say behold i have dream a dream in the which the lord hath command me that thou and thy brother shall return to jerusalem . nephi for behold laban hath the record of the jew and also a genealogy of my forefather and they be engraven upon plate of brass . nephi wherefore the lord hath command me that thou and thy brother should go unto the house of laban and seek the record and bring them down hither into the wilderness . nephi and now behold thy brother murmur say it be a hard thing which i have require of them but behold i have not require it of them but it be a commandment of the lord . nephi therefore go my son and thou shalt be favor of the lord because thou hast not murmur . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi say unto my father i will go and do the thing which the lord hath command for i know that the lord giveth no commandment unto the child of men save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them . nephi and it come to pass that when my father have hear these word he be exceedingly glad for he know that i have be bless of the lord . nephi and i nephi and my brother take our journey in the wilderness with our tent to go up to the land of jerusalem . nephi and it come to pass that when we have go up to the land of jerusalem i and my brother do consult one with another . nephi and we cast lot who of u should go in unto the house of laban . and it come to pass that the lot fell upon laman and laman go in unto the house of laban and he talk with him a he sit in his house . nephi and he desire of laban the record which be engraven upon the plate of brass which contain the genealogy of my father . nephi and behold it come to pass that laban be angry and thrust him out from his presence and he would not that he should have the record . wherefore he say unto him behold thou art a robber and i will slay thee . nephi but laman flee out of his presence and tell the thing which laban have do unto u . and we begin to be exceedingly sorrowful and my brother be about to return unto my father in the wilderness . nephi but behold i say unto them that a the lord liveth and a we live we will not go down unto our father in the wilderness until we have accomplish the thing which the lord hath command u . nephi wherefore let u be faithful in keep the commandment of the lord therefore let u go down to the land of our father 's inheritance for behold he leave gold and silver and all manner of rich . and all this he hath do because of the commandment of the lord . nephi for he know that jerusalem must be destroy because of the wickedness of the people . nephi for behold they have reject the word of the prophet . wherefore if my father should dwell in the land after he hath be command to flee out of the land behold he would also perish . wherefore it must needs be that he flee out of the land . nephi and behold it be wisdom in god that we should obtain these record that we may preserve unto our child the language of our father nephi and also that we may preserve unto them the word which have be speak by the mouth of all the holy prophet which have be deliver unto them by the spirit and power of god since the world begin even down unto this present time . nephi and it come to pass that after this manner of language do i persuade my brother that they might be faithful in keep the commandment of god . nephi and it come to pass that we go down to the land of our inheritance and we do gather together our gold and our silver and our precious thing . nephi and after we have gather these thing together we go up again unto the house of laban . nephi and it come to pass that we go in unto laban and desire him that he would give unto u the record which be engraven upon the plate of brass for which we would give unto him our gold and our silver and all our precious thing . nephi and it come to pass that when laban saw our property and that it be exceedingly great he do lust after it insomuch that he thrust u out and send his servant to slay u that he might obtain our property . nephi and it come to pass that we do flee before the servant of laban and we be oblige to leave behind our property and it fell into the hand of laban . nephi and it come to pass that we flee into the wilderness and the servant of laban do not overtake u and we hide ourselves in the cavity of a rock . nephi and it come to pass that laman be angry with me and also with my father and also be lemuel for he hearken unto the word of laman . wherefore laman and lemuel do speak many hard word unto u their young brother and they do smite u even with a rod . nephi and it come to pass a they smite u with a rod behold an angel of the lord come and stand before them and he spake unto them say why do ye smite your young brother with a rod ? know ye not that the lord hath choose him to be a ruler over you and this because of your iniquity ? behold ye shall go up to jerusalem again and the lord will deliver laban into your hand . nephi and after the angel have speak unto u he depart . nephi and after the angel have depart laman and lemuel again begin to murmur say how be it possible that the lord will deliver laban into our hand ? behold he be a mighty man and he can command fifty yea even he can slay fifty then why not u ? nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that i spake unto my brother say let u go up again unto jerusalem and let u be faithful in keep the commandment of the lord for behold he be mighty than all the earth then why not mighty than laban and his fifty yea or even than his ten of thousand ? nephi therefore let u go up let u be strong like unto moses for he truly spake unto the water of the red sea and they divide hither and thither and our father come through out of captivity on dry ground and the army of pharaoh do follow and be drown in the water of the red sea . nephi now behold ye know that this be true and ye also know that an angel hath speak unto you wherefore can ye doubt ? let u go up the lord be able to deliver u even a our father and to destroy laban even a the egyptian . nephi now when i have speak these word they be yet wroth and do still continue to murmur nevertheless they do follow me up until we come without the wall of jerusalem . nephi and it be by night and i cause that they should hide themselves without the wall . and after they have hide themselves i nephi crept into the city and go forth towards the house of laban . nephi and i be lead by the spirit not know beforehand the thing which i should do . nephi nevertheless i go forth and a i come near unto the house of laban i behold a man and he have fall to the earth before me for he be drunken with wine . nephi and when i come to him i find that it be laban . nephi and i behold his sword and i draw it forth from the sheath thereof and the hilt thereof be of pure gold and the workmanship thereof be exceedingly fine and i saw that the blade thereof be of the most precious steel . nephi and it come to pass that i be constrain by the spirit that i should kill laban but i say in my heart never at any time have i shed the blood of man . and i shrunk and would that i might not slay him . nephi and the spirit say unto me again behold the lord hath deliver him into thy hand . yea and i also know that he have seek to take away mine own life yea and he would not hearken unto the commandment of the lord and he also have take away our property . nephi and it come to pass that the spirit say unto me again slay him for the lord hath deliver him into thy hand nephi behold the lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purpose . it be well that one man should perish than that a nation should dwindle and perish in unbelief . nephi and now when i nephi have hear these word i remember the word of the lord which he spake unto me in the wilderness say that inasmuch a thy seed shall keep my commandment they shall prosper in the land of promise . nephi yea and i also think that they could not keep the commandment of the lord accord to the law of moses save they should have the law . nephi and i also know that the law be engraven upon the plate of brass . nephi and again i know that the lord have deliver laban into my hand for this cause that i might obtain the record accord to his commandment . nephi therefore i do obey the voice of the spirit and take laban by the hair of the head and i smite off his head with his own sword . nephi and after i have smite off his head with his own sword i take the garment of laban and put them upon mine own body yea even every whit and i do gird on his armor about my loin . nephi and after i have do this i go forth unto the treasury of laban . and a i go forth towards the treasury of laban behold i saw the servant of laban who have the key of the treasury . and i command him in the voice of laban that he should go with me into the treasury . nephi and he suppose me to be his master laban for he behold the garment and also the sword gird about my loin . nephi and he spake unto me concern the elder of the jew he know that his master laban have be out by night among them . nephi and i spake unto him a if it have be laban . nephi and i also spake unto him that i should carry the engraving which be upon the plate of brass to my elder brother who be without the wall . nephi and i also bid him that he should follow me . nephi and he suppose that i spake of the brother of the church and that i be truly that laban whom i have slay wherefore he do follow me . nephi and he spake unto me many time concern the elder of the jew a i go forth unto my brother who be without the wall . nephi and it come to pass that when laman saw me he be exceedingly frighten and also lemuel and sam . and they flee from before my presence for they suppose it be laban and that he have slay me and have seek to take away their life also . nephi and it come to pass that i call after them and they do hear me wherefore they do cease to flee from my presence . nephi and it come to pass that when the servant of laban beheld my brother he begin to tremble and be about to flee from before me and return to the city of jerusalem . nephi and now i nephi be a man large in stature and also have receive much strength of the lord therefore i do seize upon the servant of laban and hold him that he should not flee . nephi and it come to pass that i spake with him that if he would hearken unto my word a the lord liveth and a i live even so that if he would hearken unto our word we would spare his life . nephi and i spake unto him even with an oath that he need not fear that he should be a free man like unto u if he would go down in the wilderness with u . nephi and i also spake unto him say surely the lord hath command u to do this thing and shall we not be diligent in keep the commandment of the lord ? therefore if thou wilt go down into the wilderness to my father thou shalt have place with u . nephi and it come to pass that zoram do take courage at the word which i spake . now zoram be the name of the servant and he promise that he would go down into the wilderness unto our father . yea and he also make an oath unto u that he would tarry with u from that time forth . nephi now we be desirous that he should tarry with u for this cause that the jew might not know concern our flight into the wilderness l they should pursue u and destroy u . nephi and it come to pass that when zoram have make an oath unto u our fear do cease concern him . nephi and it come to pass that we take the plate of brass and the servant of laban and depart into the wilderness and journeyed unto the tent of our father . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that after we have come down into the wilderness unto our father behold he be fill with joy and also my mother sariah be exceedingly glad for she truly have mourn because of u . nephi for she have suppose that we have perish in the wilderness and she also have complain against my father tell him that he be a visionary man say behold thou hast lead u forth from the land of our inheritance and my son be no more and we perish in the wilderness . nephi and after this manner of language have my mother complain against my father . nephi and it have come to pass that my father spake unto her say i know that i be a visionary man for if i have not see the thing of god in a vision i should not have know the goodness of god but have tarry at jerusalem and have perish with my brother . nephi but behold i have obtain a land of promise in the which thing i do rejoice yea and i know that the lord will deliver my son out of the hand of laban and bring them down again unto u in the wilderness . nephi and after this manner of language do my father lehi comfort my mother sariah concern u while we journey in the wilderness up to the land of jerusalem to obtain the record of the jew . nephi and when we have return to the tent of my father behold their joy be full and my mother be comfort . nephi and she spake say now i know of a surety that the lord hath command my husband to flee into the wilderness yea and i also know of a surety that the lord hath protect my son and deliver them out of the hand of laban and give them power whereby they could accomplish the thing which the lord hath command them . and after this manner of language do she speak . nephi and it come to pass that they do rejoice exceedingly and do offer sacrifice and burnt offering unto the lord and they give thanks unto the god of israel . nephi and after they have give thanks unto the god of israel my father lehi take the record which be engraven upon the plate of brass and he do search them from the beginning . nephi and he behold that they do contain the five book of moses which give an account of the creation of the world and also of adam and eve who be our first parent nephi and also a record of the jew from the begin even down to the commencement of the reign of zedekiah king of judah nephi and also the prophecy of the holy prophet from the begin even down to the commencement of the reign of zedekiah and also many prophecy which have be speak by the mouth of jeremiah . nephi and it come to pass that my father lehi also find upon the plate of brass a genealogy of his father wherefore he know that he be a descendant of joseph yea even that joseph who be the son of jacob who be sell into egypt and who be preserve by the hand of the lord that he might preserve his father jacob and all his household from perish with famine . nephi and they be also lead out of captivity and out of the land of egypt by that same god who have preserve them . nephi and thus my father lehi do discover the genealogy of his father . and laban also be a descendant of joseph wherefore he and his father have keep the record . nephi and now when my father saw all these thing he be fill with the spirit and begin to prophesy concern his seed nephi that these plate of brass should go forth unto all nation kindred tongue and people who be of his seed . nephi wherefore he say that these plate of brass should never perish neither should they be dim any more by time . and he prophesy many thing concern his seed . nephi and it come to pass that thus far i and my father have keep the commandment wherewith the lord have command u . nephi and we have obtain the record which the lord have command u and search them and find that they be desirable yea even of great worth unto u insomuch that we could preserve the commandment of the lord unto our child . nephi wherefore it be wisdom in the lord that we should carry them with u a we journey in the wilderness towards the land of promise . nephi chapter nephi and now i nephi do not give the genealogy of my father in this part of my record neither at any time shall i give it after upon these plate which i be write for it be give in the record which have be keep by my father wherefore i do not write it in this work . nephi for it sufficeth me to say that we be descendant of joseph . nephi and it mattereth not to me that i be particular to give a full account of all the thing of my father for they can not be write upon these plate for i desire the room that i may write of the thing of god . nephi for the fulness of mine intent be that i may persuade men to come unto the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob and be save . nephi wherefore the thing which be please unto the world i do not write but the thing which be please unto god and unto those who be not of the world . nephi wherefore i shall give commandment unto my seed that they shall not occupy these plate with thing which be not of worth unto the child of men . nephi chapter nephi and now i would that ye might know that after my father lehi have make an end of prophesy concern his seed it come to pass that the lord spake unto him again say that it be not meet for him lehi that he should take his family into the wilderness alone but that his son should take daughter to wife that they might raise up seed unto the lord in the land of promise . nephi and it come to pass that the lord command him that i nephi and my brother should again return unto the land of jerusalem and bring down ishmael and his family into the wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do again with my brother go forth into the wilderness to go up to jerusalem . nephi and it come to pass that we go up unto the house of ishmael and we do gain favor in the sight of ishmael insomuch that we do speak unto him the word of the lord . nephi and it come to pass that the lord do soften the heart of ishmael and also his household insomuch that they take their journey with u down into the wilderness to the tent of our father . nephi and it come to pass that a we journey in the wilderness behold laman and lemuel and two of the daughter of ishmael and the two son of ishmael and their family do rebel against u yea against me nephi and sam and their father ishmael and his wife and his three other daughter . nephi and it come to pass in the which rebellion they be desirous to return unto the land of jerusalem . nephi and now i nephi be grieve for the hardness of their heart therefore i spake unto them say yea even unto laman and unto lemuel behold ye be mine elder brother and how be it that ye be so hard in your heart and so blind in your mind that ye have need that i your young brother should speak unto you yea and set an example for you ? nephi how be it that ye have not hearken unto the word of the lord ? nephi how be it that ye have forget that ye have see an angel of the lord ? nephi yea and how be it that ye have forget what great thing the lord hath do for u in deliver u out of the hand of laban and also that we should obtain the record ? nephi yea and how be it that ye have forget that the lord be able to do all thing accord to his will for the child of men if it so be that they exercise faith in him ? wherefore let u be faithful to him . nephi and if it so be that we be faithful to him we shall obtain the land of promise and ye shall know at some future period that the word of the lord shall be fulfil concern the destruction of jerusalem for all thing which the lord hath speak concern the destruction of jerusalem must be fulfil . nephi for behold the spirit of the lord ceaseth soon to strive with them for behold they have reject the prophet and jeremiah have they cast into prison . and they have seek to take away the life of my father insomuch that they have drive him out of the land . nephi now behold i say unto you that if ye will return unto jerusalem ye shall also perish with them . and now if ye have choice go up to the land and remember the word which i speak unto you that if ye go ye will also perish for thus the spirit of the lord constraineth me that i should speak . nephi and it come to pass that when i nephi have speak these word unto my brother they be angry with me . and it come to pass that they do lay their hand upon me for behold they be exceedingly wroth and they do bind me with cord for they seek to take away my life that they might leave me in the wilderness to be devour by wild beast . nephi but it come to pass that i pray unto the lord say o lord accord to my faith which be in thee wilt thou deliver me from the hand of my brother yea even give me strength that i may burst these band with which i be bound . nephi and it come to pass that when i have say these word behold the band be loose from off my hand and foot and i stood before my brother and i spake unto them again . nephi and it come to pass that they be angry with me again and seek to lay hand upon me but behold one of the daughter of ishmael yea and also her mother and one of the son of ishmael do plead with my brother insomuch that they do soften their heart and they do cease striving to take away my life . nephi and it come to pass that they be sorrowful because of their wickedness insomuch that they do bow down before me and do plead with me that i would forgive them of the thing that they have do against me . nephi and it come to pass that i do frankly forgive them all that they have do and i do exhort them that they would pray unto the lord their god for forgiveness . and it come to pass that they do so . and after they have do pray unto the lord we do again travel on our journey towards the tent of our father . nephi and it come to pass that we do come down unto the tent of our father . and after i and my brother and all the house of ishmael have come down unto the tent of my father they do give thanks unto the lord their god and they do offer sacrifice and burnt offering unto him . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that we have gather together all manner of seed of every kind both of grain of every kind and also of the seed of fruit of every kind . nephi and it come to pass that while my father tarry in the wilderness he spake unto u say behold i have dream a dream or in other word i have see a vision . nephi and behold because of the thing which i have see i have reason to rejoice in the lord because of nephi and also of sam for i have reason to suppose that they and also many of their seed will be save . nephi but behold laman and lemuel i fear exceedingly because of you for behold methought i saw in my dream a dark and dreary wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that i saw a man and he be dress in a white robe and he come and stand before me . nephi and it come to pass that he spake unto me and bid me follow him . nephi and it come to pass that a i follow him i behold myself that i be in a dark and dreary waste . nephi and after i have travel for the space of many hour in darkness i begin to pray unto the lord that he would have mercy on me accord to the multitude of his tender mercy . nephi and it come to pass after i have pray unto the lord i behold a large and spacious field . nephi and it come to pass that i behold a tree whose fruit be desirable to make one happy . nephi and it come to pass that i do go forth and partake of the fruit thereof and i beheld that it be most sweet above all that i ever before taste . yea and i beheld that the fruit thereof be white to exceed all the whiteness that i have ever see . nephi and a i partook of the fruit thereof it fill my soul with exceedingly great joy wherefore i begin to be desirous that my family should partake of it also for i know that it be desirable above all other fruit . nephi and a i cast my eye round about that perhaps i might discover my family also i behold a river of water and it run along and it be near the tree of which i be partake the fruit . nephi and i look to behold from whence it come and i saw the head thereof a little way off and at the head thereof i behold your mother sariah and sam and nephi and they stand a if they know not whither they should go . nephi and it come to pass that i beckon unto them and i also do say unto them with a loud voice that they should come unto me and partake of the fruit which be desirable above all other fruit . nephi and it come to pass that they do come unto me and partake of the fruit also . nephi and it come to pass that i be desirous that laman and lemuel should come and partake of the fruit also wherefore i cast mine eye towards the head of the river that perhaps i might see them . nephi and it come to pass that i saw them but they would not come unto me and partake of the fruit . nephi and i behold a rod of iron and it extend along the bank of the river and lead to the tree by which i stand . nephi and i also behold a strait and narrow path which come along by the rod of iron even to the tree by which i stand and it also lead by the head of the fountain unto a large and spacious field a if it have be a world . nephi and i saw numberless concourse of people many of whom be press forward that they might obtain the path which lead unto the tree by which i stand . nephi and it come to pass that they do come forth and commence in the path which lead to the tree . nephi and it come to pass that there arise a mist of darkness yea even an exceedingly great mist of darkness insomuch that they who have commence in the path do lose their way that they wander off and be lose . nephi and it come to pass that i behold others press forward and they come forth and catch hold of the end of the rod of iron and they do press forward through the mist of darkness cling to the rod of iron even until they do come forth and partake of the fruit of the tree . nephi and after they have partake of the fruit of the tree they do cast their eye about a if they be ashamed . nephi and i also cast my eye round about and behold on the other side of the river of water a great and spacious building and it stand a it be in the air high above the earth . nephi and it be fill with people both old and young both male and female and their manner of dress be exceedingly fine and they be in the attitude of mocking and point their finger towards those who have come at and be partake of the fruit . nephi and after they have taste of the fruit they be ashamed because of those that be scoff at them and they fell away into forbidden path and be lose . nephi and now i nephi do not speak all the word of my father . nephi but to be short in write behold he saw other multitude press forward and they come and catch hold of the end of the rod of iron and they do press their way forward continually hold fast to the rod of iron until they come forth and fell down and partook of the fruit of the tree . nephi and he also saw other multitude feel their way towards that great and spacious building . nephi and it come to pass that many be drown in the depth of the fountain and many be lose from his view wander in strange road . nephi and great be the multitude that do enter into that strange building . and after they do enter into that building they do point the finger of scorn at me and those that be partake of the fruit also but we heed them not . nephi these be the word of my father for as many a heeded them have fall away . nephi and laman and lemuel partook not of the fruit say my father . nephi and it come to pas after my father have speak all the word of his dream or vision which be many he say unto u because of these thing which he saw in a vision he exceedingly fear for laman and lemuel yea he fear l they should be cast off from the presence of the lord . nephi and he do exhort them then with all the feeling of a tender parent that they would hearken to his word that perhaps the lord would be merciful to them and not cast them off yea my father do preach unto them . nephi and after he have preach unto them and also prophesy unto them of many thing he bid them to keep the commandment of the lord and he do cease speaking unto them . nephi chapter nephi and all these thing do my father see and hear and speak a he dwell in a tent in the valley of lemuel and also a great many more thing which can not be write upon these plate . nephi and now a i have speak concern these plate behold they be not the plate upon which i make a full account of the history of my people for the plate upon which i make a full account of my people i have give the name of nephi wherefore they be call the plate of nephi after mine own name and these plate also be call the plate of nephi . nephi nevertheless i have receive a commandment of the lord that i should make these plate for the special purpose that there should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people . nephi upon the other plate should be engraven an account of the reign of the king and the war and contention of my people wherefore these plate be for the more part of the ministry and the other plate be for the more part of the reign of the king and the war and contention of my people . nephi wherefore the lord hath command me to make these plate for a wise purpose in him which purpose i know not . nephi but the lord knoweth all thing from the beginning wherefore he prepareth a way to accomplish all his work among the child of men for behold he hath all power unto the fulfilling of all his word . and thus it be . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now i nephi proceed to give an account upon these plate of my proceeding and my reign and ministry wherefore to proceed with mine account i must speak somewhat of the thing of my father and also of my brother . nephi for behold it come to pas after my father have make an end of speak the word of his dream and also of exhort them to all diligence he spake unto them concern the jew nephi that after they should be destroy even that great city jerusalem and many be carry away captive into babylon accord to the own due time of the lord they should return again yea even be bring back out of captivity and after they should be bring back out of captivity they should possess again the land of their inheritance . nephi yea even six hundred year from the time that my father leave jerusalem a prophet would the lord god raise up among the jew even a messiah or in other word a savior of the world . nephi and he also spake concern the prophet how great a number have testify of these thing concern this messiah of whom he have speak or this redeemer of the world . nephi wherefore all mankind be in a lost and in a fallen state and ever would be save they should rely on this redeemer . nephi and he spake also concern a prophet who should come before the messiah to prepare the way of the lord nephi yea even he should go forth and cry in the wilderness prepare ye the way of the lord and make his path straight for there standeth one among you whom ye know not and he be mighty than i whose shoe 's latchet i be not worthy to unloose . and much spake my father concern this thing . nephi and my father say he should baptize in bethabara beyond jordan and he also say he should baptize with water even that he should baptize the messiah with water . nephi and after he have baptize the messiah with water he should behold and bear record that he have baptize the lamb of god who should take away the sin of the world . nephi and it come to pas after my father have speak these word he spake unto my brother concern the gospel which should be preach among the jew and also concern the dwindling of the jew in unbelief . and after they have slay the messiah who should come and after he have be slain he should rise from the dead and should make himself manifest by the holy ghost unto the gentile . nephi yea even my father spake much concern the gentile and also concern the house of israel that they should be compare like unto an olive tree whose branch should be break off and should be scatter upon all the face of the earth . nephi wherefore he say it must needs be that we should be lead with one accord into the land of promise unto the fulfilling of the word of the lord that we should be scatter upon all the face of the earth . nephi and after the house of israel should be scatter they should be gather together again or in fine after the gentile have receive the fulness of the gospel the natural branch of the olive tree or the remnant of the house of israel should be graft in or come to the knowledge of the true messiah their lord and their redeemer . nephi and after this manner of language do my father prophesy and speak unto my brother and also many more thing which i do not write in this book for i have write a many of them a be expedient for me in mine other book . nephi and all these thing of which i have speak be do a my father dwelt in a tent in the valley of lemuel . nephi and it come to pass after i nephi have hear all the word of my father concern the thing which he saw in a vision and also the thing which he spake by the power of the holy ghost which power he receive by faith on the son of god and the son of god be the messiah who should come i nephi be desirous also that i might see and hear and know of these thing by the power of the holy ghost which be the gift of god unto all those who diligently seek him as well in time of old a in the time that he should manifest himself unto the child of men . nephi for he be the same yesterday to day and forever and the way be prepare for all men from the foundation of the world if it so be that they repent and come unto him . nephi for he that diligently seeketh shall find and the mystery of god shall be unfold unto them by the power of the holy ghost as well in these time a in time of old and as well in time of old a in time to come wherefore the course of the lord be one eternal round . nephi therefore remember o man for all thy doings thou shalt be bring into judgment . nephi wherefore if ye have seek to do wickedly in the day of your probation then ye be find unclean before the judgment seat of god and no unclean thing can dwell with god wherefore ye must be cast off forever . nephi and the holy ghost giveth authority that i should speak these thing and deny them not . nephi chapter nephi for it come to pass after i have desire to know the thing that my father have see and believe that the lord be able to make them know unto me a i sit ponder in mine heart i be catch away in the spirit of the lord yea into an exceedingly high mountain which i never have before see and upon which i never have before set my foot . nephi and the spirit say unto me behold what desirest thou ? nephi and i say i desire to behold the thing which my father saw . nephi and the spirit say unto me believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath speak ? nephi and i say yea thou knowest that i believe all the word of my father . nephi and when i have speak these word the spirit cry with a loud voice say hosanna to the lord the most high god for he be god over all the earth yea even above all . and bless art thou nephi because thou believest in the son of the most high god wherefore thou shalt behold the thing which thou hast desire . nephi and behold this thing shall be give unto thee for a sign that after thou hast behold the tree which bore the fruit which thy father taste thou shalt also behold a man descend out of heaven and him shall ye witness and after ye have witness him ye shall bear record that it be the son of god . nephi and it come to pass that the spirit say unto me look ! and i look and behold a tree and it be like unto the tree which my father have see and the beauty thereof be far beyond yea exceeding of all beauty and the whiteness thereof do exceed the whiteness of the driven snow . nephi and it come to pass after i have see the tree i say unto the spirit i behold thou hast show unto me the tree which be precious above all . nephi and he say unto me what desirest thou ? nephi and i say unto him to know the interpretation thereof for i spake unto him a a man speaketh for i beheld that he be in the form of a man yet nevertheless i know that it be the spirit of the lord and he spake unto me a a man speaketh with another . nephi and it come to pass that he say unto me look ! and i look a if to look upon him and i saw him not for he have go from before my presence . nephi and it come to pass that i look and behold the great city of jerusalem and also other city . and i behold the city of nazareth and in the city of nazareth i behold a virgin and she be exceedingly fair and white . nephi and it come to pass that i saw the heaven open and an angel come down and stand before me and he say unto me nephi what beholdest thou ? nephi and i say unto him a virgin most beautiful and fair above all other virgin . nephi and he say unto me knowest thou the condescension of god ? nephi and i say unto him i know that he loveth his child nevertheless i do not know the meaning of all thing . nephi and he say unto me behold the virgin whom thou seest be the mother of the son of god after the manner of the flesh . nephi and it come to pass that i behold that she be carry away in the spirit and after she have be carry away in the spirit for the space of a time the angel spake unto me say look ! nephi and i look and behold the virgin again bear a child in her arm . nephi and the angel say unto me behold the lamb of god yea even the son of the eternal father ! knowest thou the meaning of the tree which thy father saw ? nephi and i answer him say yea it be the love of god which sheddeth itself abroad in the heart of the child of men wherefore it be the most desirable above all thing . nephi and he spake unto me say yea and the most joyous to the soul . nephi and after he have say these word he say unto me look ! and i look and i behold the son of god go forth among the child of men and i saw many fall down at his foot and worship him . nephi and it come to pass that i behold that the rod of iron which my father have see be the word of god which lead to the fountain of live water or to the tree of life which water be a representation of the love of god and i also behold that the tree of life be a representation of the love of god . nephi and the angel say unto me again look and behold the condescension of god ! nephi and i look and behold the redeemer of the world of whom my father have speak and i also behold the prophet who should prepare the way before him . and the lamb of god go forth and be baptize of him and after he be baptize i behold the heaven open and the holy ghost come down out of heaven and abide upon him in the form of a dove . nephi and i beheld that he go forth minister unto the people in power and great glory and the multitude be gather together to hear him and i behold that they cast him out from among them . nephi and i also behold twelve others follow him . and it come to pass that they be carry away in the spirit from before my face and i saw them not . nephi and it come to pass that the angel spake unto me again say look ! and i look and i behold the heaven open again and i saw angel descend upon the child of men and they do minister unto them . nephi and he spake unto me again say look ! and i look and i behold the lamb of god go forth among the child of men . and i beheld multitude of people who be sick and who be afflict with all manner of disease and with devil and unclean spirit and the angel spake and show all these thing unto me . and they be heal by the power of the lamb of god and the devil and the unclean spirit be cast out . nephi and it come to pass that the angel spake unto me again say look ! and i look and behold the lamb of god that he be take by the people yea the son of the everlasting god be judge of the world and i saw and bear record . nephi and i nephi saw that he be lift up upon the cross and slain for the sin of the world . nephi and after he be slay i saw the multitude of the earth that they be gather together to fight against the apostle of the lamb for thus be the twelve call by the angel of the lord . nephi and the multitude of the earth be gather together and i behold that they be in a large and spacious building like unto the building which my father saw . and the angel of the lord spake unto me again say behold the world and the wisdom thereof yea behold the house of israel hath gather together to fight against the twelve apostle of the lamb . nephi and it come to pass that i saw and bear record that the great and spacious building be the pride of the world and it fell and the fall thereof be exceedingly great . and the angel of the lord spake unto me again say thus shall be the destruction of all nation kindred tongue and people that shall fight against the twelve apostle of the lamb . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that the angel say unto me look and behold thy seed and also the seed of thy brother . and i look and behold the land of promise and i beheld multitude of people yea even a it be in number as many a the sand of the sea . nephi and it come to pass that i behold multitude gather together to battle one against the other and i beheld war and rumor of war and great slaughter with the sword among my people . nephi and it come to pass that i behold many generation pass away after the manner of war and contention in the land and i behold many city yea even that i do not number them . nephi and it come to pass that i saw a mist of darkness on the face of the land of promise and i saw lightning and i hear thunderings and earthquake and all manner of tumultuous noise and i saw the earth and the rock that they rent and i saw mountain tumble into piece and i saw the plain of the earth that they be break up and i saw many city that they be sunk and i saw many that they be burn with fire and i saw many that do tumble to the earth because of the quake thereof . nephi and it come to pass after i saw these thing i saw the vapor of darkness that it pass from off the face of the earth and behold i saw multitude who have not fall because of the great and terrible judgment of the lord . nephi and i saw the heaven open and the lamb of god descend out of heaven and he come down and show himself unto them . nephi and i also saw and bear record that the holy ghost fell upon twelve others and they be ordain of god and chosen . nephi and the angel spake unto me say behold the twelve disciple of the lamb who be choose to minister unto thy seed . nephi and he say unto me thou rememberest the twelve apostle of the lamb ? behold they be they who shall judge the twelve tribe of israel wherefore the twelve minister of thy seed shall be judge of them for ye be of the house of israel . nephi and these twelve minister whom thou beholdest shall judge thy seed . and behold they be righteous forever for because of their faith in the lamb of god their garment be make white in his blood . nephi and the angel say unto me look ! and i look and behold three generation pass away in righteousness and their garment be white even like unto the lamb of god . and the angel say unto me these be make white in the blood of the lamb because of their faith in him . nephi and i nephi also saw many of the fourth generation who pass away in righteousness . nephi and it come to pass that i saw the multitude of the earth gather together . nephi and the angel say unto me behold thy seed and also the seed of thy brother . nephi and it come to pass that i look and behold the people of my seed gather together in multitude against the seed of my brother and they be gather together to battle . nephi and the angel spake unto me say behold the fountain of filthy water which thy father saw yea even the river of which he spake and the depth thereof be the depth of hell . nephi and the mist of darkness be the temptation of the devil which blindeth the eye and hardeneth the heart of the child of men and leadeth them away into broad road that they perish and be lose . nephi and the large and spacious building which thy father saw be vain imagination and the pride of the child of men . and a great and a terrible gulf divideth them yea even the word of the justice of the eternal god and the messiah who be the lamb of god of whom the holy ghost beareth record from the beginning of the world until this time and from this time henceforth and forever . nephi and while the angel spake these word i beheld and saw that the seed of my brother do contend against my seed accord to the word of the angel and because of the pride of my seed and the temptation of the devil i behold that the seed of my brother do overpower the people of my seed . nephi and it come to pass that i beheld and saw the people of the seed of my brother that they have overcome my seed and they go forth in multitude upon the face of the land . nephi and i saw them gather together in multitude and i saw war and rumor of war among them and in war and rumor of war i saw many generation pass away . nephi and the angel say unto me behold these shall dwindle in unbelief . nephi and it come to pass that i behold after they have dwindle in unbelief they become a dark and loathsome and a filthy people full of idleness and all manner of abomination . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that the angel spake unto me say look ! and i look and behold many nation and kingdom . nephi and the angel say unto me what beholdest thou ? and i say i behold many nation and kingdom . nephi and he say unto me these be the nation and kingdom of the gentile . nephi and it come to pass that i saw among the nation of the gentile the formation of a great church . nephi and the angel say unto me behold the formation of a church which be most abominable above all other church which slayeth the saint of god yea and tortureth them and bindeth them down and yoketh them with a yoke of iron and bringeth them down into captivity . nephi and it come to pass that i behold this great and abominable church and i saw the devil that he be the founder of it . nephi and i also saw gold and silver and silk and scarlet and fine twin linen and all manner of precious clothing and i saw many harlot . nephi and the angel spake unto me say behold the gold and the silver and the silk and the scarlet and the fine twin linen and the precious clothing and the harlot be the desire of this great and abominable church . nephi and also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saint of god and bring them down into captivity . nephi and it come to pass that i look and behold many water and they divide the gentile from the seed of my brother . nephi and it come to pass that the angel say unto me behold the wrath of god be upon the seed of thy brother . nephi and i look and behold a man among the gentile who be separate from the seed of my brother by the many water and i behold the spirit of god that it come down and wrought upon the man and he go forth upon the many water even unto the seed of my brother who be in the promised land . nephi and it come to pass that i behold the spirit of god that it work upon other gentile and they go forth out of captivity upon the many water . nephi and it come to pass that i behold many multitude of the gentile upon the land of promise and i behold the wrath of god that it be upon the seed of my brother and they be scatter before the gentile and be smite . nephi and i behold the spirit of the lord that it be upon the gentile and they do prosper and obtain the land for their inheritance and i behold that they be white and exceedingly fair and beautiful like unto my people before they be slay . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi beheld that the gentile who have go forth out of captivity do humble themselves before the lord and the power of the lord be with them . nephi and i behold that their mother gentile be gather together upon the water and upon the land also to battle against them . nephi and i beheld that the power of god be with them and also that the wrath of god be upon all those that be gather together against them to battle . nephi and i nephi beheld that the gentile that have go out of captivity be deliver by the power of god out of the hand of all other nation . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi behold that they do prosper in the land and i behold a book and it be carry forth among them . nephi and the angel say unto me knowest thou the meaning of the book ? nephi and i say unto him i know not . nephi and he say behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a jew . and i nephi beheld it and he say unto me the book that thou beholdest be a record of the jew which contain the covenant of the lord which he hath make unto the house of israel and it also containeth many of the prophecy of the holy prophet and it be a record like unto the engraving which be upon the plate of brass save there be not so many nevertheless they contain the covenant of the lord which he hath make unto the house of israel wherefore they be of great worth unto the gentile . nephi and the angel of the lord say unto me thou hast beheld that the book proceed forth from the mouth of a jew and when it proceed forth from the mouth of a jew it contain the fulness of the gospel of the lord of whom the twelve apostles bear record and they bear record accord to the truth which be in the lamb of god . nephi wherefore these thing go forth from the jew in purity unto the gentile accord to the truth which be in god . nephi and after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostle of the lamb from the jew unto the gentile thou seest the formation of a great and abominable church which be most abominable above all other church for behold they have take away from the gospel of the lamb many part which be plain and most precious and also many covenant of the lord have they take away . nephi and all this have they do that they might pervert the right way of the lord that they might blind the eye and harden the heart of the child of men . nephi wherefore thou seest that after the book hath go forth through the hand of the great and abominable church that there be many plain and precious thing take away from the book which be the book of the lamb of god . nephi and after these plain and precious thing be take away it goeth forth unto all the nation of the gentile and after it goeth forth unto all the nation of the gentile yea even across the many water which thou hast see with the gentile which have go forth out of captivity thou seest because of the many plain and precious thing which have be take out of the book which be plain unto the understanding of the child of men accord to the plainness which be in the lamb of god because of these thing which be take away out of the gospel of the lamb an exceedingly great many do stumble yea insomuch that satan hath great power over them . nephi nevertheless thou beholdest that the gentile who have go forth out of captivity and have be lift up by the power of god above all other nation upon the face of the land which be choice above all other land which be the land that the lord god hath covenant with thy father that his seed should have for the land of their inheritance wherefore thou seest that the lord god will not suffer that the gentile will utterly destroy the mixture of thy seed which be among thy brother . nephi neither will he suffer that the gentile shall destroy the seed of thy brother . nephi neither will the lord god suffer that the gentile shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness which thou beholdest they be in because of the plain and most precious part of the gospel of the lamb which have be keep back by that abominable church whose formation thou hast see . nephi wherefore saith the lamb of god i will be merciful unto the gentile unto the visiting of the remnant of the house of israel in great judgment . nephi and it come to pass that the angel of the lord spake unto me say behold saith the lamb of god after i have visit the remnant of the house of israel and this remnant of whom i speak be the seed of thy father wherefore after i have visit them in judgment and smite them by the hand of the gentile and after the gentile do stumble exceedingly because of the most plain and precious part of the gospel of the lamb which have be keep back by that abominable church which be the mother of harlot saith the lamb i will be merciful unto the gentile in that day insomuch that i will bring forth unto them in mine own power much of my gospel which shall be plain and precious saith the lamb . nephi for behold saith the lamb i will manifest myself unto thy seed that they shall write many thing which i shall minister unto them which shall be plain and precious and after thy seed shall be destroy and dwindle in unbelief and also the seed of thy brother behold these thing shall be hide up to come forth unto the gentile by the gift and power of the lamb . nephi and in them shall be write my gospel saith the lamb and my rock and my salvation . nephi and bless be they who shall seek to bring forth my zion at that day for they shall have the gift and the power of the holy ghost and if they endure unto the end they shall be lift up at the last day and shall be save in the everlasting kingdom of the lamb and whoso shall publish peace yea tidings of great joy how beautiful upon the mountain shall they be . nephi and it come to pass that i behold the remnant of the seed of my brother and also the book of the lamb of god which have proceed forth from the mouth of the jew that it come forth from the gentile unto the remnant of the seed of my brother . nephi and after it have come forth unto them i behold other book which come forth by the power of the lamb from the gentile unto them unto the convincing of the gentile and the remnant of the seed of my brother and also the jew who be scatter upon all the face of the earth that the record of the prophet and of the twelve apostle of the lamb be true . nephi and the angel spake unto me say these last record which thou hast see among the gentile shall establish the truth of the first which be of the twelve apostle of the lamb and shall make know the plain and precious thing which have be take away from them and shall make know to all kindred tongue and people that the lamb of god be the son of the eternal father and the savior of the world and that all men must come unto him or they can not be save . nephi and they must come accord to the word which shall be establish by the mouth of the lamb and the word of the lamb shall be make know in the record of thy seed as well a in the record of the twelve apostle of the lamb wherefore they both shall be establish in one for there be one god and one shepherd over all the earth . nephi and the time cometh that he shall manifest himself unto all nation both unto the jew and also unto the gentile and after he have manifest himself unto the jew and also unto the gentile then he shall manifest himself unto the gentile and also unto the jew and the last shall be first and the first shall be last . nephi chapter nephi and it shall come to pass that if the gentile shall hearken unto the lamb of god in that day that he shall manifest himself unto them in word and also in power in very deed unto the take away of their stumbling block nephi and harden not their heart against the lamb of god they shall be number among the seed of thy father yea they shall be number among the house of israel and they shall be a blessed people upon the promised land forever they shall be no more bring down into captivity and the house of israel shall no more be confound . nephi and that great pit which hath be digged for them by that great and abominable church which be found by the devil and his child that he might lead away the soul of men down to hell yea that great pit which hath be digged for the destruction of men shall be fill by those who digged it unto their utter destruction saith the lamb of god not the destruction of the soul save it be the casting of it into that hell which hath no end . nephi for behold this be accord to the captivity of the devil and also accord to the justice of god upon all those who will work wickedness and abomination before him . nephi and it come to pass that the angel spake unto me nephi say thou hast beheld that if the gentile repent it shall be well with them and thou also knowest concern the covenant of the lord unto the house of israel and thou also hast heard that whoso repenteth not must perish . nephi therefore wo be unto the gentile if it so be that they harden their heart against the lamb of god . nephi for the time cometh saith the lamb of god that i will work a great and a marvelous work among the child of men a work which shall be everlasting either on the one hand or on the other either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their heart and the blindness of their mind unto their be bring down into captivity and also into destruction both temporally and spiritually accord to the captivity of the devil of which i have speak . nephi and it come to pass that when the angel have speak these word he say unto me rememberest thou the covenant of the father unto the house of israel ? i say unto him yea . nephi and it come to pass that he say unto me look and behold that great and abominable church which be the mother of abomination whose founder be the devil . nephi and he say unto me behold there be save two church only the one be the church of the lamb of god and the other be the church of the devil wherefore whoso belongeth not to the church of the lamb of god belongeth to that great church which be the mother of abomination and she be the whore of all the earth . nephi and it come to pass that i look and behold the whore of all the earth and she sit upon many water and she have dominion over all the earth among all nation kindred tongue and people . nephi and it come to pass that i behold the church of the lamb of god and it number be few because of the wickedness and abomination of the whore who sit upon many water nevertheless i behold that the church of the lamb who be the saint of god be also upon all the face of the earth and their dominion upon the face of the earth be small because of the wickedness of the great whore whom i saw . nephi and it come to pass that i behold that the great mother of abomination do gather together multitude upon the face of all the earth among all the nation of the gentile to fight against the lamb of god . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi behold the power of the lamb of god that it descend upon the saint of the church of the lamb and upon the covenant people of the lord who be scatter upon all the face of the earth and they be arm with righteousness and with the power of god in great glory . nephi and it come to pass that i behold that the wrath of god be pour out upon that great and abominable church insomuch that there be war and rumor of war among all the nation and kindred of the earth . nephi and a there begin to be war and rumor of war among all the nation which belong to the mother of abomination the angel spake unto me say behold the wrath of god be upon the mother of harlot and behold thou seest all these thing nephi and when the day cometh that the wrath of god be pour out upon the mother of harlot which be the great and abominable church of all the earth whose founder be the devil then at that day the work of the father shall commence in prepare the way for the fulfilling of his covenant which he hath make to his people who be of the house of israel . nephi and it come to pass that the angel spake unto me say look ! nephi and i look and behold a man and he be dress in a white robe . nephi and the angel say unto me behold one of the twelve apostle of the lamb . nephi behold he shall see and write the remainder of these thing yea and also many thing which have be . nephi and he shall also write concern the end of the world . nephi wherefore the thing which he shall write be just and true and behold they be write in the book which thou beheld proceed out of the mouth of the jew and at the time they proceed out of the mouth of the jew or at the time the book proceed out of the mouth of the jew the thing which be write be plain and pure and most precious and easy to the understanding of all men . nephi and behold the thing which this apostle of the lamb shall write be many thing which thou hast see and behold the remainder shalt thou see . nephi but the thing which thou shalt see hereafter thou shalt not write for the lord god hath ordain the apostle of the lamb of god that he should write them . nephi and also others who have be to them hath he show all thing and they have write them and they be seal up to come forth in their purity accord to the truth which be in the lamb in the own due time of the lord unto the house of israel . nephi and i nephi heard and bear record that the name of the apostle of the lamb be john accord to the word of the angel . nephi and behold i nephi be forbidden that i should write the remainder of the thing which i saw and heard wherefore the thing which i have write sufficeth me and i have write but a small part of the thing which i saw . nephi and i bear record that i saw the thing which my father saw and the angel of the lord do make them know unto me . nephi and now i make an end of speak concern the thing which i saw while i be carry away in the spirit and if all the thing which i saw be not write the thing which i have write be true . and thus it be . amen . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that after i nephi have be carry away in the spirit and see all these thing i return to the tent of my father . nephi and it come to pass that i behold my brother and they be dispute one with another concern the thing my father have speak unto them . nephi for he truly spake many great thing unto them which be hard to be understood save a man should inquire of the lord and they be hard in their heart therefore they do not look unto the lord a they ought . nephi and now i nephi be grieve because of the hardness of their heart and also because of the thing which i have see and know they must unavoidably come to pass because of the great wickedness of the child of men . nephi and it come to pass that i be overcome because of my affliction for i consider that mine affliction be great above all because of the destruction of my people for i have behold their fall . nephi and it come to pass that after i have receive strength i spake unto my brother desire to know of them the cause of their disputation . nephi and they say behold we can not understand the word which our father hath speak concern the natural branch of the olive tree and also concern the gentile . nephi and i say unto them have ye inquire of the lord ? nephi and they say unto me we have not for the lord maketh no such thing know unto u . nephi behold i say unto them how be it that ye do not keep the commandment of the lord ? how be it that ye will perish because of the hardness of your heart ? nephi do ye not remember the thing which the lord hath say ? if ye will not harden your heart and ask me in faith believing that ye shall receive with diligence in keep my commandment surely these thing shall be make know unto you . nephi behold i say unto you that the house of israel be compare unto an olive tree by the spirit of the lord which be in our father and behold be we not break off from the house of israel and be we not a branch of the house of israel ? nephi and now the thing which our father meaneth concern the grafting in of the natural branch through the fulness of the gentile be that in the latter day when our seed shall have dwindle in unbelief yea for the space of many year and many generation after the messiah shall be manifest in body unto the child of men then shall the fulness of the gospel of the messiah come unto the gentile and from the gentile unto the remnant of our seed nephi and at that day shall the remnant of our seed know that they be of the house of israel and that they be the covenant people of the lord and then shall they know and come to the knowledge of their forefather and also to the knowledge of the gospel of their redeemer which be minister unto their father by him wherefore they shall come to the knowledge of their redeemer and the very point of his doctrine that they may know how to come unto him and be save . nephi and then at that day will they not rejoice and give praise unto their everlasting god their rock and their salvation ? yea at that day will they not receive the strength and nourishment from the true vine ? yea will they not come unto the true fold of god ? nephi behold i say unto you yea they shall be remember again among the house of israel they shall be graft in be a natural branch of the olive tree into the true olive tree . nephi and this be what our father meaneth and he meaneth that it will not come to pass until after they be scatter by the gentile and he meaneth that it shall come by way of the gentile that the lord may show his power unto the gentile for the very cause that he shall be reject of the jew or of the house of israel . nephi wherefore our father hath not speak of our seed alone but also of all the house of israel point to the covenant which should be fulfil in the latter day which covenant the lord make to our father abraham say in thy seed shall all the kindred of the earth be bless . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi spake much unto them concern these thing yea i spake unto them concern the restoration of the jew in the latter day . nephi and i do rehearse unto them the word of isaiah who spake concern the restoration of the jew or of the house of israel and after they be restore they should no more be confound neither should they be scatter again . and it come to pass that i do speak many word unto my brother that they be pacify and do humble themselves before the lord . nephi and it come to pass that they do speak unto me again say what meaneth this thing which our father saw in a dream ? what meaneth the tree which he saw ? nephi and i say unto them it be a representation of the tree of life . nephi and they say unto me what meaneth the rod of iron which our father saw that lead to the tree ? nephi and i say unto them that it be the word of god and whose would hearken unto the word of god and would hold fast unto it they would never perish neither could the temptation and the fiery dart of the adversary overpower them unto blindness to lead them away to destruction . nephi wherefore i nephi do exhort them to give heed unto the word of the lord yea i do exhort them with all the energy of my soul and with all the faculty which i possess that they would give heed to the word of god and remember to keep his commandment always in all thing . nephi and they say unto me what meaneth the river of water which our father saw ? nephi and i say unto them that the water which my father saw be filthiness and so much be his mind swallow up in other thing that he behold not the filthiness of the water . nephi and i say unto them that it be an awful gulf which separate the wicked from the tree of life and also from the saint of god . nephi and i say unto them that it be a representation of that awful hell which the angel say unto me be prepare for the wicked . nephi and i say unto them that our father also saw that the justice of god do also divide the wicked from the righteous and the brightness thereof be like unto the brightness of a flaming fire which ascendeth up unto god forever and ever and hath no end . nephi and they say unto me doth this thing mean the torment of the body in the day of probation or doth it mean the final state of the soul after the death of the temporal body or doth it speak of the thing which be temporal ? nephi and it come to pass that i say unto them that it be a representation of thing both temporal and spiritual for the day should come that they must be judge of their work yea even the work which be do by the temporal body in their day of probation . nephi wherefore if they should die in their wickedness they must be cast off also a to the thing which be spiritual which be pertain to righteousness wherefore they must be bring to stand before god to be judge of their work and if their work have be filthiness they must needs be filthy and if they be filthy it must needs be that they can not dwell in the kingdom of god if so the kingdom of god must be filthy also . nephi but behold i say unto you the kingdom of god be not filthy and there can not any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of god wherefore there must need be a place of filthiness prepare for that which be filthy . nephi and there be a place prepared yea even that awful hell of which i have speak and the devil be the preparator of it wherefore the final state of the soul of men be to dwell in the kingdom of god or to be cast out because of that justice of which i have speak . nephi wherefore the wicked be reject from the righteous and also from that tree of life whose fruit be most precious and most desirable above all other fruit yea and it be the great of all the gift of god . and thus i spake unto my brother . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that after i nephi have make an end of speaking to my brother behold they say unto me thou hast declare unto u hard thing more than we be able to bear . nephi and it come to pass that i say unto them that i know that i have speak hard thing against the wicked accord to the truth and the righteous have i justified and testify that they should be lift up at the last day wherefore the guilty taketh the truth to be hard for it cutteth them to the very center . nephi and now my brother if ye be righteous and be willing to hearken to the truth and give heed unto it that ye might walk uprightly before god then ye would not murmur because of the truth and say thou speakest hard thing against u . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do exhort my brother with all diligence to keep the commandment of the lord . nephi and it come to pass that they do humble themselves before the lord insomuch that i have joy and great hope of them that they would walk in the path of righteousness . nephi now all these thing be say and do a my father dwelt in a tent in the valley which he call lemuel . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi take one of the daughter of ishmael to wife and also my brother take of the daughter of ishmael to wife and also zoram take the eldest daughter of ishmael to wife . nephi and thus my father have fulfil all the commandment of the lord which have be give unto him . and also i nephi have be bless of the lord exceedingly . nephi and it come to pass that the voice of the lord spake unto my father by night and command him that on the morrow he should take his journey into the wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that a my father arose in the morning and go forth to the tent door to his great astonishment he behold upon the ground a round ball of curious workmanship and it be of fine brass . and within the ball be two spindle and the one point the way whither we should go into the wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that we do gather together whatsoever thing we should carry into the wilderness and all the remainder of our provision which the lord have give unto u and we do take seed of every kind that we might carry into the wilderness . nephi and it come to pass that we do take our tent and depart into the wilderness across the river laman . nephi and it come to pass that we travel for the space of four day nearly a south southeast direction and we do pitch our tent again and we do call the name of the place shazer . nephi and it come to pass that we do take our bow and our arrow and go forth into the wilderness to slay food for our family and after we have slay food for our family we do return again to our family in the wilderness to the place of shazer . and we do go forth again in the wilderness follow the same direction keep in the most fertile part of the wilderness which be in the border near the red sea . nephi and it come to pass that we do travel for the space of many day slay food by the way with our bow and our arrow and our stone and our sling . nephi and we do follow the direction of the ball which lead u in the more fertile part of the wilderness . nephi and after we have travel for the space of many day we do pitch our tent for the space of a time that we might again rest ourselves and obtain food for our family . nephi and it come to pass that a i nephi go forth to slay food behold i do break my bow which be make of fine steel and after i do break my bow behold my brother be angry with me because of the loss of my bow for we do obtain no food . nephi and it come to pass that we do return without food to our family and be much fatigue because of their journeying they do suffer much for the want of food . nephi and it come to pass that laman and lemuel and the son of ishmael do begin to murmur exceedingly because of their suffering and affliction in the wilderness and also my father begin to murmur against the lord his god yea and they be all exceedingly sorrowful even that they do murmur against the lord . nephi now it come to pass that i nephi have be afflict with my brother because of the loss of my bow and their bow have lose their spring it begin to be exceedingly difficult yea insomuch that we could obtain no food . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do speak much unto my brother because they have harden their heart again even unto complain against the lord their god . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do make out of wood a bow and out of a straight stick an arrow wherefore i do arm myself with a bow and an arrow with a sling and with stone . and i say unto my father whither shall i go to obtain food ? nephi and it come to pass that he do inquire of the lord for they have humble themselves because of my word for i do say many thing unto them in the energy of my soul . nephi and it come to pass that the voice of the lord come unto my father and he be truly chastened because of his murmuring against the lord insomuch that he be bring down into the depth of sorrow . nephi and it come to pass that the voice of the lord say unto him look upon the ball and behold the thing which be write . nephi and it come to pass that when my father behold the thing which be write upon the ball he do fear and tremble exceedingly and also my brother and the son of ishmael and our wife . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi beheld the pointer which be in the ball that they do work accord to the faith and diligence and heed which we do give unto them . nephi and there be also write upon them a new writing which be plain to be read which do give u understand concern the way of the lord and it be write and change from time to time accord to the faith and diligence which we give unto it . and thus we see that by small mean the lord can bring about great thing . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do go forth up into the top of the mountain accord to the direction which be give upon the ball . nephi and it come to pass that i do slay wild beast insomuch that i do obtain food for our family . nephi and it come to pass that i do return to our tent bear the beast which i have slay and now when they behold that i have obtain food how great be their joy ! and it come to pass that they do humble themselves before the lord and do give thanks unto him . nephi and it come to pass that we do again take our journey travel nearly the same course a in the beginning and after we have travel for the space of many day we do pitch our tent again that we might tarry for the space of a time . nephi and it come to pass that ishmael die and be bury in the place which be call nahom . nephi and it come to pass that the daughter of ishmael do mourn exceedingly because of the loss of their father and because of their affliction in the wilderness and they do murmur against my father because he have bring them out of the land of jerusalem say our father be dead yea and we have wander much in the wilderness and we have suffer much affliction hunger thirst and fatigue and after all these suffering we must perish in the wilderness with hunger . nephi and thus they do murmur against my father and also against me and they be desirous to return again to jerusalem . nephi and laman say unto lemuel and also unto the son of ishmael behold let u slay our father and also our brother nephi who have take it upon him to be our ruler and our teacher who be his elder brother . nephi now he say that the lord have talk with him and also that angel have minister unto him . but behold we know that he lie unto u and he tell u these thing and he worketh many thing by his cunning art that he may deceive our eye think perhaps that he may lead u away into some strange wilderness and after he have lead u away he have think to make himself a king and a ruler over u that he may do with u accord to his will and pleasure . and after this manner do my brother laman stir up their heart to anger . nephi and it come to pass that the lord be with u yea even the voice of the lord come and do speak many word unto them and do chasten them exceedingly and after they be chasten by the voice of the lord they do turn away their anger and do repent of their sin insomuch that the lord do bless u again with food that we do not perish . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that we do again take our journey in the wilderness and we do travel nearly eastward from that time forth . and we do travel and wade through much affliction in the wilderness and our woman do bear child in the wilderness . nephi and so great be the blessing of the lord upon u that while we do live upon raw meat in the wilderness our woman do give plenty of suck for their child and be strong yea even like unto the men and they begin to bear their journeying without murmuring . nephi and thus we see that the commandment of god must be fulfil . and if it so be that the child of men keep the commandment of god he doth nourish them and strengthen them and provide mean whereby they can accomplish the thing which he have command them wherefore he do provide mean for u while we do sojourn in the wilderness . nephi and we do sojourn for the space of many year yea even eight year in the wilderness . nephi and we do come to the land which we call bountiful because of it much fruit and also wild honey and all these thing be prepare of the lord that we might not perish . and we behold the sea which we call irreantum which be interpret be many water . nephi and it come to pass that we do pitch our tent by the seashore and notwithstanding we have suffer many affliction and much difficulty yea even so much that we can not write them all we be exceedingly rejoice when we come to the seashore and we call the place bountiful because of it much fruit . nephi and it come to pass that after i nephi have be in the land of bountiful for the space of many day the voice of the lord come unto me say arise and get thee into the mountain . and it come to pass that i arise and go up into the mountain and cry unto the lord . nephi and it come to pass that the lord spake unto me say thou shalt construct a ship after the manner which i shall show thee that i may carry thy people across these water . nephi and i say lord whither shall i go that i may find ore to melt that i may make tool to construct the ship after the manner which thou hast show unto me ? nephi and it come to pass that the lord tell me whither i should go to find ore that i might make tool . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do make a bellow wherewith to blow the fire of the skin of beast and after i have make a bellow that i might have wherewith to blow the fire i do smite two stone together that i might make fire . nephi for the lord have not hitherto suffer that we should make much fire a we journey in the wilderness for he say i will make thy food become sweet that ye cook it not nephi and i will also be your light in the wilderness and i will prepare the way before you if it so be that ye shall keep my commandment wherefore inasmuch a ye shall keep my commandment ye shall be lead towards the promised land and ye shall know that it be by me that ye be lead . nephi yea and the lord say also that after ye have arrive in the promised land ye shall know that i the lord be god and that i the lord do deliver you from destruction yea that i do bring you out of the land of jerusalem . nephi wherefore i nephi do strive to keep the commandment of the lord and i do exhort my brother to faithfulness and diligence . nephi and it come to pass that i do make tool of the ore which i do melt out of the rock . nephi and when my brother saw that i be about to build a ship they begin to murmur against me say our brother be a fool for he thinketh that he can build a ship yea and he also thinketh that he can cross these great water . nephi and thus my brother do complain against me and be desirous that they might not labor for they do not believe that i could build a ship neither would they believe that i be instruct of the lord . nephi and now it come to pass that i nephi be exceedingly sorrowful because of the hardness of their heart and now when they saw that i begin to be sorrowful they be glad in their heart insomuch that they do rejoice over me say we know that ye could not construct a ship for we know that ye be lack in judgment wherefore thou canst not accomplish so great a work . nephi and thou art like unto our father lead away by the foolish imagination of his heart yea he hath lead u out of the land of jerusalem and we have wander in the wilderness for these many year and our woman have toil be big with child and they have borne child in the wilderness and suffer all thing save it be death and it would have be good that they have die before they come out of jerusalem than to have suffer these affliction . nephi behold these many year we have suffer in the wilderness which time we might have enjoy our possession and the land of our inheritance yea and we might have be happy . nephi and we know that the people who be in the land of jerusalem be a righteous people for they keep the statute and judgment of the lord and all his commandment accord to the law of moses wherefore we know that they be a righteous people and our father hath judge them and hath lead u away because we would hearken unto his word yea and our brother be like unto him . and after this manner of language do my brother murmur and complain against u . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi spake unto them say do ye believe that our father who be the child of israel would have be lead away out of the hand of the egyptian if they have not hearken unto the word of the lord ? nephi yea do ye suppose that they would have be lead out of bondage if the lord have not command moses that he should lead them out of bondage ? nephi now ye know that the child of israel be in bondage and ye know that they be laden with task which be grievous to be borne wherefore ye know that it must needs be a good thing for them that they should be bring out of bondage . nephi now ye know that moses be command of the lord to do that great work and ye know that by his word the water of the red sea be divide hither and thither and they pass through on dry ground . nephi but ye know that the egyptian be drown in the red sea who be the army of pharaoh . nephi and ye also know that they be feed with manna in the wilderness . nephi yea and ye also know that moses by his word accord to the power of god which be in him smite the rock and there come forth water that the child of israel might quench their thirst . nephi and notwithstanding they be lead the lord their god their redeemer go before them lead them by day and give light unto them by night and do all thing for them which be expedient for man to receive they harden their heart and blind their mind and revile against moses and against the true and living god . nephi and it come to pass that accord to his word he do destroy them and accord to his word he do lead them and accord to his word he do do all thing for them and there be not any thing do save it be by his word . nephi and after they have cross the river jordan he do make them mighty unto the drive out of the child of the land yea unto the scatter them to destruction . nephi and now do ye suppose that the child of this land who be in the land of promise who be drive out by our father do ye suppose that they be righteous ? behold i say unto you nay . nephi do ye suppose that our father would have be more choice than they if they have be righteous ? i say unto you nay . nephi behold the lord esteemeth all flesh in one he that be righteous be favor of god . but behold this people have reject every word of god and they be ripe in iniquity and the fulness of the wrath of god be upon them and the lord do curse the land against them and bless it unto our father yea he do curse it against them unto their destruction and he do bless it unto our father unto their obtain power over it . nephi behold the lord hath create the earth that it should be inhabit and he hath create his child that they should possess it . nephi and he raiseth up a righteous nation and destroyeth the nation of the wicked . nephi and he leadeth away the righteous into precious land and the wicked he destroyeth and curseth the land unto them for their sake . nephi he ruleth high in the heaven for it be his throne and this earth be his footstool . nephi and he loveth those who will have him to be their god . behold he love our father and he covenant with them yea even abraham isaac and jacob and he remember the covenant which he have make wherefore he do bring them out of the land of egypt . nephi and he do straiten them in the wilderness with his rod for they harden their heart even a ye have and the lord straiten them because of their iniquity . he send fiery fly serpent among them and after they be bite he prepare a way that they might be heal and the labor which they have to perform be to look and because of the simpleness of the way or the easiness of it there be many who perish . nephi and they do harden their heart from time to time and they do revile against moses and also against god nevertheless ye know that they be lead forth by his matchless power into the land of promise . nephi and now after all these thing the time have come that they have become wicked yea nearly unto ripeness and i know not but they be at this day about to be destroy for i know that the day must surely come that they must be destroy save a few only who shall be lead away into captivity . nephi wherefore the lord command my father that he should depart into the wilderness and the jew also seek to take away his life yea and ye also have seek to take away his life wherefore ye be murderer in your heart and ye be like unto them . nephi ye be swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the lord your god . ye have see an angel and he spake unto you yea ye have hear his voice from time to time and he hath speak unto you in a still small voice but ye be past feeling that ye could not feel his word wherefore he have speak unto you like unto the voice of thunder which do cause the earth to shake a if it be to divide asunder . nephi and ye also know that by the power of his almighty word he can cause the earth that it shall pass away yea and ye know that by his word he can cause the rough place to be make smooth and smooth place shall be break up . o then why be it that ye can be so hard in your heart ? nephi behold my soul be rent with anguish because of you and my heart be pain i fear l ye shall be cast off forever . behold i be full of the spirit of god insomuch that my frame have no strength . nephi and now it come to pass that when i have speak these word they be angry with me and be desirous to throw me into the depth of the sea and a they come forth to lay their hand upon me i spake unto them say in the name of the almighty god i command you that ye touch me not for i be fill with the power of god even unto the consuming of my flesh and whoso shall lay his hand upon me shall wither even a a dried reed and he shall be a naught before the power of god for god shall smite him . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi say unto them that they should murmur no more against their father neither should they withhold their labor from me for god have command me that i should build a ship . nephi and i say unto them if god have command me to do all thing i could do them . if he should command me that i should say unto this water be thou earth it should be earth and if i should say it it would be do . nephi and now if the lord have such great power and have work so many miracle among the child of men how be it that he can not instruct me that i should build a ship ? nephi and it come to pass that i nephi say many thing unto my brother insomuch that they be confound and could not contend against me neither durst they lay their hand upon me nor touch me with their finger even for the space of many day . now they durst not do this l they should wither before me so powerful be the spirit of god and thus it have work upon them . nephi and it come to pass that the lord say unto me stretch forth thine hand again unto thy brother and they shall not wither before thee but i will shock them saith the lord and this will i do that they may know that i be the lord their god . nephi and it come to pass that i stretch forth my hand unto my brother and they do not wither before me but the lord do shake them even accord to the word which he have speak . nephi and now they say we know of a surety that the lord be with thee for we know that it be the power of the lord that have shake u . and they fell down before me and be about to worship me but i would not suffer them say i be thy brother yea even thy young brother wherefore worship the lord thy god and honor thy father and thy mother that thy day may be long in the land which the lord thy god shall give thee . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that they do worship the lord and do go forth with me and we do work timber of curious workmanship . and the lord do show me from time to time after what manner i should work the timber of the ship . nephi now i nephi do not work the timber after the manner which be learn by men neither do i build the ship after the manner of men but i do build it after the manner which the lord have show unto me wherefore it be not after the manner of men . nephi and i nephi do go into the mount oft and i do pray oft unto the lord wherefore the lord show unto me great thing . nephi and it come to pass that after i have finish the ship accord to the word of the lord my brother behold that it be good and that the workmanship thereof be exceedingly fine wherefore they do humble themselves again before the lord . nephi and it come to pass that the voice of the lord come unto my father that we should arise and go down into the ship . nephi and it come to pass that on the morrow after we have prepare all thing much fruit and meat from the wilderness and honey in abundance and provision accord to that which the lord have command u we do go down into the ship with all our loading and our seed and whatsoever thing we have bring with u every one accord to his age wherefore we do all go down into the ship with our wife and our child . nephi and now my father have beget two son in the wilderness the elder be call jacob and the young joseph . nephi and it come to pass after we have all go down into the ship and have take with u our provision and thing which have be command u we do put forth into the sea and be drive forth before the wind towards the promised land . nephi and after we have be drive forth before the wind for the space of many day behold my brother and the son of ishmael and also their wife begin to make themselves merry insomuch that they begin to dance and to sing and to speak with much rudeness yea even that they do forget by what power they have be bring thither yea they be lift up unto exceed rudeness . nephi and i nephi begin to fear exceedingly l the lord should be angry with u and smite u because of our iniquity that we should be swallow up in the depth of the sea wherefore i nephi begin to speak to them with much soberness but behold they be angry with me say we will not that our young brother shall be a ruler over u . nephi and it come to pass that laman and lemuel do take me and bind me with cord and they do treat me with much harshness nevertheless the lord do suffer it that he might show forth his power unto the fulfilling of his word which he have speak concern the wicked . nephi and it come to pass that after they have bind me insomuch that i could not move the compass which have be prepare of the lord do cease to work . nephi wherefore they know not whither they should steer the ship insomuch that there arise a great storm yea a great and terrible tempest and we be drive back upon the water for the space of three day and they begin to be frighten exceedingly l they should be drown in the sea nevertheless they do not loose me . nephi and on the fourth day which we have be drive back the tempest begin to be exceedingly sore . nephi and it come to pass that we be about to be swallow up in the depth of the sea . and after we have be drive back upon the water for the space of four day my brother begin to see that the judgment of god be upon them and that they must perish save that they should repent of their iniquity wherefore they come unto me and loose the band which be upon my wrist and behold they have swell exceedingly and also mine ankle be much swollen and great be the soreness thereof . nephi nevertheless i do look unto my god and i do praise him all the day long and i do not murmur against the lord because of mine affliction . nephi now my father lehi have say many thing unto them and also unto the son of ishmael but behold they do breathe out much threatenings against anyone that should speak for me and my parent be stricken in year and have suffer much grief because of their child they be bring down yea even upon their sick bed . nephi because of their grief and much sorrow and the iniquity of my brother they be bring near even to be carry out of this time to meet their god yea their grey hair be about to be bring down to lie low in the dust yea even they be near to be cast with sorrow into a watery grave . nephi and jacob and joseph also be young have need of much nourishment be grieve because of the affliction of their mother and also my wife with her tear and prayer and also my child do not soften the heart of my brother that they would loose me . nephi and there be nothing save it be the power of god which threaten them with destruction could soften their heart wherefore when they saw that they be about to be swallow up in the depth of the sea they repent of the thing which they have do insomuch that they loose me . nephi and it come to pass after they have loose me behold i take the compass and it do work whither i desire it . and it come to pass that i pray unto the lord and after i have pray the wind do cease and the storm do cease and there be a great calm . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do guide the ship that we sail again towards the promised land . nephi and it come to pass that after we have sail for the space of many day we do arrive at the promised land and we go forth upon the land and do pitch our tent and we do call it the promised land . nephi and it come to pass that we do begin to till the earth and we begin to plant seed yea we do put all our seed into the earth which we have bring from the land of jerusalem . and it come to pass that they do grow exceedingly wherefore we be bless in abundance . nephi and it come to pass that we do find upon the land of promise a we journey in the wilderness that there be beast in the forest of every kind both the cow and the ox and the as and the horse and the goat and the wild goat and all manner of wild animal which be for the use of men . and we do find all manner of ore both of gold and of silver and of copper . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that the lord command me wherefore i do make plate of ore that i might engraven upon them the record of my people . and upon the plate which i make i do engraven the record of my father and also our journeying in the wilderness and the prophecy of my father and also many of mine own prophecy have i engraven upon them . nephi and i know not at the time when i make them that i should be command of the lord to make these plate wherefore the record of my father and the genealogy of his father and the more part of all our proceeding in the wilderness be engraven upon those first plate of which i have speak wherefore the thing which transpire before i make these plate be of a truth more particularly make mention upon the first plate . nephi and after i have make these plate by way of commandment i nephi receive a commandment that the ministry and the prophecy the more plain and precious part of them should be write upon these plate and that the thing which be write should be keep for the instruction of my people who should possess the land and also for other wise purpose which purpose be know unto the lord . nephi wherefore i nephi do make a record upon the other plate which give an account or which give a great account of the war and contention and destruction of my people . and this have i do and command my people what they should do after i be go and that these plate should be hand down from one generation to another or from one prophet to another until further commandment of the lord . nephi and an account of my make these plate shall be give hereafter and then behold i proceed accord to that which i have speak and this i do that the more sacred thing may be keep for the knowledge of my people . nephi nevertheless i do not write anything upon plate save it be that i think it be sacred . and now if i do err even do they err of old not that i would excuse myself because of other men but because of the weakness which be in me accord to the flesh i would excuse myself . nephi for the thing which some men esteem to be of great worth both to the body and soul others set at naught and trample under their foot . yea even the very god of israel do men trample under their foot i say trample under their foot but i would speak in other word they set him at naught and hearken not to the voice of his counsel . nephi and behold he cometh accord to the word of the angel in six hundred year from the time my father leave jerusalem . nephi and the world because of their iniquity shall judge him to be a thing of naught wherefore they scourge him and he suffereth it and they smite him and he suffereth it . yea they spit upon him and he suffereth it because of his love kindness and his long suffering towards the child of men . nephi and the god of our father who be lead out of egypt out of bondage and also be preserve in the wilderness by him yea the god of abraham and of isaac and the god of jacob yieldeth himself accord to the word of the angel a a man into the hand of wicked men to be lift up accord to the word of zenock and to be crucify accord to the word of neum and to be bury in a sepulchre accord to the word of zeno which he spake concern the three day of darkness which should be a sign give of his death unto those who should inhabit the isle of the sea more especially give unto those who be of the house of israel . nephi for thus spake the prophet the lord god surely shall visit all the house of israel at that day some with his voice because of their righteousness unto their great joy and salvation and others with the thunderings and the lightning of his power by tempest by fire and by smoke and vapor of darkness and by the opening of the earth and by mountain which shall be carry up . nephi and all these thing must surely come saith the prophet zeno . and the rock of the earth must rend and because of the groanings of the earth many of the king of the isle of the sea shall be work upon by the spirit of god to exclaim the god of nature suffers . nephi and a for those who be at jerusalem saith the prophet they shall be scourge by all people because they crucify the god of israel and turn their heart aside reject sign and wonder and the power and glory of the god of israel . nephi and because they turn their heart aside saith the prophet and have despise the holy one of israel they shall wander in the flesh and perish and become a hiss and a byword and be hat among all nation . nephi nevertheless when that day cometh saith the prophet that they no more turn aside their heart against the holy one of israel then will he remember the covenant which he make to their father . nephi yea then will he remember the isle of the sea yea and all the people who be of the house of israel will i gather in saith the lord accord to the word of the prophet zeno from the four quarter of the earth . nephi yea and all the earth shall see the salvation of the lord saith the prophet every nation kindred tongue and people shall be bless . nephi and i nephi have write these thing unto my people that perhaps i might persuade them that they would remember the lord their redeemer . nephi wherefore i speak unto all the house of israel if it so be that they should obtain these thing . nephi for behold i have working in the spirit which doth weary me even that all my joint be weak for those who be at jerusalem for have not the lord be merciful to show unto me concern them even a he have prophet of old i should have perish also . nephi and he surely do show unto the prophet of old all thing concern them and also he do show unto many concern u wherefore it must needs be that we know concern them for they be write upon the plate of brass . nephi now it come to pass that i nephi do teach my brother these thing and it come to pass that i do read many thing to them which be engraven upon the plate of brass that they might know concern the doings of the lord in other land among people of old . nephi and i do read many thing unto them which be write in the book of moses but that i might more fully persuade them to believe in the lord their redeemer i do read unto them that which be write by the prophet isaiah for i do liken all scripture unto u that it might be for our profit and learning . nephi wherefore i spake unto them say hear ye the word of the prophet ye who be a remnant of the house of israel a branch who have be break off hear ye the word of the prophet which be write unto all the house of israel and liken them unto yourselves that ye may have hope as well a your brother from whom ye have be break off for after this manner have the prophet write . nephi chapter nephi hearken and hear this o house of jacob who be call by the name of israel and be come forth out of the water of judah or out of the water of baptism who swear by the name of the lord and make mention of the god of israel yet they swear not in truth nor in righteousness . nephi nevertheless they call themselves of the holy city but they do not stay themselves upon the god of israel who be the lord of host yea the lord of host be his name . nephi behold i have declare the former thing from the beginning and they go forth out of my mouth and i show them . i do show them suddenly . nephi and i do it because i know that thou art obstinate and thy neck be an iron sinew and thy brow brass nephi and i have even from the beginning declare to thee before it come to pass i show them thee and i show them for fear l thou shouldst say mine idol hath do them and my graven image and my molten image hath command them . nephi thou hast see and hear all this and will ye not declare them ? and that i have show thee new thing from this time even hidden thing and thou didst not know them . nephi they be create now and not from the begin even before the day when thou heardest them not they be declare unto thee l thou shouldst say behold i know them . nephi yea and thou heard not yea thou knewest not yea from that time thine ear be not open for i know that thou wouldst deal very treacherously and wast call a transgressor from the womb . nephi nevertheless for my name 's sake will i defer mine anger and for my praise will i refrain from thee that i cut thee not off . nephi for behold i have refine thee i have choose thee in the furnace of affliction . nephi for mine own sake yea for mine own sake will i do this for i will not suffer my name to be pollute and i will not give my glory unto another . nephi hearken unto me o jacob and israel my call for i be he i be the first and i be also the last . nephi mine hand hath also lay the foundation of the earth and my right hand hath span the heaven . i call unto them and they stand up together . nephi all ye assemble yourselves and hear who among them hath declare these thing unto them ? the lord hath love him yea and he will fulfill his word which he hath declare by them and he will do his pleasure on babylon and his arm shall come upon the chaldean . nephi also saith the lord i the lord yea i have speak yea i have call him to declare i have bring him and he shall make his way prosperous . nephi come ye near unto me i have not speak in secret from the beginning from the time that it be declare have i speak and the lord god and his spirit hath send me . nephi and thus saith the lord thy redeemer the holy one of israel i have send him the lord thy god who teacheth thee to profit who leadeth thee by the way thou shouldst go hath do it . nephi o that thou hadst hearken to my commandment then have thy peace be a a river and thy righteousness a the wave of the sea . nephi thy seed also have be a the sand the offspring of thy bowel like the gravel thereof his name should not have be cut off nor destroy from before me . nephi go ye forth of babylon flee ye from the chaldean with a voice of sing declare ye tell this utter to the end of the earth say ye the lord hath redeem his servant jacob . nephi and they thirst not he lead them through the desert he cause the water to flow out of the rock for them he clave the rock also and the water gush out . nephi and notwithstanding he hath do all this and great also there be no peace saith the lord unto the wicked . nephi chapter nephi and again hearken o ye house of israel all ye that be break off and be drive out because of the wickedness of the pastor of my people yea all ye that be break off that be scatter abroad who be of my people o house of israel . listen o isle unto me and hearken ye people from far the lord hath call me from the womb from the bowel of my mother hath he make mention of my name . nephi and he hath make my mouth like a sharp sword in the shadow of his hand hath he hide me and make me a polished shaft in his quiver hath he hide me nephi and say unto me thou art my servant o israel in whom i will be glorify . nephi then i say i have labor in vain i have spend my strength for naught and in vain surely my judgment be with the lord and my work with my god . nephi and now saith the lord that form me from the womb that i should be his servant to bring jacob again to him though israel be not gather yet shall i be glorious in the eye of the lord and my god shall be my strength . nephi and he say it be a light thing that thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribe of jacob and to restore the preserved of israel . i will also give thee for a light to the gentile that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth . nephi thus saith the lord the redeemer of israel his holy one to him whom man despiseth to him whom the nation abhorreth to servant of ruler king shall see and arise prince also shall worship because of the lord that be faithful . nephi thus saith the lord in an acceptable time have i hear thee o isle of the sea and in a day of salvation have i help thee and i will preserve thee and give thee my servant for a covenant of the people to establish the earth to cause to inherit the desolate heritage nephi that thou mayest say to the prisoner go forth to them that sit in darkness show yourselves . they shall fee in the way and their pasture shall be in all high place . nephi they shall not hunger nor thirst neither shall the heat nor the sun smite them for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them even by the spring of water shall he guide them . nephi and i will make all my mountain a way and my highway shall be exalt . nephi and then o house of israel behold these shall come from far and lo these from the north and from the west and these from the land of sinim . nephi sing o heaven and be joyful o earth for the foot of those who be in the east shall be establish and break forth into sing o mountain for they shall be smite no more for the lord hath comfort his people and will have mercy upon his afflict . nephi but behold zion hath say the lord hath forsake me and my lord hath forget me but he will show that he hath not . nephi for can a woman forget her suck child that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb ? yea they may forget yet will i not forget thee o house of israel . nephi behold i have grave thee upon the palm of my hand thy wall be continually before me . nephi thy child shall make haste against thy destroyer and they that make thee waste shall go forth of thee . nephi lift up thine eye round about and behold all these gather themselves together and they shall come to thee . and a i live saith the lord thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all a with an ornament and bind them on even a a bride . nephi for thy waste and thy desolate place and the land of thy destruction shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitant and they that swallow thee up shall be far away . nephi the child whom thou shalt have after thou hast lose the first shall again in thine ear say the place be too strait for me give place to me that i may dwell . nephi then shalt thou say in thine heart who hath beget me these see i have lose my child and be desolate a captive and remove to and fro ? and who hath bring up these ? behold i be leave alone these where have they be ? nephi thus saith the lord god behold i will lift up mine hand to the gentile and set up my standard to the people and they shall bring thy son in their arm and thy daughter shall be carry upon their shoulder . nephi and king shall be thy nursing father and their queen thy nurse mother they shall bow down to thee with their face towards the earth and lick up the dust of thy foot and thou shalt know that i be the lord for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me . nephi for shall the prey be take from the mighty or the lawful captive deliver ? nephi but thus saith the lord even the captive of the mighty shall be take away and the prey of the terrible shall be deliver for i will contend with him that contendeth with thee and i will save thy child . nephi and i will fee them that oppress thee with their own flesh they shall be drunken with their own blood a with sweet wine and all flesh shall know that i the lord be thy savior and thy redeemer the mighty one of jacob . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that after i nephi have read these thing which be engraven upon the plate of brass my brother come unto me and say unto me what meaneth these thing which ye have read ? behold be they to be understood accord to thing which be spiritual which shall come to pass accord to the spirit and not the flesh ? nephi and i nephi say unto them behold they be manifest unto the prophet by the voice of the spirit for by the spirit be all thing make know unto the prophet which shall come upon the child of men accord to the flesh . nephi wherefore the thing of which i have read be thing pertain to thing both temporal and spiritual for it appear that the house of israel sooner or later will be scatter upon all the face of the earth and also among all nation . nephi and behold there be many who be already lose from the knowledge of those who be at jerusalem . yea the more part of all the tribe have be lead away and they be scatter to and fro upon the isle of the sea and whither they be none of u knoweth save that we know that they have be lead away . nephi and since they have be lead away these thing have be prophesy concern them and also concern all those who shall hereafter be scatter and be confound because of the holy one of israel for against him will they harden their heart wherefore they shall be scatter among all nation and shall be hat of all men . nephi nevertheless after they shall be nurse by the gentile and the lord have lift up his hand upon the gentile and set them up for a standard and their child have be carry in their arm and their daughter have be carry upon their shoulder behold these thing of which be speak be temporal for thus be the covenant of the lord with our father and it meaneth u in the day to come and also all our brother who be of the house of israel . nephi and it meaneth that the time cometh that after all the house of israel have be scatter and confound that the lord god will raise up a mighty nation among the gentile yea even upon the face of this land and by them shall our seed be scatter . nephi and after our seed be scatter the lord god will proceed to do a marvelous work among the gentile which shall be of great worth unto our seed wherefore it be liken unto their be nourish by the gentile and be carry in their arm and upon their shoulder . nephi and it shall also be of worth unto the gentile and not only unto the gentile but unto all the house of israel unto the make known of the covenant of the father of heaven unto abraham say in thy seed shall all the kindred of the earth be bless . nephi and i would my brother that ye should know that all the kindred of the earth can not be bless unless he shall make bare his arm in the eye of the nation . nephi wherefore the lord god will proceed to make bare his arm in the eye of all the nation in bring about his covenant and his gospel unto those who be of the house of israel . nephi wherefore he will bring them again out of captivity and they shall be gather together to the land of their inheritance and they shall be bring out of obscurity and out of darkness and they shall know that the lord be their savior and their redeemer the mighty one of israel . nephi and the blood of that great and abominable church which be the whore of all the earth shall turn upon their own head for they shall war among themselves and the sword of their own hand shall fall upon their own head and they shall be drunken with their own blood . nephi and every nation which shall war against thee o house of israel shall be turn one against another and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the lord . and all that fight against zion shall be destroy and that great whore who hath pervert the right way of the lord yea that great and abominable church shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it . nephi for behold saith the prophet the time cometh speedily that satan shall have no more power over the heart of the child of men for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be a stubble and the day cometh that they must be burn . nephi for the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of god shall be pour out upon all the child of men for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous . nephi wherefore he will preserve the righteous by his power even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come and the righteous be preserve even unto the destruction of their enemy by fire . wherefore the righteous need not fear for thus saith the prophet they shall be save even if it so be a by fire . nephi behold my brother i say unto you that these thing must shortly come yea even blood and fire and vapor of smoke must come and it must needs be upon the face of this earth and it cometh unto men accord to the flesh if it so be that they will harden their heart against the holy one of israel . nephi for behold the righteous shall not perish for the time surely must come that all they who fight against zion shall be cut off . nephi and the lord will surely prepare a way for his people unto the fulfilling of the word of moses which he spake say a prophet shall the lord your god raise up unto you like unto me him shall ye hear in all thing whatsoever he shall say unto you . and it shall come to pass that all those who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people . nephi and now i nephi declare unto you that this prophet of whom moses spake be the holy one of israel wherefore he shall execute judgment in righteousness . nephi and the righteous need not fear for they be those who shall not be confound . but it be the kingdom of the devil which shall be build up among the child of men which kingdom be establish among them which be in the flesh nephi for the time speedily shall come that all church which be build up to get gain and all those who be build up to get power over the flesh and those who be build up to become popular in the eye of the world and those who seek the lust of the flesh and the thing of the world and to do all manner of iniquity yea in fine all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil be they who need fear and tremble and quake they be those who must be bring low in the dust they be those who must be consume a stubble and this be accord to the word of the prophet . nephi and the time cometh speedily that the righteous must be lead up a calf of the stall and the holy one of israel must reign in dominion and might and power and great glory . nephi and he gathereth his child from the four quarter of the earth and he numbereth his sheep and they know him and there shall be one fold and one shepherd and he shall fee his sheep and in him they shall find pasture . nephi and because of the righteousness of his people satan have no power wherefore he can not be loose for the space of many year for he hath no power over the heart of the people for they dwell in righteousness and the holy one of israel reigneth . nephi and now behold i nephi say unto you that all these thing must come accord to the flesh . nephi but behold all nation kindred tongue and people shall dwell safely in the holy one of israel if it so be that they will repent . nephi and now i nephi make an end for i durst not speak far a yet concern these thing . nephi wherefore my brother i would that ye should consider that the thing which have be write upon the plate of brass be true and they testify that a man must be obedient to the commandment of god . nephi wherefore ye need not suppose that i and my father be the only one that have testify and also teach them . wherefore if ye shall be obedient to the commandment and endure to the end ye shall be save at the last day . and thus it be . amen . the second book of nephi an account of the death of lehi . nephi 's brother rebel against him . the lord warn nephi to depart into the wilderness . his journeying in the wilderness and so forth . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that after i nephi have make an end of teach my brother our father lehi also spake many thing unto them and rehearse unto them how great thing the lord have do for them in bring them out of the land of jerusalem . nephi and he spake unto them concern their rebellion upon the water and the mercy of god in spar their life that they be not swallow up in the sea . nephi and he also spake unto them concern the land of promise which they have obtain how merciful the lord have be in warn u that we should flee out of the land of jerusalem . nephi for behold say he i have see a vision in which i know that jerusalem be destroy and have we remain in jerusalem we should also have perish . nephi but say he notwithstanding our affliction we have obtain a land of promise a land which be choice above all other land a land which the lord god hath covenant with me should be a land for the inheritance of my seed . yea the lord hath covenant this land unto me and to my child forever and also all those who should be lead out of other country by the hand of the lord . nephi wherefore i lehi prophesy accord to the working of the spirit which be in me that there shall none come into this land save they shall be bring by the hand of the lord . nephi wherefore this land be consecrate unto him whom he shall bring . and if it so be that they shall serve him accord to the commandment which he hath give it shall be a land of liberty unto them wherefore they shall never be bring down into captivity if so it shall be because of iniquity for if iniquity shall abound curse shall be the land for their sake but unto the righteous it shall be bless forever . nephi and behold it be wisdom that this land should be keep a yet from the knowledge of other nation for behold many nation would overrun the land that there would be no place for an inheritance . nephi wherefore i lehi have obtain a promise that inasmuch a those whom the lord god shall bring out of the land of jerusalem shall keep his commandment they shall prosper upon the face of this land and they shall be keep from all other nation that they may possess this land unto themselves . and if it so be that they shall keep his commandment they shall be bless upon the face of this land and there shall be none to molest them nor to take away the land of their inheritance and they shall dwell safely forever . nephi but behold when the time cometh that they shall dwindle in unbelief after they have receive so great blessing from the hand of the lord have a knowledge of the creation of the earth and all men know the great and marvelous work of the lord from the creation of the world have power give them to do all thing by faith have all the commandment from the beginning and have be bring by his infinite goodness into this precious land of promise behold i say if the day shall come that they will reject the holy one of israel the true messiah their redeemer and their god behold the judgment of him that be just shall rest upon them . nephi yea he will bring other nation unto them and he will give unto them power and he will take away from them the land of their possession and he will cause them to be scatter and smite . nephi yea a one generation passeth to another there shall be bloodshed and great visitation among them wherefore my son i would that ye would remember yea i would that ye would hearken unto my word . nephi o that ye would awake awake from a deep sleep yea even from the sleep of hell and shake off the awful chain by which ye be bound which be the chain which bind the child of men that they be carry away captive down to the eternal gulf of misery and woe . nephi awake ! and arise from the dust and hear the word of a trembling parent whose limbs ye must soon lay down in the cold and silent grave from whence no traveler can return a few more day and i go the way of all the earth . nephi but behold the lord hath redeem my soul from hell i have behold his glory and i be encircle about eternally in the arm of his love . nephi and i desire that ye should remember to observe the statute and the judgment of the lord behold this hath be the anxiety of my soul from the beginning . nephi my heart hath be weigh down with sorrow from time to time for i have fear l for the hardness of your heart the lord your god should come out in the fulness of his wrath upon you that ye be cut off and destroy forever nephi or that a cursing should come upon you for the space of many generation and ye be visit by sword and by famine and be hat and be lead accord to the will and captivity of the devil . nephi o my son that these thing might not come upon you but that ye might be a choice and a favored people of the lord . but behold his will be do for his way be righteousness forever . nephi and he hath say that inasmuch a ye shall keep my commandment ye shall prosper in the land but inasmuch a ye will not keep my commandment ye shall be cut off from my presence . nephi and now that my soul might have joy in you and that my heart might leave this world with gladness because of you that i might not be bring down with grief and sorrow to the grave arise from the dust my son and be men and be determine in one mind and in one heart unite in all thing that ye may not come down into captivity nephi that ye may not be curse with a sore cursing and also that ye may not incur the displeasure of a just god upon you unto the destruction yea the eternal destruction of both soul and body . nephi awake my son put on the armor of righteousness . shake off the chain with which ye be bind and come forth out of obscurity and arise from the dust . nephi rebel no more against your brother whose view have be glorious and who hath keep the commandment from the time that we leave jerusalem and who hath be an instrument in the hand of god in bring u forth into the land of promise for be it not for him we must have perish with hunger in the wilderness nevertheless ye seek to take away his life yea and he hath suffer much sorrow because of you . nephi and i exceedingly fear and tremble because of you l he shall suffer again for behold ye have accuse him that he seek power and authority over you but i know that he hath not seek for power nor authority over you but he hath seek the glory of god and your own eternal welfare . nephi and ye have murmur because he hath be plain unto you . ye say that he hath used sharpness ye say that he hath be angry with you but behold his sharpness be the sharpness of the power of the word of god which be in him and that which ye call anger be the truth accord to that which be in god which he could not restrain manifest boldly concern your iniquity . nephi and it must needs be that the power of god must be with him even unto his commanding you that ye must obey . but behold it be not he but it be the spirit of the lord which be in him which open his mouth to utterance that he could not shut it . nephi and now my son laman and also lemuel and sam and also my son who be the son of ishmael behold if ye will hearken unto the voice of nephi ye shall not perish . and if ye will hearken unto him i leave unto you a bless yea even my first blessing . nephi but if ye will not hearken unto him i take away my first blessing yea even my blessing and it shall rest upon him . nephi and now zoram i speak unto you behold thou art the servant of laban nevertheless thou hast be bring out of the land of jerusalem and i know that thou art a true friend unto my son nephi forever . nephi wherefore because thou hast be faithful thy seed shall be bless with his seed that they dwell in prosperity long upon the face of this land and nothing save it shall be iniquity among them shall harm or disturb their prosperity upon the face of this land forever . nephi wherefore if ye shall keep the commandment of the lord the lord hath consecrate this land for the security of thy seed with the seed of my son . nephi chapter nephi and now jacob i speak unto you thou art my first bear in the day of my tribulation in the wilderness . and behold in thy childhood thou hast suffer affliction and much sorrow because of the rudeness of thy brother . nephi nevertheless jacob my first bear in the wilderness thou knowest the greatness of god and he shall consecrate thine affliction for thy gain . nephi wherefore thy soul shall be bless and thou shalt dwell safely with thy brother nephi and thy day shall be spend in the service of thy god . wherefore i know that thou art redeem because of the righteousness of thy redeemer for thou hast beheld that in the fulness of time he cometh to bring salvation unto men . nephi and thou hast beheld in thy youth his glory wherefore thou art bless even a they unto whom he shall minister in the flesh for the spirit be the same yesterday today and forever . and the way be prepare from the fall of man and salvation be free . nephi and men be instruct sufficiently that they know good from evil . and the law be give unto men . and by the law no flesh be justified or by the law men be cut off . yea by the temporal law they be cut off and also by the spiritual law they perish from that which be good and become miserable forever . nephi wherefore redemption cometh in and through the holy messiah for he be full of grace and truth . nephi behold he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin to answer the end of the law unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit and unto none else can the end of the law be answer . nephi wherefore how great the importance to make these thing know unto the inhabitant of the earth that they may know that there be no flesh that can dwell in the presence of god save it be through the merit and mercy and grace of the holy messiah who layeth down his life accord to the flesh and taketh it again by the power of the spirit that he may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead be the first that should rise . nephi wherefore he be the first fruit unto god inasmuch a he shall make intercession for all the child of men and they that believe in him shall be save . nephi and because of the intercession for all all men come unto god wherefore they stand in the presence of him to be judge of him accord to the truth and holiness which be in him . wherefore the end of the law which the holy one hath give unto the inflicting of the punishment which be affixed which punishment that be affix be in opposition to that of the happiness which be affix to answer the end of the atonement nephi for it must needs be that there be an opposition in all thing . if not so my first bear in the wilderness righteousness could not be bring to pass neither wickedness neither holiness nor misery neither good nor bad . wherefore all thing must needs be a compound in one wherefore if it should be one body it must need remain a dead have no life neither death nor corruption nor incorruption happiness nor misery neither sense nor insensibility . nephi wherefore it must need have be create for a thing of naught wherefore there would have be no purpose in the end of it creation . wherefore this thing must need destroy the wisdom of god and his eternal purpose and also the power and the mercy and the justice of god . nephi and if ye shall say there be no law ye shall also say there be no sin . if ye shall say there be no sin ye shall also say there be no righteousness . and if there be no righteousness there be no happiness . and if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery . and if these thing be not there be no god . and if there be no god we be not neither the earth for there could have be no creation of thing neither to act nor to be act upon wherefore all thing must have vanish away . nephi and now my son i speak unto you these thing for your profit and learning for there be a god and he hath create all thing both the heaven and the earth and all thing that in them be both thing to act and thing to be act upon . nephi and to bring about his eternal purpose in the end of man after he have create our first parent and the beast of the field and the fowl of the air and in fine all thing which be create it must needs be that there be an opposition even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life the one be sweet and the other bitter . nephi wherefore the lord god give unto man that he should act for himself . wherefore man could not act for himself save it should be that he be entice by the one or the other . nephi and i lehi accord to the thing which i have read must need suppose that an angel of god accord to that which be write have fall from heaven wherefore he become a devil have seek that which be evil before god . nephi and because he have fall from heaven and have become miserable forever he seek also the misery of all mankind . wherefore he say unto eve yea even that old serpent who be the devil who be the father of all lie wherefore he say partake of the forbidden fruit and ye shall not die but ye shall be a god know good and evil . nephi and after adam and eve have partake of the forbidden fruit they be drive out of the garden of eden to till the earth . nephi and they have bring forth child yea even the family of all the earth . nephi and the day of the child of men be prolong accord to the will of god that they might repent while in the flesh wherefore their state become a state of probation and their time be lengthen accord to the commandment which the lord god give unto the child of men . for he give commandment that all men must repent for he show unto all men that they be lose because of the transgression of their parent . nephi and now behold if adam have not transgress he would not have fall but he would have remain in the garden of eden . and all thing which be create must have remain in the same state in which they be after they be create and they must have remain forever and have no end . nephi and they would have have no child wherefore they would have remain in a state of innocence have no joy for they know no misery do no good for they know no sin . nephi but behold all thing have be do in the wisdom of him who knoweth all thing . nephi adam fell that men might be and men be that they might have joy . nephi and the messiah cometh in the fulness of time that he may redeem the child of men from the fall . and because that they be redeem from the fall they have become free forever know good from evil to act for themselves and not to be act upon save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day accord to the commandment which god hath give . nephi wherefore men be free accord to the flesh and all thing be give them which be expedient unto man . and they be free to choose liberty and eternal life through the great mediator of all men or to choose captivity and death accord to the captivity and power of the devil for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself . nephi and now my son i would that ye should look to the great mediator and hearken unto his great commandment and be faithful unto his word and choose eternal life accord to the will of his holy spirit nephi and not choose eternal death accord to the will of the flesh and the evil which be therein which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate to bring you down to hell that he may reign over you in his own kingdom . nephi i have speak these few word unto you all my son in the last day of my probation and i have choose the good part accord to the word of the prophet . and i have none other object save it be the everlasting welfare of your soul . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now i speak unto you joseph my last born . thou wast bear in the wilderness of mine affliction yea in the day of my great sorrow do thy mother bear thee . nephi and may the lord consecrate also unto thee this land which be a most precious land for thine inheritance and the inheritance of thy seed with thy brother for thy security forever if it so be that ye shall keep the commandment of the holy one of israel . nephi and now joseph my last born whom i have bring out of the wilderness of mine affliction may the lord bless thee forever for thy seed shall not utterly be destroy . nephi for behold thou art the fruit of my loin and i be a descendant of joseph who be carry captive into egypt . and great be the covenant of the lord which he make unto joseph . nephi wherefore joseph truly saw our day . and he obtain a promise of the lord that out of the fruit of his loins the lord god would raise up a righteous branch unto the house of israel not the messiah but a branch which be to be break off nevertheless to be remember in the covenant of the lord that the messiah should be make manifest unto them in the latter day in the spirit of power unto the bringing of them out of darkness unto light yea out of hidden darkness and out of captivity unto freedom . nephi for joseph truly testify say a seer shall the lord my god raise up who shall be a choice seer unto the fruit of my loin . nephi yea joseph truly say thus saith the lord unto me a choice seer will i raise up out of the fruit of thy loin and he shall be esteem highly among the fruit of thy loin . and unto him will i give commandment that he shall do a work for the fruit of thy loin his brother which shall be of great worth unto them even to the bringing of them to the knowledge of the covenant which i have make with thy father . nephi and i will give unto him a commandment that he shall do none other work save the work which i shall command him . and i will make him great in mine eye for he shall do my work . nephi and he shall be great like unto moses whom i have say i would raise up unto you to deliver my people o house of israel . nephi and moses will i raise up to deliver thy people out of the land of egypt . nephi but a seer will i raise up out of the fruit of thy loin and unto him will i give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loin and not to the bring forth my word only saith the lord but to the convince them of my word which shall have already go forth among them . nephi wherefore the fruit of thy loin shall write and the fruit of the loin of judah shall write and that which shall be write by the fruit of thy loin and also that which shall be write by the fruit of the loin of judah shall grow together unto the confounding of false doctrine and lay down of contention and establish peace among the fruit of thy loin and bring them to the knowledge of their father in the latter day and also to the knowledge of my covenant saith the lord . nephi and out of weakness he shall be make strong in that day when my work shall commence among all my people unto the restore thee o house of israel saith the lord . nephi and thus prophesy joseph say behold that seer will the lord bless and they that seek to destroy him shall be confound for this promise which i have obtain of the lord of the fruit of my loin shall be fulfil . behold i be sure of the fulfilling of this promise nephi and his name shall be call after me and it shall be after the name of his father . and he shall be like unto me for the thing which the lord shall bring forth by his hand by the power of the lord shall bring my people unto salvation . nephi yea thus prophesy joseph i be sure of this thing even a i be sure of the promise of moses for the lord hath say unto me i will preserve thy seed forever . nephi and the lord hath say i will raise up a moses and i will give power unto him in a rod and i will give judgment unto him in writing . yet i will not loose his tongue that he shall speak much for i will not make him mighty in speaking . but i will write unto him my law by the finger of mine own hand and i will make a spokesman for him . nephi and the lord say unto me also i will raise up unto the fruit of thy loin and i will make for him a spokesman . and i behold i will give unto him that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loin unto the fruit of thy loin and the spokesman of thy loin shall declare it . nephi and the word which he shall write shall be the word which be expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy loin . and it shall be a if the fruit of thy loin have cry unto them from the dust for i know their faith . nephi and they shall cry from the dust yea even repentance unto their brother even after many generation have go by them . and it shall come to pass that their cry shall go even accord to the simpleness of their word . nephi because of their faith their word shall proceed forth out of my mouth unto their brother who be the fruit of thy loin and the weakness of their word will i make strong in their faith unto the remembering of my covenant which i make unto thy father . nephi and now behold my son joseph after this manner do my father of old prophesy . nephi wherefore because of this covenant thou art bless for thy seed shall not be destroy for they shall hearken unto the word of the book . nephi and there shall rise up one mighty among them who shall do much good both in word and in deed be an instrument in the hand of god with exceed faith to work mighty wonder and do that thing which be great in the sight of god unto the bringing to pass much restoration unto the house of israel and unto the seed of thy brother . nephi and now bless art thou joseph . behold thou art little wherefore hearken unto the word of thy brother nephi and it shall be do unto thee even accord to the word which i have speak . remember the word of thy die father . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now i nephi speak concern the prophecy of which my father hath speak concern joseph who be carry into egypt . nephi for behold he truly prophesy concern all his seed . and the prophecy which he write there be not many great . and he prophesy concern u and our future generation and they be write upon the plate of brass . nephi wherefore after my father have make an end of speak concern the prophecy of joseph he call the child of laman his son and his daughter and say unto them behold my son and my daughter who be the son and the daughter of my first bear i would that ye should give ear unto my word . nephi for the lord god hath say that inasmuch a ye shall keep my commandment ye shall prosper in the land and inasmuch a ye will not keep my commandment ye shall be cut off from my presence . nephi but behold my son and my daughter i can not go down to my grave save i should leave a blessing upon you for behold i know that if ye be bring up in the way ye should go ye will not depart from it . nephi wherefore if ye be curse behold i leave my blessing upon you that the cursing may be take from you and be answer upon the head of your parent . nephi wherefore because of my bless the lord god will not suffer that ye shall perish wherefore he will be merciful unto you and unto your seed forever . nephi and it come to pass that after my father have make an end of speak to the son and daughter of laman he cause the son and daughter of lemuel to be bring before him . nephi and he spake unto them say behold my son and my daughter who be the son and the daughter of my second son behold i leave unto you the same blessing which i leave unto the son and daughter of laman wherefore thou shalt not utterly be destroy but in the end thy seed shall be bless . nephi and it come to pass that when my father have make an end of speak unto them behold he spake unto the son of ishmael yea and even all his household . nephi and after he have make an end of speak unto them he spake unto sam say bless art thou and thy seed for thou shall inherit the land like unto thy brother nephi . and thy seed shall be number with his seed and thou shalt be even like unto thy brother and thy seed like unto his seed and thou shalt be bless in all thy day . nephi and it come to pas after my father lehi have speak unto all his household accord to the feeling of his heart and the spirit of the lord which be in him he wax old . and it come to pass that he die and be bury . nephi and it come to pass that not many day after his death laman and lemuel and the son of ishmael be angry with me because of the admonition of the lord . nephi for i nephi be constrain to speak unto them accord to his word for i have speak many thing unto them and also my father before his death many of which saying be write upon mine other plate for a more history part be write upon mine other plate . nephi and upon these i write the thing of my soul and many of the scripture which be engraven upon the plate of brass . for my soul delighteth in the scripture and my heart pondereth them and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my child . nephi behold my soul delighteth in the thing of the lord and my heart pondereth continually upon the thing which i have see and hear . nephi nevertheless notwithstanding the great goodness of the lord in show me his great and marvelous work my heart exclaimeth o wretched man that i be ! yea my heart sorroweth because of my flesh my soul grieveth because of mine iniquity . nephi i be encompass about because of the temptation and the sin which do so easily beset me . nephi and when i desire to rejoice my heart groaneth because of my sin nevertheless i know in whom i have trust . nephi my god hath be my support he hath lead me through mine affliction in the wilderness and he hath preserve me upon the water of the great deep . nephi he hath fill me with his love even unto the consuming of my flesh . nephi he hath confound mine enemy unto the causing of them to quake before me . nephi behold he hath heard my cry by day and he hath give me knowledge by vision in the nighttime . nephi and by day have i wax bold in mighty prayer before him yea my voice have i send up on high and angel come down and minister unto me . nephi and upon the wing of his spirit hath my body be carry away upon exceedingly high mountain . and mine eye have behold great thing yea even too great for man therefore i be bidden that i should not write them . nephi o then if i have see so great thing if the lord in his condescension unto the child of men hath visit men in so much mercy why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow and my flesh waste away and my strength slacken because of mine affliction ? nephi and why should i yield to sin because of my flesh ? yea why should i give way to temptation that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul ? why be i angry because of mine enemy ? nephi awake my soul ! no longer droop in sin . rejoice o my heart and give place no more for the enemy of my soul . nephi do not anger again because of mine enemy . do not slacken my strength because of mine affliction . nephi rejoice o my heart and cry unto the lord and say o lord i will praise thee forever yea my soul will rejoice in thee my god and the rock of my salvation . nephi o lord wilt thou redeem my soul ? wilt thou deliver me out of the hand of mine enemy ? wilt thou make me that i may shake at the appearance of sin ? nephi may the gate of hell be shut continually before me because that my heart be break and my spirit be contrite ! o lord wilt thou not shut the gate of thy righteousness before me that i may walk in the path of the low valley that i may be strict in the plain road ! nephi o lord wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness ! o lord wilt thou make a way for mine escape before mine enemy ! wilt thou make my path straight before me ! wilt thou not place a stumbling block in my way but that thou wouldst clear my way before me and hedge not up my way but the way of mine enemy . nephi o lord i have trust in thee and i will trust in thee forever . i will not put my trust in the arm of flesh for i know that curse be he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh . yea curse be he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm . nephi yea i know that god will give liberally to him that asketh . yea my god will give me if i ask not amiss therefore i will lift up my voice unto thee yea i will cry unto thee my god the rock of my righteousness . behold my voice shall forever ascend up unto thee my rock and mine everlasting god . amen . nephi chapter nephi behold it come to pass that i nephi do cry much unto the lord my god because of the anger of my brother . nephi but behold their anger do increase against me insomuch that they do seek to take away my life . nephi yea they do murmur against me say our young brother think to rule over u and we have have much trial because of him wherefore now let u slay him that we may not be afflict more because of his word . for behold we will not have him to be our ruler for it belong unto u who be the elder brother to rule over this people . nephi now i do not write upon these plate all the word which they murmur against me . but it sufficeth me to say that they do seek to take away my life . nephi and it come to pass that the lord do warn me that i nephi should depart from them and flee into the wilderness and all those who would go with me . nephi wherefore it come to pass that i nephi do take my family and also zoram and his family and sam mine elder brother and his family and jacob and joseph my young brother and also my sister and all those who would go with me . and all those who would go with me be those who believe in the warning and the revelation of god wherefore they do hearken unto my word . nephi and we do take our tent and whatsoever thing be possible for u and do journey in the wilderness for the space of many day . and after we have journey for the space of many day we do pitch our tent . nephi and my people would that we should call the name of the place nephi wherefore we do call it nephi . nephi and all those who be with me do take upon them to call themselves the people of nephi . nephi and we do observe to keep the judgment and the statute and the commandment of the lord in all thing accord to the law of moses . nephi and the lord be with u and we do prosper exceedingly for we do sow seed and we do reap again in abundance . and we begin to raise flock and herd and animal of every kind . nephi and i nephi have also bring the record which be engraven upon the plate of brass and also the ball or compass which be prepare for my father by the hand of the lord accord to that which be write . nephi and it come to pass that we begin to prosper exceedingly and to multiply in the land . nephi and i nephi do take the sword of laban and after the manner of it do make many sword l by any mean the people who be now call lamanites should come upon u and destroy u for i know their hatred towards me and my child and those who be call my people . nephi and i do teach my people to build building and to work in all manner of wood and of iron and of copper and of brass and of steel and of gold and of silver and of precious ore which be in great abundance . nephi and i nephi do build a temple and i do construct it after the manner of the temple of solomon save it be not build of so many precious thing for they be not to be find upon the land wherefore it could not be build like unto solomon 's temple . but the manner of the construction be like unto the temple of solomon and the workmanship thereof be exceedingly fine . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do cause my people to be industrious and to labor with their hand . nephi and it come to pass that they would that i should be their king . but i nephi be desirous that they should have no king nevertheless i do for them accord to that which be in my power . nephi and behold the word of the lord have be fulfil unto my brother which he spake concern them that i should be their ruler and their teacher . wherefore i have be their ruler and their teacher accord to the commandment of the lord until the time they seek to take away my life . nephi wherefore the word of the lord be fulfil which he spake unto me say that inasmuch a they will not hearken unto thy word they shall be cut off from the presence of the lord . and behold they be cut off from his presence . nephi and he have cause the cursing to come upon them yea even a sore cursing because of their iniquity . for behold they have harden their heart against him that they have become like unto a flint wherefore a they be white and exceedingly fair and delightsome that they might not be entice unto my people the lord god do cause a skin of blackness to come upon them . nephi and thus saith the lord god i will cause that they shall be loathsome unto thy people save they shall repent of their iniquity . nephi and curse shall be the seed of him that mixeth with their seed for they shall be curse even with the same cursing . and the lord spake it and it be do . nephi and because of their cursing which be upon them they do become an idle people full of mischief and subtlety and do seek in the wilderness for beast of prey . nephi and the lord god say unto me they shall be a scourge unto thy seed to stir them up in remembrance of me and inasmuch a they will not remember me and hearken unto my word they shall scourge them even unto destruction . nephi and it come to pass that i nephi do consecrate jacob and joseph that they should be priest and teacher over the land of my people . nephi and it come to pass that we live after the manner of happiness . nephi and thirty year have pass away from the time we leave jerusalem . nephi and i nephi have keep the record upon my plate which i have make of my people thus far . nephi and it come to pass that the lord god say unto me make other plate and thou shalt engraven many thing upon them which be good in my sight for the profit of thy people . nephi wherefore i nephi to be obedient to the commandment of the lord go and make these plate upon which i have engraven these thing . nephi and i engrave that which be please unto god . and if my people be please with the thing of god they will be please with mine engraving which be upon these plate . nephi and if my people desire to know the more particular part of the history of my people they must search mine other plate . nephi and it sufficeth me to say that forty year have pass away and we have already have war and contention with our brother . nephi chapter nephi the word of jacob the brother of nephi which he spake unto the people of nephi nephi behold my beloved brother i jacob have be call of god and ordain after the manner of his holy order and have be consecrate by my brother nephi unto whom ye look a a king or a protector and on whom ye depend for safety behold ye know that i have speak unto you exceedingly many thing . nephi nevertheless i speak unto you again for i be desirous for the welfare of your soul . yea mine anxiety be great for you and ye yourselves know that it ever have be . for i have exhort you with all diligence and i have teach you the word of my father and i have speak unto you concern all thing which be write from the creation of the world . nephi and now behold i would speak unto you concern thing which be and which be to come wherefore i will read you the word of isaiah . and they be the word which my brother have desire that i should speak unto you . and i speak unto you for your sake that ye may learn and glorify the name of your god . nephi and now the word which i shall read be they which isaiah spake concern all the house of israel wherefore they may be liken unto you for ye be of the house of israel . and there be many thing which have be speak by isaiah which may be liken unto you because ye be of the house of israel . nephi and now these be the word thus saith the lord god behold i will lift up mine hand to the gentile and set up my standard to the people and they shall bring thy son in their arm and thy daughter shall be carry upon their shoulder . nephi and king shall be thy nursing father and their queen thy nurse mother they shall bow down to thee with their face towards the earth and lick up the dust of thy foot and thou shalt know that i be the lord for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me . nephi and now i jacob would speak somewhat concern these word . for behold the lord have show me that those who be at jerusalem from whence we come have be slay and carry away captive . nephi nevertheless the lord have show unto me that they should return again . and he also have show unto me that the lord god the holy one of israel should manifest himself unto them in the flesh and after he should manifest himself they should scourge him and crucify him accord to the word of the angel who spake it unto me . nephi and after they have harden their heart and stiffen their neck against the holy one of israel behold the judgment of the holy one of israel shall come upon them . and the day cometh that they shall be smite and afflict . nephi wherefore after they be drive to and fro for thus saith the angel many shall be afflict in the flesh and shall not be suffer to perish because of the prayer of the faithful they shall be scatter and smite and hat nevertheless the lord will be merciful unto them that when they shall come to the knowledge of their redeemer they shall be gather together again to the land of their inheritance . nephi and bless be the gentile they of whom the prophet have write for behold if it so be that they shall repent and fight not against zion and do not unite themselves to that great and abominable church they shall be save for the lord god will fulfil his covenant which he have make unto his child and for this cause the prophet have write these thing . nephi wherefore they that fight against zion and the covenant people of the lord shall lick up the dust of their foot and the people of the lord shall not be ashamed . for the people of the lord be they who wait for him for they still wait for the come of the messiah . nephi and behold accord to the word of the prophet the messiah will set himself again the second time to recover them wherefore he will manifest himself unto them in power and great glory unto the destruction of their enemy when that day cometh when they shall believe in him and none will he destroy that believe in him . nephi and they that believe not in him shall be destroy both by fire and by tempest and by earthquake and by bloodshed and by pestilence and by famine . and they shall know that the lord be god the holy one of israel . nephi for shall the prey be take from the mighty or the lawful captive deliver ? nephi but thus saith the lord even the captive of the mighty shall be take away and the prey of the terrible shall be deliver for the mighty god shall deliver his covenant people . for thus saith the lord i will contend with them that contendeth with thee nephi and i will fee them that oppress thee with their own flesh and they shall be drunken with their own blood a with sweet wine and all flesh shall know that i the lord be thy savior and thy redeemer the mighty one of jacob . nephi chapter nephi yea for thus saith the lord have i put thee away or have i cast thee off forever ? for thus saith the lord where be the bill of your mother 's divorcement ? to whom have i put thee away or to which of my creditor have i sell you ? yea to whom have i sell you ? behold for your iniquity have ye sell yourselves and for your transgression be your mother put away . nephi wherefore when i come there be no man when i call yea there be none to answer . o house of israel be my hand shorten at all that it can not redeem or have i no power to deliver ? behold at my rebuke i dry up the sea i make their river a wilderness and their fish to stink because the water be dry up and they die because of thirst . nephi i clothe the heaven with blackness and i make sackcloth their covering . nephi the lord god hath give me the tongue of the learned that i should know how to speak a word in season unto thee o house of israel . when ye be weary he waketh morning by morning . he waketh mine ear to hear a the learn . nephi the lord god hath open mine ear and i be not rebellious neither turn away back . nephi i give my back to the smiter and my cheek to them that pluck off the hair . i hide not my face from shame and spitting . nephi for the lord god will help me therefore shall i not be confound . therefore have i set my face like a flint and i know that i shall not be ashamed . nephi and the lord be near and he justifieth me . who will contend with me ? let u stand together . who be mine adversary ? let him come near me and i will smite him with the strength of my mouth . nephi for the lord god will help me . and all they who shall condemn me behold all they shall wax old a a garment and the moth shall eat them up . nephi who be among you that feareth the lord that obeyeth the voice of his servant that walketh in darkness and hath no light ? nephi behold all ye that kindle fire that compass yourselves about with spark walk in the light of your fire and in the spark which ye have kindle . this shall ye have of mine hand ye shall lie down in sorrow . nephi chapter nephi hearken unto me ye that follow after righteousness . look unto the rock from whence ye be hewn and to the hole of the pit from whence ye be digged . nephi look unto abraham your father and unto sarah she that bare you for i call him alone and bless him . nephi for the lord shall comfort zion he will comfort all her waste place and he will make her wilderness like eden and her desert like the garden of the lord . joy and gladness shall be find therein thanksgiving and the voice of melody . nephi hearken unto me my people and give ear unto me o my nation for a law shall proceed from me and i will make my judgment to rest for a light for the people . nephi my righteousness be near my salvation be go forth and mine arm shall judge the people . the isle shall wait upon me and on mine arm shall they trust . nephi lift up your eye to the heaven and look upon the earth beneath for the heaven shall vanish away like smoke and the earth shall wax old like a garment and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner . but my salvation shall be forever and my righteousness shall not be abolish . nephi hearken unto me ye that know righteousness the people in whose heart i have write my law fear ye not the reproach of men neither be ye afraid of their revilings . nephi for the moth shall eat them up like a garment and the worm shall eat them like wool . but my righteousness shall be forever and my salvation from generation to generation . nephi awake awake ! put on strength o arm of the lord awake a in the ancient day . art thou not he that hath cut rahab and wound the dragon ? nephi art thou not he who hath dry the sea the water of the great deep that hath make the depth of the sea a way for the ransom to pass over ? nephi therefore the redeemed of the lord shall return and come with sing unto zion and everlasting joy and holiness shall be upon their head and they shall obtain gladness and joy sorrow and mourn shall flee away . nephi i be he yea i be he that comforteth you . behold who art thou that thou shouldst be afraid of man who shall die and of the son of man who shall be make like unto grass ? nephi and forgettest the lord thy maker that hath stretch forth the heaven and lay the foundation of the earth and hast fear continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor a if he be ready to destroy ? and where be the fury of the oppressor ? nephi the captive exile hasteneth that he may be loose and that he should not die in the pit nor that his bread should fail . nephi but i be the lord thy god whose wave roar the lord of host be my name . nephi and i have put my word in thy mouth and have cover thee in the shadow of mine hand that i may plant the heaven and lay the foundation of the earth and say unto zion behold thou art my people . nephi awake awake stand up o jerusalem which hast drunk at the hand of the lord the cup of his fury thou hast drunken the dreg of the cup of tremble wrung out nephi and none to guide her among all the son she hath brought forth neither that taketh her by the hand of all the son she hath bring up . nephi these two son be come unto thee who shall be sorry for thee thy desolation and destruction and the famine and the sword and by whom shall i comfort thee ? nephi thy son have faint save these two they lie at the head of all the street a a wild bull in a net they be full of the fury of the lord the rebuke of thy god . nephi therefore hear now this thou afflict and drunken and not with wine nephi thus saith thy lord the lord and thy god pleadeth the cause of his people behold i have take out of thine hand the cup of tremble the dreg of the cup of my fury thou shalt no more drink it again . nephi but i will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee who have say to thy soul bow down that we may go over and thou hast laid thy body a the ground and a the street to them that go over . nephi awake awake put on thy strength o zion put on thy beautiful garment o jerusalem the holy city for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean . nephi shake thyself from the dust arise sit down o jerusalem loose thyself from the band of thy neck o captive daughter of zion . nephi chapter nephi and now my beloved brother i have read these thing that ye might know concern the covenant of the lord that he have covenant with all the house of israel nephi that he have speak unto the jew by the mouth of his holy prophet even from the begin down from generation to generation until the time come that they shall be restore to the true church and fold of god when they shall be gather home to the land of their inheritance and shall be establish in all their land of promise . nephi behold my beloved brother i speak unto you these thing that ye may rejoice and lift up your head forever because of the blessing which the lord god shall bestow upon your child . nephi for i know that ye have search much many of you to know of thing to come wherefore i know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die nevertheless in our body we shall see god . nephi yea i know that ye know that in the body he shall show himself unto those at jerusalem from whence we come for it be expedient that it should be among them for it behooveth the great creator that he suffereth himself to become subject unto man in the flesh and die for all men that all men might become subject unto him . nephi for a death hath pass upon all men to fulfil the merciful plan of the great creator there must need be a power of resurrection and the resurrection must need come unto man by reason of the fall and the fall come by reason of transgression and because man become fall they be cut off from the presence of the lord . nephi wherefore it must needs be an infinite atonement save it should be an infinite atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption . wherefore the first judgment which come upon man must need have remain to an endless duration . and if so this flesh must have lay down to rot and to crumble to it mother earth to rise no more . nephi o the wisdom of god his mercy and grace ! for behold if the flesh should rise no more our spirit must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the eternal god and become the devil to rise no more . nephi and our spirit must have become like unto him and we become devils angel to a devil to be shut out from the presence of our god and to remain with the father of lie in misery like unto himself yea to that be who beguile our first parent who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light and stirreth up the child of men unto secret combination of murder and all manner of secret work of darkness . nephi o how great the goodness of our god who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster yea that monster death and hell which i call the death of the body and also the death of the spirit . nephi and because of the way of deliverance of our god the holy one of israel this death of which i have speak which be the temporal shall deliver up it dead which death be the grave . nephi and this death of which i have speak which be the spiritual death shall deliver up it dead which spiritual death be hell wherefore death and hell must deliver up their dead and hell must deliver up it captive spirit and the grave must deliver up it captive body and the body and the spirit of men will be restore one to the other and it be by the power of the resurrection of the holy one of israel . nephi o how great the plan of our god ! for on the other hand the paradise of god must deliver up the spirit of the righteous and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous and the spirit and the body be restore to itself again and all men become incorruptible and immortal and they be live soul have a perfect knowledge like unto u in the flesh save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect . nephi wherefore we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt and our uncleanness and our nakedness and the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment and their righteousness be clothe with purity yea even with the robe of righteousness . nephi and it shall come to pass that when all men shall have pass from this first death unto life insomuch a they have become immortal they must appear before the judgment seat of the holy one of israel and then cometh the judgment and then must they be judge accord to the holy judgment of god . nephi and assuredly a the lord liveth for the lord god hath speak it and it be his eternal word which can not pass away that they who be righteous shall be righteous still and they who be filthy shall be filthy still wherefore they who be filthy be the devil and his angel and they shall go away into everlasting fire prepare for them and their torment be a a lake of fire and brimstone whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and have no end . nephi o the greatness and the justice of our god ! for he executeth all his word and they have go forth out of his mouth and his law must be fulfil . nephi but behold the righteous the saint of the holy one of israel they who have believe in the holy one of israel they who have endure the cross of the world and despise the shame of it they shall inherit the kingdom of god which be prepare for them from the foundation of the world and their joy shall be full forever . nephi o the greatness of the mercy of our god the holy one of israel ! for he delivereth his saint from that awful monster the devil and death and hell and that lake of fire and brimstone which be endless torment . nephi o how great the holiness of our god ! for he knoweth all thing and there be not anything save he know it . nephi and he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice for behold he suffereth the pain of all men yea the pain of every living creature both men woman and child who belong to the family of adam . nephi and he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day . nephi and he commandeth all men that they must repent and be baptize in his name have perfect faith in the holy one of israel or they can not be save in the kingdom of god . nephi and if they will not repent and believe in his name and be baptize in his name and endure to the end they must be damn for the lord god the holy one of israel have speak it . nephi wherefore he have give a law and where there be no law give there be no punishment and where there be no punishment there be no condemnation and where there be no condemnation the mercy of the holy one of israel have claim upon them because of the atonement for they be deliver by the power of him . nephi for the atonement satisfieth the demand of his justice upon all those who have not the law give to them that they be deliver from that awful monster death and hell and the devil and the lake of fire and brimstone which be endless torment and they be restore to that god who give them breath which be the holy one of israel . nephi but wo unto him that have the law give yea that have all the commandment of god like unto u and that transgresseth them and that wasteth the day of his probation for awful be his state ! nephi o that cunning plan of the evil one ! o the vainness and the frailty and the foolishness of men ! when they be learn they think they be wise and they hearken not unto the counsel of god for they set it aside suppose they know of themselves wherefore their wisdom be foolishness and it profiteth them not . and they shall perish . nephi but to be learn be good if they hearken unto the counsel of god . nephi but wo unto the rich who be rich a to the thing of the world . for because they be rich they despise the poor and they persecute the meek and their heart be upon their treasure wherefore their treasure be their god . and behold their treasure shall perish with them also . nephi and wo unto the deaf that will not hear for they shall perish . nephi wo unto the blind that will not see for they shall perish also . nephi wo unto the uncircumcised of heart for a knowledge of their iniquity shall smite them at the last day . nephi wo unto the liar for he shall be thrust down to hell . nephi wo unto the murderer who deliberately killeth for he shall die . nephi wo unto them who commit whoredom for they shall be thrust down to hell . nephi yea wo unto those that worship idol for the devil of all devil delighteth in them . nephi and in fine wo unto all those who die in their sin for they shall return to god and behold his face and remain in their sin . nephi o my beloved brother remember the awfulness in transgress against that holy god and also the awfulness of yield to the enticings of that cunning one . remember to be carnally mind be death and to be spiritually mind be life eternal . nephi o my beloved brother give ear to my word . remember the greatness of the holy one of israel . do not say that i have speak hard thing against you for if ye do ye will revile against the truth for i have speak the word of your maker . i know that the word of truth be hard against all uncleanness but the righteous fear them not for they love the truth and be not shake . nephi o then my beloved brother come unto the lord the holy one . remember that his path be righteous . behold the way for man be narrow but it lieth in a straight course before him and the keeper of the gate be the holy one of israel and he employeth no servant there and there be none other way save it be by the gate for he can not be deceive for the lord god be his name . nephi and whoso knocketh to him will he open and the wise and the learn and they that be rich who be puff up because of their learning and their wisdom and their rich yea they be they whom he despiseth and save they shall cast these thing away and consider themselves fool before god and come down in the depth of humility he will not open unto them . nephi but the thing of the wise and the prudent shall be hide from them forever yea that happiness which be prepare for the saint . nephi o my beloved brother remember my word . behold i take off my garment and i shake them before you i pray the god of my salvation that he view me with his all search eye wherefore ye shall know at the last day when all men shall be judge of their work that the god of israel do witness that i shake your iniquity from my soul and that i stand with brightness before him and be rid of your blood . nephi o my beloved brother turn away from your sin shake off the chain of him that would bind you fast come unto that god who be the rock of your salvation . nephi prepare your soul for that glorious day when justice shall be administer unto the righteous even the day of judgment that ye may not shrink with awful fear that ye may not remember your awful guilt in perfectness and be constrain to exclaim holy holy be thy judgment o lord god almighty but i know my guilt i transgress thy law and my transgression be mine and the devil hath obtain me that i be a prey to his awful misery . nephi but behold my brother be it expedient that i should awake you to an awful reality of these thing ? would i harrow up your soul if your mind be pure ? would i be plain unto you accord to the plainness of the truth if ye be free from sin ? nephi behold if ye be holy i would speak unto you of holiness but a ye be not holy and ye look upon me a a teacher it must needs be expedient that i teach you the consequence of sin . nephi behold my soul abhorreth sin and my heart delighteth in righteousness and i will praise the holy name of my god . nephi come my brother every one that thirsteth come ye to the water and he that hath no money come buy and eat yea come buy wine and milk without money and without price . nephi wherefore do not spend money for that which be of no worth nor your labor for that which can not satisfy . hearken diligently unto me and remember the word which i have speak and come unto the holy one of israel and feast upon that which perisheth not neither can be corrupt and let your soul delight in fatness . nephi behold my beloved brother remember the word of your god pray unto him continually by day and give thanks unto his holy name by night . let your heart rejoice . nephi and behold how great the covenant of the lord and how great his condescension unto the child of men and because of his greatness and his grace and mercy he have promise unto u that our seed shall not utterly be destroy accord to the flesh but that he would preserve them and in future generation they shall become a righteous branch unto the house of israel . nephi and now my brother i would speak unto you more but on the morrow i will declare unto you the remainder of my word . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now i jacob speak unto you again my beloved brother concern this righteous branch of which i have speak . nephi for behold the promise which we have obtain be promise unto u accord to the flesh wherefore a it have be show unto me that many of our child shall perish in the flesh because of unbelief nevertheless god will be merciful unto many and our child shall be restore that they may come to that which will give them the true knowledge of their redeemer . nephi wherefore a i say unto you it must needs be expedient that christ for in the last night the angel spake unto me that this should be his name should come among the jew among those who be the more wicked part of the world and they shall crucify him for thus it behooveth our god and there be none other nation on earth that would crucify their god . nephi for should the mighty miracle be work among other nation they would repent and know that he be their god . nephi but because of priestcraft and iniquity they at jerusalem will stiffen their neck against him that he be crucify . nephi wherefore because of their iniquity destruction famine pestilence and bloodshed shall come upon them and they who shall not be destroy shall be scatter among all nation . nephi but behold thus saith the lord god when the day cometh that they shall believe in me that i be christ then have i covenant with their father that they shall be restore in the flesh upon the earth unto the land of their inheritance . nephi and it shall come to pass that they shall be gather in from their long dispersion from the isle of the sea and from the four part of the earth and the nation of the gentile shall be great in the eye of me saith god in carry them forth to the land of their inheritance . nephi yea the king of the gentile shall be nurse father unto them and their queen shall become nursing mother wherefore the promise of the lord be great unto the gentile for he hath speak it and who can dispute ? nephi but behold this land say god shall be a land of thine inheritance and the gentile shall be bless upon the land . nephi and this land shall be a land of liberty unto the gentile and there shall be no king upon the land who shall raise up unto the gentile . nephi and i will fortify this land against all other nation . nephi and he that fighteth against zion shall perish saith god . nephi for he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish for i the lord the king of heaven will be their king and i will be a light unto them forever that hear my word . nephi wherefore for this cause that my covenant may be fulfil which i have make unto the child of men that i will do unto them while they be in the flesh i must need destroy the secret work of darkness and of murder and of abomination . nephi wherefore he that fighteth against zion both jew and gentile both bond and free both male and female shall perish for they be they who be the whore of all the earth for they who be not for me be against me saith our god . nephi for i will fulfil my promise which i have make unto the child of men that i will do unto them while they be in the flesh nephi wherefore my beloved brother thus saith our god i will afflict thy seed by the hand of the gentile nevertheless i will soften the heart of the gentile that they shall be like unto a father to them wherefore the gentile shall be bless and number among the house of israel . nephi wherefore i will consecrate this land unto thy seed and them who shall be number among thy seed forever for the land of their inheritance for it be a choice land saith god unto me above all other land wherefore i will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship me saith god . nephi and now my beloved brother see that our merciful god have give u so great knowledge concern these thing let u remember him and lay aside our sin and not hang down our head for we be not cast off nevertheless we have be drive out of the land of our inheritance but we have be lead to a good land for the lord have make the sea our path and we be upon an isle of the sea . nephi but great be the promise of the lord unto them who be upon the isle of the sea wherefore a it say isle there must need be more than this and they be inhabit also by our brother . nephi for behold the lord god have lead away from time to time from the house of israel accord to his will and pleasure . and now behold the lord remembereth all them who have be break off wherefore he remembereth u also . nephi therefore cheer up your heart and remember that ye be free to act for yourselves to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life . nephi wherefore my beloved brother reconcile yourselves to the will of god and not to the will of the devil and the flesh and remember after ye be reconcile unto god that it be only in and through the grace of god that ye be save . nephi wherefore may god raise you from death by the power of the resurrection and also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement that ye may be receive into the eternal kingdom of god that ye may praise him through grace divine . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now jacob spake many more thing to my people at that time nevertheless only these thing have i cause to be write for the thing which i have write sufficeth me . nephi and now i nephi write more of the word of isaiah for my soul delighteth in his word . for i will liken his word unto my people and i will send them forth unto all my child for he verily saw my redeemer even a i have see him . nephi and my brother jacob also have see him a i have see him wherefore i will send their word forth unto my child to prove unto them that my word be true . wherefore by the word of three god hath say i will establish my word . nevertheless god sendeth more witness and he proveth all his word . nephi behold my soul delighteth in prove unto my people the truth of the come of christ for for this end hath the law of moses be give and all thing which have be give of god from the beginning of the world unto man be the typifying of him . nephi and also my soul delighteth in the covenant of the lord which he hath make to our father yea my soul delighteth in his grace and in his justice and power and mercy in the great and eternal plan of deliverance from death . nephi and my soul delighteth in prove unto my people that save christ should come all men must perish . nephi for if there be no christ there be no god and if there be no god we be not for there could have be no creation . but there be a god and he be christ and he cometh in the fulness of his own time . nephi and now i write some of the word of isaiah that whoso of my people shall see these word may lift up their heart and rejoice for all men . now these be the word and ye may liken them unto you and unto all men . nephi chapter nephi the word that isaiah the son of amoz saw concern judah and jerusalem nephi and it shall come to pass in the last day when the mountain of the lord 's house shall be establish in the top of the mountain and shall be exalt above the hill and all nation shall flow unto it . nephi and many people shall go and say come ye and let u go up to the mountain of the lord to the house of the god of jacob and he will teach u of his way and we will walk in his path for out of zion shall go forth the law and the word of the lord from jerusalem . nephi and he shall judge among the nation and shall rebuke many people and they shall beat their sword into plow share and their spear into prune hooks nation shall not lift up sword against nation neither shall they learn war any more . nephi o house of jacob come ye and let u walk in the light of the lord yea come for ye have all go astray every one to his wicked way . nephi therefore o lord thou hast forsaken thy people the house of jacob because they be replenish from the east and hearken unto soothsayer like the philistine and they please themselves in the child of stranger . nephi their land also be full of silver and gold neither be there any end of their treasure their land be also full of horse neither be there any end of their chariot . nephi their land be also full of idol they worship the work of their own hand that which their own finger have make . nephi and the mean man boweth not down and the great man humbleth himself not therefore forgive him not . nephi o ye wicked one enter into the rock and hide thee in the dust for the fear of the lord and the glory of his majesty shall smite thee . nephi and it shall come to pass that the lofty look of man shall be humble and the haughtiness of men shall be bow down and the lord alone shall be exalt in that day . nephi for the day of the lord of host soon cometh upon all nation yea upon every one yea upon the proud and lofty and upon every one who be lift up and he shall be bring low . nephi yea and the day of the lord shall come upon all the cedar of lebanon for they be high and lift up and upon all the oak of bashan nephi and upon all the high mountain and upon all the hill and upon all the nation which be lift up and upon every people nephi and upon every high tower and upon every fence wall nephi and upon all the ship of the sea and upon all the ship of tarshish and upon all pleasant picture . nephi and the loftiness of man shall be bow down and the haughtiness of men shall be make low and the lord alone shall be exalt in that day . nephi and the idol he shall utterly abolish . nephi and they shall go into the hole of the rock and into the cave of the earth for the fear of the lord shall come upon them and the glory of his majesty shall smite them when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth . nephi in that day a man shall cast his idol of silver and his idol of gold which he hath make for himself to worship to the mole and to the bat nephi to go into the cleft of the rock and into the top of the ragged rock for the fear of the lord shall come upon them and the majesty of his glory shall smite them when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth . nephi cease ye from man whose breath be in his nostril for wherein be he to be account of ? nephi chapter nephi for behold the lord the lord of host doth take away from jerusalem and from judah the stay and the staff the whole staff of bread and the whole stay of water nephi the mighty man and the man of war the judge and the prophet and the prudent and the ancient nephi the captain of fifty and the honorable man and the counselor and the cunning artificer and the eloquent orator . nephi and i will give child unto them to be their prince and babes shall rule over them . nephi and the people shall be oppress every one by another and every one by his neighbor the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient and the base against the honorable . nephi when a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father and shall say thou hast clothing be thou our ruler and let not this ruin come under thy hand nephi in that day shall he swear say i will not be a healer for in my house there be neither bread nor clothing make me not a ruler of the people . nephi for jerusalem be ruin and judah be fall because their tongue and their doings have be against the lord to provoke the eye of his glory . nephi the show of their countenance doth witness against them and doth declare their sin to be even a sodom and they can not hide it . wo unto their soul for they have reward evil unto themselves ! nephi say unto the righteous that it be well with them for they shall eat the fruit of their doings . nephi wo unto the wicked for they shall perish for the reward of their hand shall be upon them ! nephi and my people child be their oppressor and woman rule over them . o my people they who lead thee cause thee to err and destroy the way of thy path . nephi the lord standeth up to plead and standeth to judge the people . nephi the lord will enter into judgment with the ancient of his people and the prince thereof for ye have eat up the vineyard and the spoil of the poor in your house . nephi what mean ye ? ye beat my people to piece and grind the face of the poor saith the lord god of host . nephi moreover the lord saith because the daughter of zion be haughty and walk with stretched forth neck and wanton eye walk and mince a they go and make a tinkle with their foot nephi therefore the lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughter of zion and the lord will discover their secret part . nephi in that day the lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornament and caul and round tire like the moon nephi the chain and the bracelet and the muffler nephi the bonnet and the ornament of the leg and the headband and the tablet and the ear ring nephi the ring and nose jewel nephi the changeable suit of apparel and the mantle and the wimple and the crisping pin nephi the glass and the fine linen and hood and the veil . nephi and it shall come to pass instead of sweet smell there shall be stink and instead of a girdle a rent and instead of well set hair baldness and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth burn instead of beauty . nephi thy men shall fall by the sword and thy mighty in the war . nephi and her gate shall lament and mourn and she shall be desolate and shall sit upon the ground . nephi chapter nephi and in that day seven woman shall take hold of one man say we will eat our own bread and wear our own apparel only let u be call by thy name to take away our reproach . nephi in that day shall the branch of the lord be beautiful and glorious the fruit of the earth excellent and comely to them that be escape of israel . nephi and it shall come to pass they that be leave in zion and remain in jerusalem shall be call holy every one that be write among the living in jerusalem nephi when the lord shall have wash away the filth of the daughter of zion and shall have purge the blood of jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning . nephi and the lord will create upon every dwell place of mount zion and upon her assembly a cloud and smoke by day and the shining of a flaming fire by night for upon all the glory of zion shall be a defence . nephi and there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat and for a place of refuge and a covert from storm and from rain . nephi chapter nephi and then will i sing to my well beloved a song of my beloved touch his vineyard . my well beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill . nephi and he fence it and gather out the stone thereof and plant it with the choice vine and build a tower in the midst of it and also make a wine press therein and he look that it should bring forth grape and it bring forth wild grape . nephi and now o inhabitant of jerusalem and men of judah judge i pray you betwixt me and my vineyard . nephi what could have be do more to my vineyard that i have not do in it ? wherefore when i look that it should bring forth grape it bring forth wild grape . nephi and now go to i will tell you what i will do to my vineyard i will take away the hedge thereof and it shall be eat up and i will break down the wall thereof and it shall be trodden down nephi and i will lay it waste it shall not be prune nor digged but there shall come up brier and thorn i will also command the cloud that they rain no rain upon it . nephi for the vineyard of the lord of host be the house of israel and the men of judah his pleasant plant and he look for judgment and behold oppression for righteousness but behold a cry . nephi wo unto them that join house to house till there can be no place that they may be place alone in the midst of the earth ! nephi in mine ear say the lord of host of a truth many house shall be desolate and great and fair city without inhabitant . nephi yea ten acre of vineyard shall yield one bath and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah . nephi wo unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink that continue until night and wine inflame them ! nephi and the harp and the viol the tabret and pipe and wine be in their feast but they regard not the work of the lord neither consider the operation of his hand . nephi therefore my people be go into captivity because they have no knowledge and their honorable men be famish and their multitude dry up with thirst . nephi therefore hell hath enlarge herself and open her mouth without measure and their glory and their multitude and their pomp and he that rejoiceth shall descend into it . nephi and the mean man shall be bring down and the mighty man shall be humble and the eye of the lofty shall be humble . nephi but the lord of host shall be exalt in judgment and god that be holy shall be sanctify in righteousness . nephi then shall the lamb fee after their manner and the waste place of the fat one shall stranger eat . nephi wo unto them that draw iniquity with cord of vanity and sin a it be with a cart rope nephi that say let him make speed hasten his work that we may see it and let the counsel of the holy one of israel draw nigh and come that we may know it . nephi wo unto them that call evil good and good evil that put darkness for light and light for darkness that put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter ! nephi wo unto the wise in their own eye and prudent in their own sight ! nephi wo unto the mighty to drink wine and men of strength to mingle strong drink nephi who justify the wicked for reward and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him ! nephi therefore a the fire devoureth the stubble and the flame consumeth the chaff their root shall be rottenness and their blossom shall go up as dust because they have cast away the law of the lord of host and despise the word of the holy one of israel . nephi therefore be the anger of the lord kindle against his people and he hath stretch forth his hand against them and hath smite them and the hill do tremble and their carcass be tear in the midst of the street . for all this his anger be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . nephi and he will lift up an ensign to the nation from far and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth and behold they shall come with speed swiftly none shall be weary nor stumble among them . nephi none shall slumber nor sleep neither shall the girdle of their loin be loose nor the latchet of their shoe be break nephi whose arrow shall be sharp and all their bow bent and their horse ' hoof shall be count like flint and their wheel like a whirlwind their roaring like a lion . nephi they shall roar like young lion yea they shall roar and lay hold of the prey and shall carry away safe and none shall deliver . nephi and in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea and if they look unto the land behold darkness and sorrow and the light be darken in the heaven thereof . nephi chapter nephi in the year that king uzziah die i saw also the lord sit upon a throne high and lift up and his train fill the temple . nephi above it stand the seraph each one have six wing with twain he cover his face and with twain he cover his foot and with twain he do fly . nephi and one cry unto another and say holy holy holy be the lord of host the whole earth be full of his glory . nephi and the post of the door move at the voice of him that cry and the house be fill with smoke . nephi then say i wo be unto me ! for i be undone because i be a man of unclean lip and i dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lip for mine eye have see the king the lord of host . nephi then fly one of the seraph unto me have a live coal in his hand which he have take with the tongs from off the altar nephi and he lay it upon my mouth and say lo this have touch thy lip and thine iniquity be take away and thy sin purge . nephi also i hear the voice of the lord say whom shall i send and who will go for u ? then i say here be i send me . nephi and he say go and tell this people hear ye indeed but they understand not and see ye indeed but they perceive not . nephi make the heart of this people fat and make their ear heavy and shut their eye l they see with their eye and hear with their ear and understand with their heart and be convert and be heal . nephi then say i lord how long ? and he say until the city be waste without inhabitant and the house without man and the land be utterly desolate nephi and the lord have remove men far away for there shall be a great forsaking in the midst of the land . nephi but yet there shall be a tenth and they shall return and shall be eat a a teil tree and a an oak whose substance be in them when they cast their leaf so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass in the day of ahaz the son of jotham the son of uzziah king of judah that rezin king of syria and pekah the son of remaliah king of israel go up toward jerusalem to war against it but could not prevail against it . nephi and it be tell the house of david say syria be confederate with ephraim . and his heart be move and the heart of his people a the tree of the wood be move with the wind . nephi then say the lord unto isaiah go forth now to meet ahaz thou and shearjashub thy son at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller 's field nephi and say unto him take heed and be quiet fear not neither be faint hearted for the two tail of these smoke firebrand for the fierce anger of rezin with syria and of the son of remaliah . nephi because syria ephraim and the son of remaliah have take evil counsel against thee say nephi let u go up against judah and vex it and let u make a breach therein for u and set a king in the midst of it yea the son of tabeal . nephi thus saith the lord god it shall not stand neither shall it come to pass . nephi for the head of syria be damascus and the head of damascus rezin and within three score and five year shall ephraim be break that it be not a people . nephi and the head of ephraim be samaria and the head of samaria be remaliah 's son . if ye will not believe surely ye shall not be establish . nephi moreover the lord spake again unto ahaz say nephi ask thee a sign of the lord thy god ask it either in the depth or in the height above . nephi but ahaz say i will not ask neither will i tempt the lord . nephi and he say hear ye now o house of david be it a small thing for you to weary men but will ye weary my god also ? nephi therefore the lord himself shall give you a sign behold a virgin shall conceive and shall bear a son and shall call his name immanuel . nephi butter and honey shall he eat that he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good . nephi for before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsake of both her king . nephi the lord shall bring upon thee and upon thy people and upon thy father 's house day that have not come from the day that ephraim depart from judah the king of assyria . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall hiss for the fly that be in the uttermost part of egypt and for the bee that be in the land of assyria . nephi and they shall come and shall rest all of them in the desolate valley and in the hole of the rock and upon all thorn and upon all bush . nephi in the same day shall the lord shave with a razor that be hire by them beyond the river by the king of assyria the head and the hair of the foot and it shall also consume the beard . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep nephi and it shall come to pass for the abundance of milk they shall give he shall eat butter for butter and honey shall every one eat that be leave in the land . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day every place shall be where there be a thousand vine at a thousand silverlings which shall be for brier and thorn . nephi with arrow and with bow shall men come thither because all the land shall become brier and thorn . nephi and all hill that shall be digged with the mattock there shall not come thither the fear of brier and thorn but it shall be for the send forth of ox and the treading of less cattle . nephi chapter nephi moreover the word of the lord say unto me take thee a great roll and write in it with a man 's pen concern maher shalal hash baz . nephi and i take unto me faithful witness to record uriah the priest and zechariah the son of jeberechiah . nephi and i go unto the prophetess and she conceive and bare a son . then say the lord to me call his name maher shalal hash baz . nephi for behold the child shall not have knowledge to cry my father and my mother before the rich of damascus and the spoil of samaria shall be take away before the king of assyria . nephi the lord spake also unto me again say nephi forasmuch a this people refuseth the water of shiloah that go softly and rejoice in rezin and remaliah 's son nephi now therefore behold the lord bringeth up upon them the water of the river strong and many even the king of assyria and all his glory and he shall come up over all his channel and go over all his bank . nephi and he shall pass through judah he shall overflow and go over he shall reach even to the neck and the stretch out of his wing shall fill the breadth of thy land o immanuel . nephi associate yourselves o ye people and ye shall be break in piece and give ear all ye of far country gird yourselves and ye shall be break in piece gird yourselves and ye shall be break in piece . nephi take counsel together and it shall come to naught speak the word and it shall not stand for god be with u . nephi for the lord spake thus to me with a strong hand and instruct me that i should not walk in the way of this people say nephi say ye not a confederacy to all to whom this people shall say a confederacy neither fear ye their fear nor be afraid . nephi sanctify the lord of host himself and let him be your fear and let him be your dread . nephi and he shall be for a sanctuary but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the house of israel for a gin and a snare to the inhabitant of jerusalem . nephi and many among them shall stumble and fall and be break and be snare and be take . nephi bind up the testimony seal the law among my disciple . nephi and i will wait upon the lord that hideth his face from the house of jacob and i will look for him . nephi behold i and the child whom the lord hath give me be for sign and for wonder in israel from the lord of host which dwelleth in mount zion . nephi and when they shall say unto you seek unto them that have familiar spirit and unto wizard that peep and mutter should not a people seek unto their god for the living to hear from the dead ? nephi to the law and to the testimony and if they speak not accord to this word it be because there be no light in them . nephi and they shall pass through it hardly bestead and hungry and it shall come to pass that when they shall be hungry they shall fret themselves and curse their king and their god and look upward . nephi and they shall look unto the earth and behold trouble and darkness dimness of anguish and shall be drive to darkness . nephi chapter nephi nevertheless the dimness shall not be such a be in her vexation when at first he lightly afflict the land of zebulun and the land of naphtali and afterwards do more grievously afflict by the way of the red sea beyond jordan in galilee of the nation . nephi the people that walk in darkness have see a great light they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death upon them hath the light shin . nephi thou hast multiply the nation and increase the joy they joy before thee accord to the joy in harvest and a men rejoice when they divide the spoil . nephi for thou hast broken the yoke of his burden and the staff of his shoulder the rod of his oppressor . nephi for every battle of the warrior be with confused noise and garment roll in blood but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire . nephi for unto u a child be bear unto u a son be give and the government shall be upon his shoulder and his name shall be call wonderful counselor the mighty god the everlasting father the prince of peace . nephi of the increase of government and peace there be no end upon the throne of david and upon his kingdom to order it and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even forever . the zeal of the lord of host will perform this . nephi the lord send his word unto jacob and it hath light upon israel . nephi and all the people shall know even ephraim and the inhabitant of samaria that say in the pride and stoutness of heart nephi the brick be fall down but we will build with hewn stone the sycamore be cut down but we will change them into cedar . nephi therefore the lord shall set up the adversary of rezin against him and join his enemy together nephi the syrian before and the philistine behind and they shall devour israel with open mouth . for all this his anger be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . nephi for the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them neither do they seek the lord of host . nephi therefore will the lord cut off from israel head and tail branch and rush in one day . nephi the ancient he be the head and the prophet that teacheth lie he be the tail . nephi for the leader of this people cause them to err and they that be lead of them be destroy . nephi therefore the lord shall have no joy in their young men neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widow for every one of them be a hypocrite and an evildoer and every mouth speaketh folly . for all this his anger be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . nephi for wickedness burneth a the fire it shall devour the brier and thorn and shall kindle in the thicket of the forest and they shall mount up like the lift up of smoke . nephi through the wrath of the lord of host be the land darken and the people shall be a the fuel of the fire no man shall spare his brother . nephi and he shall snatch on the right hand and be hungry and he shall eat on the left hand and they shall not be satisfy they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm nephi manasseh ephraim and ephraim manasseh they together shall be against judah . for all this his anger be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . nephi chapter nephi wo unto them that decree unrighteous decree and that write grievousness which they have prescribe nephi to turn away the needy from judgment and to take away the right from the poor of my people that widow may be their prey and that they may rob the fatherless ! nephi and what will ye do in the day of visitation and in the desolation which shall come from far ? to whom will ye flee for help ? and where will ye leave your glory ? nephi without me they shall bow down under the prisoner and they shall fall under the slain . for all this his anger be not turn away but his hand be stretch out still . nephi o assyrian the rod of mine anger and the staff in their hand be their indignation . nephi i will send him against a hypocritical nation and against the people of my wrath will i give him a charge to take the spoil and to take the prey and to tread them down like the mire of the street . nephi howbeit he meaneth not so neither doth his heart think so but in his heart it be to destroy and cut off nation not a few . nephi for he saith be not my prince altogether king ? nephi be not calno a carchemish ? be not hamath a arpad ? be not samaria a damascus ? nephi a my hand hath found the kingdom of the idol and whose graven image do excel them of jerusalem and of samaria nephi shall i not a i have do unto samaria and her idol so do to jerusalem and to her idol ? nephi wherefore it shall come to pass that when the lord hath perform his whole work upon mount zion and upon jerusalem i will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of assyria and the glory of his high look . nephi for he saith by the strength of my hand and by my wisdom i have do these thing for i be prudent and i have move the border of the people and have rob their treasure and i have put down the inhabitant like a valiant man nephi and my hand hath find a a nest the rich of the people and a one gathereth egg that be leave have i gather all the earth and there be none that move the wing or open the mouth or peep . nephi shall the ax boast itself against him that heweth therewith ? shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it ? a if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up or a if the staff should lift up itself a if it be no wood ! nephi therefore shall the lord the lord of host send among his fat one leanness and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire . nephi and the light of israel shall be for a fire and his holy one for a flame and shall burn and shall devour his thorn and his brier in one day nephi and shall consume the glory of his forest and of his fruitful field both soul and body and they shall be a when a standard bearer fainteth . nephi and the rest of the tree of his forest shall be few that a child may write them . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that the remnant of israel and such a be escape of the house of jacob shall no more again stay upon him that smite them but shall stay upon the lord the holy one of israel in truth . nephi the remnant shall return yea even the remnant of jacob unto the mighty god . nephi for though thy people israel be a the sand of the sea yet a remnant of them shall return the consumption decree shall overflow with righteousness . nephi for the lord god of host shall make a consumption even determine in all the land . nephi therefore thus saith the lord god of host o my people that dwellest in zion be not afraid of the assyrian he shall smite thee with a rod and shall lift up his staff against thee after the manner of egypt . nephi for yet a very little while and the indignation shall cease and mine anger in their destruction . nephi and the lord of host shall stir up a scourge for him accord to the slaughter of midian at the rock of oreb and a his rod be upon the sea so shall he lift it up after the manner of egypt . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that his burden shall be take away from off thy shoulder and his yoke from off thy neck and the yoke shall be destroy because of the anointing . nephi he be come to aiath he be pass to migron at michmash he hath lay up his carriage . nephi they be go over the passage they have take up their lodging at geba ramath be afraid gibeah of saul be flee . nephi lift up the voice o daughter of gallim cause it to be hear unto laish o poor anathoth . nephi madmenah be remove the inhabitant of gebim gather themselves to flee . nephi a yet shall he remain at nob that day he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of zion the hill of jerusalem . nephi behold the lord the lord of host shall lop the bough with terror and the high one of stature shall be hew down and the haughty shall be humble . nephi and he shall cut down the thicket of the forest with iron and lebanon shall fall by a mighty one . nephi chapter nephi and there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of jesse and a branch shall grow out of his root . nephi and the spirit of the lord shall rest upon him the spirit of wisdom and understand the spirit of counsel and might the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the lord nephi and shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the lord and he shall not judge after the sight of his eye neither reprove after the hearing of his ear . nephi but with righteousness shall he judge the poor and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth and with the breath of his lip shall he slay the wicked . nephi and righteousness shall be the girdle of his loin and faithfulness the girdle of his rein . nephi the wolf also shall dwell with the lamb and the leopard shall lie down with the kid and the calf and the young lion and fatling together and a little child shall lead them . nephi and the cow and the bear shall fee their young one shall lie down together and the lion shall eat straw like the ox . nephi and the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice 's den . nephi they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the lord a the water cover the sea . nephi and in that day there shall be a root of jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the people to it shall the gentile seek and his rest shall be glorious . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people which shall be leave from assyria and from egypt and from pathros and from cush and from elam and from shinar and from hamath and from the island of the sea . nephi and he shall set up an ensign for the nation and shall assemble the outcast of israel and gather together the dispersed of judah from the four corner of the earth . nephi the envy of ephraim also shall depart and the adversary of judah shall be cut off ephraim shall not envy judah and judah shall not vex ephraim . nephi but they shall fly upon the shoulder of the philistine towards the west they shall spoil them of the east together they shall lay their hand upon edom and moab and the child of ammon shall obey them . nephi and the lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the egyptian sea and with his mighty wind he shall shake his hand over the river and shall smite it in the seven stream and make men go over dry shod . nephi and there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people which shall be leave from assyria like a it be to israel in the day that he come up out of the land of egypt . nephi chapter nephi and in that day thou shalt say o lord i will praise thee though thou wast angry with me thine anger be turn away and thou comfortedst me . nephi behold god be my salvation i will trust and not be afraid for the lord jehovah be my strength and my song he also have become my salvation . nephi therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the well of salvation . nephi and in that day shall ye say praise the lord call upon his name declare his doings among the people make mention that his name be exalt . nephi sing unto the lord for he hath do excellent thing this be know in all the earth . nephi cry out and shout thou inhabitant of zion for great be the holy one of israel in the midst of thee . nephi chapter nephi the burden of babylon which isaiah the son of amoz do see . nephi lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain exalt the voice unto them shake the hand that they may go into the gate of the noble . nephi i have command my sanctified one i have also call my mighty one for mine anger be not upon them that rejoice in my highness . nephi the noise of the multitude in the mountain like a of a great people a tumultuous noise of the kingdom of nation gather together the lord of host mustereth the host of the battle . nephi they come from a far country from the end of heaven yea the lord and the weapon of his indignation to destroy the whole land . nephi howl ye for the day of the lord be at hand it shall come a a destruction from the almighty . nephi therefore shall all hand be faint every man 's heart shall melt nephi and they shall be afraid pang and sorrow shall take hold of them they shall be amaze one at another their face shall be a flame . nephi behold the day of the lord cometh cruel both with wrath and fierce anger to lay the land desolate and he shall destroy the sinner thereof out of it . nephi for the star of heaven and the constellation thereof shall not give their light the sun shall be darken in his go forth and the moon shall not cause her light to shine . nephi and i will punish the world for evil and the wicked for their iniquity i will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease and will lay down the haughtiness of the terrible . nephi i will make a man more precious than fine gold even a man than the golden wedge of ophir . nephi therefore i will shake the heaven and the earth shall remove out of her place in the wrath of the lord of host and in the day of his fierce anger . nephi and it shall be a the chased roe and a a sheep that no man taketh up and they shall every man turn to his own people and flee every one into his own land . nephi every one that be proud shall be thrust through yea and every one that be join to the wicked shall fall by the sword . nephi their child also shall be dash to piece before their eye their house shall be spoil and their wife ravish . nephi behold i will stir up the medes against them which shall not regard silver and gold nor shall they delight in it . nephi their bow shall also dash the young men to piece and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb their eye shall not spare child . nephi and babylon the glory of kingdom the beauty of the chaldee ' excellency shall be a when god overthrow sodom and gomorrah . nephi it shall never be inhabit neither shall it be dwell in from generation to generation neither shall the arabian pitch tent there neither shall the shepherd make their fold there . nephi but wild beast of the desert shall lie there and their house shall be full of doleful creature and owls shall dwell there and satyrs shall dance there . nephi and the wild beast of the island shall cry in their desolate house and dragon in their pleasant palace and her time be near to come and her day shall not be prolong . for i will destroy her speedily yea for i will be merciful unto my people but the wicked shall perish . nephi chapter nephi for the lord will have mercy on jacob and will yet choose israel and set them in their own land and the stranger shall be join with them and they shall cleave to the house of jacob . nephi and the people shall take them and bring them to their place yea from far unto the end of the earth and they shall return to their land of promise . and the house of israel shall possess them and the land of the lord shall be for servant and handmaid and they shall take them captive unto whom they be captive and they shall rule over their oppressor . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that the lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow and from thy fear and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast make to serve . nephi and it shall come to pass in that day that thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of babylon and say how hath the oppressor cease the golden city cease ! nephi the lord hath broken the staff of the wicked the scepter of the ruler . nephi he who smite the people in wrath with a continual stroke he that rule the nation in anger be persecute and none hindereth . nephi the whole earth be at rest and be quiet they break forth into sing . nephi yea the fir tree rejoice at thee and also the cedar of lebanon say since thou art lay down no feller be come up against u . nephi hell from beneath be move for thee to meet thee at thy come it stirreth up the dead for thee even all the chief one of the earth it hath raise up from their throne all the king of the nation . nephi all they shall speak and say unto thee art thou also become weak a we ? art thou become like unto u ? nephi thy pomp be bring down to the grave the noise of thy viol be not hear the worm be spread under thee and the worm cover thee . nephi how art thou fall from heaven o lucifer son of the morning ! art thou cut down to the ground which do weaken the nation ! nephi for thou hast say in thy heart i will ascend into heaven i will exalt my throne above the star of god i will sit also upon the mount of the congregation in the side of the north nephi i will ascend above the height of the cloud i will be like the most high . nephi yet thou shalt be bring down to hell to the side of the pit . nephi they that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee and shall consider thee and shall say be this the man that make the earth to tremble that do shake kingdom ? nephi and make the world a a wilderness and destroy the city thereof and open not the house of his prisoner ? nephi all the king of the nation yea all of them lie in glory every one of them in his own house . nephi but thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch and the remnant of those that be slain thrust through with a sword that go down to the stone of the pit a a carcass trodden under foot . nephi thou shalt not be join with them in burial because thou hast destroy thy land and slay thy people the seed of evil doer shall never be renowned . nephi prepare slaughter for his child for the iniquity of their father that they do not rise nor possess the land nor fill the face of the world with city . nephi for i will rise up against them saith the lord of host and cut off from babylon the name and remnant and son and nephew saith the lord . nephi i will also make it a possession for the bittern and pool of water and i will sweep it with the besom of destruction saith the lord of host . nephi the lord of host hath swear say surely a i have think so shall it come to pass and a i have purpose so shall it stand nephi that i will bring the assyrian in my land and upon my mountain tread him under foot then shall his yoke depart from off them and his burden depart from off their shoulder . nephi this be the purpose that be purpose upon the whole earth and this be the hand that be stretch out upon all nation . nephi for the lord of host hath purpose and who shall disannul ? and his hand be stretch out and who shall turn it back ? nephi in the year that king ahaz die be this burden . nephi rejoice not thou whole palestina because the rod of him that smote thee be break for out of the serpent 's root shall come forth a cockatrice and his fruit shall be a fiery fly serpent . nephi and the first born of the poor shall fee and the needy shall lie down in safety and i will kill thy root with famine and he shall slay thy remnant . nephi howl o gate cry o city thou whole palestina art dissolve for there shall come from the north a smoke and none shall be alone in his appoint time . nephi what shall then answer the messenger of the nation ? that the lord hath found zion and the poor of his people shall trust in it . nephi chapter nephi now i nephi do speak somewhat concern the word which i have write which have be speak by the mouth of isaiah . for behold isaiah spake many thing which be hard for many of my people to understand for they know not concern the manner of prophesy among the jew . nephi for i nephi have not teach them many thing concern the manner of the jew for their work be work of darkness and their doings be doings of abomination . nephi wherefore i write unto my people unto all those that shall receive hereafter these thing which i write that they may know the judgment of god that they come upon all nation accord to the word which he hath speak . nephi wherefore hearken o my people which be of the house of israel and give ear unto my word for because the word of isaiah be not plain unto you nevertheless they be plain unto all those that be fill with the spirit of prophecy . but i give unto you a prophecy accord to the spirit which be in me wherefore i shall prophesy accord to the plainness which hath be with me from the time that i come out from jerusalem with my father for behold my soul delighteth in plainness unto my people that they may learn . nephi yea and my soul delighteth in the word of isaiah for i come out from jerusalem and mine eye hath beheld the thing of the jew and i know that the jew do understand the thing of the prophet and there be none other people that understand the thing which be speak unto the jew like unto them save it be that they be teach after the manner of the thing of the jew . nephi but behold i nephi have not teach my child after the manner of the jew but behold i of myself have dwell at jerusalem wherefore i know concern the region round about and i have make mention unto my child concern the judgment of god which hath come to pass among the jew unto my child accord to all that which isaiah hath spoken and i do not write them . nephi but behold i proceed with mine own prophecy accord to my plainness in the which i know that no man can err nevertheless in the day that the prophecy of isaiah shall be fulfil men shall know of a surety at the time when they shall come to pass . nephi wherefore they be of worth unto the child of men and he that supposeth that they be not unto them will i speak particularly and confine the word unto mine own people for i know that they shall be of great worth unto them in the last day for in that day shall they understand them wherefore for their good have i write them . nephi and a one generation hath be destroy among the jew because of iniquity even so have they be destroy from generation to generation accord to their iniquity and never hath any of them be destroy save it be foretell them by the prophet of the lord . nephi wherefore it hath be tell them concern the destruction which should come upon them immediately after my father leave jerusalem nevertheless they harden their heart and accord to my prophecy they have be destroy save it be those which be carry away captive into babylon . nephi and now this i speak because of the spirit which be in me . and notwithstanding they have be carry away they shall return again and possess the land of jerusalem wherefore they shall be restore again to the land of their inheritance . nephi but behold they shall have war and rumor of war and when the day cometh that the only begotten of the father yea even the father of heaven and of earth shall manifest himself unto them in the flesh behold they will reject him because of their iniquity and the hardness of their heart and the stiffness of their neck . nephi behold they will crucify him and after he be lay in a sepulchre for the space of three day he shall rise from the dead with heal in his wing and all those who shall believe on his name shall be save in the kingdom of god . wherefore my soul delighteth to prophesy concern him for i have see his day and my heart doth magnify his holy name . nephi and behold it shall come to pass that after the messiah hath risen from the dead and hath manifest himself unto his people unto as many a will believe on his name behold jerusalem shall be destroy again for wo unto them that fight against god and the people of his church . nephi wherefore the jew shall be scatter among all nation yea and also babylon shall be destroy wherefore the jew shall be scatter by other nation . nephi and after they have be scatter and the lord god hath scourge them by other nation for the space of many generation yea even down from generation to generation until they shall be persuade to believe in christ the son of god and the atonement which be infinite for all mankind and when that day shall come that they shall believe in christ and worship the father in his name with pure heart and clean hand and look not forward any more for another messiah then at that time the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these thing . nephi and the lord will set his hand again the second time to restore his people from their lose and fall state . wherefore he will proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder among the child of men . nephi wherefore he shall bring forth his word unto them which word shall judge them at the last day for they shall be give them for the purpose of convince them of the true messiah who be reject by them and unto the convincing of them that they need not look forward any more for a messiah to come for there should not any come save it should be a false messiah which should deceive the people for there be save one messiah spoken of by the prophet and that messiah be he who should be reject of the jew . nephi for accord to the word of the prophet the messiah cometh in six hundred year from the time that my father leave jerusalem and accord to the word of the prophet and also the word of the angel of god his name shall be jesus christ the son of god . nephi and now my brother i have speak plainly that ye can not err . and a the lord god liveth that bring israel up out of the land of egypt and give unto moses power that he should heal the nation after they have be bite by the poisonous serpent if they would cast their eye unto the serpent which he do raise up before them and also give him power that he should smite the rock and the water should come forth yea behold i say unto you that a these thing be true and a the lord god liveth there be none other name give under heaven save it be this jesus christ of which i have speak whereby man can be save . nephi wherefore for this cause hath the lord god promise unto me that these thing which i write shall be keep and preserve and hand down unto my seed from generation to generation that the promise may be fulfil unto joseph that his seed should never perish as long a the earth should stand . nephi wherefore these thing shall go from generation to generation as long a the earth shall stand and they shall go accord to the will and pleasure of god and the nation who shall possess them shall be judge of them accord to the word which be write . nephi for we labor diligently to write to persuade our child and also our brother to believe in christ and to be reconcile to god for we know that it be by grace that we be save after all we can do . nephi and notwithstanding we believe in christ we keep the law of moses and look forward with steadfastness unto christ until the law shall be fulfil . nephi for for this end be the law give wherefore the law hath become dead unto u and we be make alive in christ because of our faith yet we keep the law because of the commandment . nephi and we talk of christ we rejoice in christ we preach of christ we prophesy of christ and we write accord to our prophecy that our child may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sin . nephi wherefore we speak concern the law that our child may know the deadness of the law and they by know the deadness of the law may look forward unto that life which be in christ and know for what end the law be give . and after the law be fulfil in christ that they need not harden their heart against him when the law ought to be do away . nephi and now behold my people ye be a stiffnecked people wherefore i have speak plainly unto you that ye can not misunderstand . and the word which i have speak shall stand a a testimony against you for they be sufficient to teach any man the right way for the right way be to believe in christ and deny him not for by deny him ye also deny the prophet and the law . nephi and now behold i say unto you that the right way be to believe in christ and deny him not and christ be the holy one of israel wherefore ye must bow down before him and worship him with all your might mind and strength and your whole soul and if ye do this ye shall in nowise be cast out . nephi and inasmuch a it shall be expedient ye must keep the performance and ordinance of god until the law shall be fulfil which be give unto moses . nephi chapter nephi and after christ shall have rise from the dead he shall show himself unto you my child and my beloved brother and the word which he shall speak unto you shall be the law which ye shall do . nephi for behold i say unto you that i have behold that many generation shall pass away and there shall be great war and contention among my people . nephi and after the messiah shall come there shall be sign give unto my people of his birth and also of his death and resurrection and great and terrible shall that day be unto the wicked for they shall perish and they perish because they cast out the prophet and the saint and stone them and slay them wherefore the cry of the blood of the saint shall ascend up to god from the ground against them . nephi wherefore all those who be proud and that do wickedly the day that cometh shall burn them up saith the lord of host for they shall be a stubble . nephi and they that kill the prophet and the saint the depth of the earth shall swallow them up saith the lord of host and mountain shall cover them and whirlwinds shall carry them away and building shall fall upon them and crush them to piece and grind them to powder . nephi and they shall be visit with thunderings and lightning and earthquake and all manner of destruction for the fire of the anger of the lord shall be kindle against them and they shall be a stubble and the day that cometh shall consume them saith the lord of host . nephi o the pain and the anguish of my soul for the loss of the slain of my people ! for i nephi have see it and it well nigh consumeth me before the presence of the lord but i must cry unto my god thy way be just . nephi but behold the righteous that hearken unto the word of the prophet and destroy them not but look forward unto christ with steadfastness for the sign which be give notwithstanding all persecution behold they be they which shall not perish . nephi but the son of righteousness shall appear unto them and he shall heal them and they shall have peace with him until three generation shall have pass away and many of the fourth generation shall have pass away in righteousness . nephi and when these thing have pass away a speedy destruction cometh unto my people for notwithstanding the pain of my soul i have see it wherefore i know that it shall come to pass and they sell themselves for naught for for the reward of their pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction for because they yield unto the devil and choose work of darkness rather than light therefore they must go down to hell . nephi for the spirit of the lord will not always strive with man . and when the spirit ceaseth to strive with man then cometh speedy destruction and this grieveth my soul . nephi and a i spake concern the convincing of the jew that jesus be the very christ it must needs be that the gentile be convince also that jesus be the christ the eternal god nephi and that he manifesteth himself unto all those who believe in him by the power of the holy ghost yea unto every nation kindred tongue and people work mighty miracle sign and wonder among the child of men accord to their faith . nephi but behold i prophesy unto you concern the last day concern the day when the lord god shall bring these thing forth unto the child of men . nephi after my seed and the seed of my brother shall have dwindle in unbelief and shall have be smite by the gentile yea after the lord god shall have camp against them round about and shall have lay siege against them with a mount and raise fort against them and after they shall have be bring down low in the dust even that they be not yet the word of the righteous shall be write and the prayer of the faithful shall be hear and all those who have dwindle in unbelief shall not be forget . nephi for those who shall be destroy shall speak unto them out of the ground and their speech shall be low out of the dust and their voice shall be a one that hath a familiar spirit for the lord god will give unto him power that he may whisper concern them even a it be out of the ground and their speech shall whisper out of the dust . nephi for thus saith the lord god they shall write the thing which shall be do among them and they shall be write and seal up in a book and those who have dwindle in unbelief shall not have them for they seek to destroy the thing of god . nephi wherefore a those who have be destroy have be destroy speedily and the multitude of their terrible one shall be a chaff that passeth away yea thus saith the lord god it shall be at an instant suddenly nephi and it shall come to pass that those who have dwindle in unbelief shall be smite by the hand of the gentile . nephi and the gentile be lift up in the pride of their eye and have stumble because of the greatness of their stumbling block that they have build up many church nevertheless they put down the power and miracle of god and preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning that they may get gain and grind upon the face of the poor . nephi and there be many church build up which cause envyings and strife and malice . nephi and there be also secret combination even a in time of old accord to the combination of the devil for he be the founder of all these thing yea the founder of murder and work of darkness yea and he leadeth them by the neck with a flaxen cord until he bindeth them with his strong cord forever . nephi for behold my beloved brother i say unto you that the lord god worketh not in darkness . nephi he doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world for he loveth the world even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him . wherefore he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation . nephi behold doth he cry unto any say depart from me ? behold i say unto you nay but he saith come unto me all ye end of the earth buy milk and honey without money and without price . nephi behold hath he command any that they should depart out of the synagogue or out of the house of worship ? behold i say unto you nay . nephi hath he command any that they should not partake of his salvation ? behold i say unto you nay but he hath give it free for all men and he hath command his people that they should persuade all men to repentance . nephi behold hath the lord command any that they should not partake of his goodness ? behold i say unto you nay but all men be privilege the one like unto the other and none be forbid . nephi he commandeth that there shall be no priestcraft for behold priestcraft be that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world that they may get gain and praise of the world but they seek not the welfare of zion . nephi behold the lord hath forbidden this thing wherefore the lord god hath give a commandment that all men should have charity which charity be love and except they should have charity they be nothing . wherefore if they should have charity they would not suffer the laborer in zion to perish . nephi but the laborer in zion shall labor for zion for if they labor for money they shall perish . nephi and again the lord god hath command that men should not murder that they should not lie that they should not steal that they should not take the name of the lord their god in vain that they should not envy that they should not have malice that they should not contend one with another that they should not commit whoredom and that they should do none of these thing for whoso doeth them shall perish . nephi for none of these iniquity come of the lord for he doeth that which be good among the child of men and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the child of men and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness and he denieth none that come unto him black and white bond and free male and female and he remembereth the heathen and all be alike unto god both jew and gentile . nephi chapter nephi but behold in the last day or in the day of the gentile yea behold all the nation of the gentile and also the jew both those who shall come upon this land and those who shall be upon other land yea even upon all the land of the earth behold they will be drunken with iniquity and all manner of abomination nephi and when that day shall come they shall be visit of the lord of host with thunder and with earthquake and with a great noise and with storm and with tempest and with the flame of devour fire . nephi and all the nation that fight against zion and that distress her shall be a a dream of a night vision yea it shall be unto them even a unto a hungry man which dreameth and behold he eateth but he awaketh and his soul be empty or like unto a thirsty man which dreameth and behold he drinketh but he awaketh and behold he be faint and his soul hath appetite yea even so shall the multitude of all the nation be that fight against mount zion . nephi for behold all ye that doeth iniquity stay yourselves and wonder for ye shall cry out and cry yea ye shall be drunken but not with wine ye shall stagger but not with strong drink . nephi for behold the lord hath pour out upon you the spirit of deep sleep . for behold ye have close your eye and ye have reject the prophet and your ruler and the seer hath he cover because of your iniquity . nephi and it shall come to pass that the lord god shall bring forth unto you the word of a book and they shall be the word of them which have slumber . nephi and behold the book shall be seal and in the book shall be a revelation from god from the beginning of the world to the end thereof . nephi wherefore because of the thing which be seal up the thing which be seal shall not be deliver in the day of the wickedness and abomination of the people . wherefore the book shall be keep from them . nephi but the book shall be deliver unto a man and he shall deliver the word of the book which be the word of those who have slumber in the dust and he shall deliver these word unto another nephi but the word which be seal he shall not deliver neither shall he deliver the book . for the book shall be seal by the power of god and the revelation which be seal shall be keep in the book until the own due time of the lord that they may come forth for behold they reveal all thing from the foundation of the world unto the end thereof . nephi and the day cometh that the word of the book which be seal shall be read upon the house top and they shall be read by the power of christ and all thing shall be reveal unto the child of men which ever have be among the child of men and which ever will be even unto the end of the earth . nephi wherefore at that day when the book shall be deliver unto the man of whom i have speak the book shall be hide from the eye of the world that the eye of none shall behold it save it be that three witness shall behold it by the power of god besides him to whom the book shall be deliver and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the thing therein . nephi and there be none other which shall view it save it be a few accord to the will of god to bear testimony of his word unto the child of men for the lord god hath say that the word of the faithful should speak a if it be from the dead . nephi wherefore the lord god will proceed to bring forth the word of the book and in the mouth of a many witness a seemeth him good will he establish his word and wo be unto him that rejecteth the word of god ! nephi but behold it shall come to pass that the lord god shall say unto him to whom he shall deliver the book take these word which be not seal and deliver them to another that he may show them unto the learned say read this i pray thee . and the learned shall say bring hither the book and i will read them . nephi and now because of the glory of the world and to get gain will they say this and not for the glory of god . nephi and the man shall say i can not bring the book for it be seal . nephi then shall the learned say i can not read it . nephi wherefore it shall come to pass that the lord god will deliver again the book and the word thereof to him that be not learn and the man that be not learned shall say i be not learn . nephi then shall the lord god say unto him the learn shall not read them for they have reject them and i be able to do mine own work wherefore thou shalt read the word which i shall give unto thee . nephi touch not the thing which be seal for i will bring them forth in mine own due time for i will show unto the child of men that i be able to do mine own work . nephi wherefore when thou hast read the word which i have command thee and obtain the witness which i have promise unto thee then shalt thou seal up the book again and hide it up unto me that i may preserve the word which thou hast not read until i shall see fit in mine own wisdom to reveal all thing unto the child of men . nephi for behold i be god and i be a god of miracle and i will show unto the world that i be the same yesterday today and forever and i work not among the child of men save it be accord to their faith . nephi and again it shall come to pass that the lord shall say unto him that shall read the word that shall be deliver him nephi forasmuch a this people draw near unto me with their mouth and with their lip do honor me but have remove their heart far from me and their fear towards me be teach by the precept of men nephi therefore i will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people yea a marvelous work and a wonder for the wisdom of their wise and learn shall perish and the understanding of their prudent shall be hide . nephi and wo unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the lord ! and their work be in the dark and they say who seeth u and who knoweth u ? and they also say surely your turning of thing upside down shall be esteem a the potter 's clay . but behold i will show unto them saith the lord of host that i know all their work . for shall the work say of him that make it he make me not ? or shall the thing frame say of him that frame it he have no understanding ? nephi but behold saith the lord of host i will show unto the child of men that it be yet a very little while and lebanon shall be turn into a fruitful field and the fruitful field shall be esteem a a forest . nephi and in that day shall the deaf hear the word of the book and the eye of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness . nephi and the meek also shall increase and their joy shall be in the lord and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of israel . nephi for assuredly a the lord liveth they shall see that the terrible one be bring to naught and the scorner be consume and all that watch for iniquity be cut off nephi and they that make a man an offender for a word and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate and turn aside the just for a thing of naught . nephi therefore thus saith the lord who redeem abraham concern the house of jacob jacob shall not now be ashamed neither shall his face now wax pale . nephi but when he seeth his child the work of my hand in the midst of him they shall sanctify my name and sanctify the holy one of jacob and shall fear the god of israel . nephi they also that err in spirit shall come to understand and they that murmur shall learn doctrine . nephi chapter nephi and now behold my brother i have speak unto you accord a the spirit hath constrain me wherefore i know that they must surely come to pass . nephi and the thing which shall be write out of the book shall be of great worth unto the child of men and especially unto our seed which be a remnant of the house of israel . nephi for it shall come to pass in that day that the church which be build up and not unto the lord when the one shall say unto the other behold i i be the lord 's and the others shall say i i be the lord 's and thus shall every one say that hath build up church and not unto the lord nephi and they shall contend one with another and their priest shall contend one with another and they shall teach with their learning and deny the holy ghost which giveth utterance . nephi and they deny the power of god the holy one of israel and they say unto the people hearken unto u and hear ye our precept for behold there be no god today for the lord and the redeemer hath do his work and he hath give his power unto men nephi behold hearken ye unto my precept if they shall say there be a miracle wrought by the hand of the lord believe it not for this day he be not a god of miracle he hath do his work . nephi yea and there shall be many which shall say eat drink and be merry for tomorrow we die and it shall be well with u . nephi and there shall also be many which shall say eat drink and be merry nevertheless fear god he will justify in commit a little sin yea lie a little take the advantage of one because of his word dig a pit for thy neighbor there be no harm in this and do all these thing for tomorrow we die and if it so be that we be guilty god will beat u with a few stripe and at last we shall be save in the kingdom of god . nephi yea and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner false and vain and foolish doctrine and shall be puff up in their heart and shall seek deep to hide their counsel from the lord and their work shall be in the dark . nephi and the blood of the saint shall cry from the ground against them . nephi yea they have all go out of the way they have become corrupt . nephi because of pride and because of false teacher and false doctrine their church have become corrupt and their church be lift up because of pride they be puff up . nephi they rob the poor because of their fine sanctuary they rob the poor because of their fine clothing and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart because in their pride they be puff up . nephi they wear stiff neck and high head yea and because of pride and wickedness and abomination and whoredom they have all go astray save it be a few who be the humble follower of christ nevertheless they be lead that in many instance they do err because they be teach by the precept of men . nephi o the wise and the learn and the rich that be puff up in the pride of their heart and all those who preach false doctrine and all those who commit whoredom and pervert the right way of the lord wo wo wo be unto them saith the lord god almighty for they shall be thrust down to hell ! nephi wo unto them that turn aside the just for a thing of naught and revile against that which be good and say that be of no worth ! for the day shall come that the lord god will speedily visit the inhabitant of the earth and in that day that they be fully ripe in iniquity they shall perish . nephi but behold if the inhabitant of the earth shall repent of their wickedness and abomination they shall not be destroy saith the lord of host . nephi but behold that great and abominable church the whore of all the earth must tumble to the earth and great must be the fall thereof . nephi for the kingdom of the devil must shake and they which belong to it must needs be stir up unto repentance or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting chain and they be stir up to anger and perish nephi for behold at that day shall he rage in the heart of the child of men and stir them up to anger against that which be good . nephi and others will he pacify and lull them away into carnal security that they will say all be well in zion yea zion prospereth all be well and thus the devil cheateth their soul and leadeth them away carefully down to hell . nephi and behold others he flattereth away and telleth them there be no hell and he saith unto them i be no devil for there be none and thus he whispereth in their ear until he grasp them with his awful chain from whence there be no deliverance . nephi yea they be grasp with death and hell and death and hell and the devil and all that have be seize therewith must stand before the throne of god and be judge accord to their work from whence they must go into the place prepare for them even a lake of fire and brimstone which be endless torment . nephi therefore wo be unto him that be at ease in zion ! nephi wo be unto him that crieth all be well ! nephi yea wo be unto him that hearkeneth unto the precept of men and denieth the power of god and the gift of the holy ghost ! nephi yea wo be unto him that saith we have receive and we need no more ! nephi and in fine wo unto all those who tremble and be angry because of the truth of god ! for behold he that be build upon the rock receiveth it with gladness and he that be build upon a sandy foundation trembleth lest he shall fall . nephi wo be unto him that shall say we have receive the word of god and we need no more of the word of god for we have enough ! nephi for behold thus saith the lord god i will give unto the child of men line upon line precept upon precept here a little and there a little and bless be those who hearken unto my precept and lend an ear unto my counsel for they shall learn wisdom for unto him that receiveth i will give more and from them that shall say we have enough from them shall be take away even that which they have . nephi curse be he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm or shall hearken unto the precept of men save their precept shall be give by the power of the holy ghost . nephi wo be unto the gentile saith the lord god of host ! for notwithstanding i shall lengthen out mine arm unto them from day to day they will deny me nevertheless i will be merciful unto them saith the lord god if they will repent and come unto me for mine arm be lengthen out all the day long saith the lord god of host . nephi chapter nephi but behold there shall be many at that day when i shall proceed to do a marvelous work among them that i may remember my covenant which i have make unto the child of men that i may set my hand again the second time to recover my people which be of the house of israel nephi and also that i may remember the promise which i have make unto thee nephi and also unto thy father that i would remember your seed and that the word of your seed should proceed forth out of my mouth unto your seed and my word shall hiss forth unto the end of the earth for a standard unto my people which be of the house of israel nephi and because my word shall hiss forth many of the gentile shall say a bible ! a bible ! we have get a bible and there can not be any more bible . nephi but thus saith the lord god o fool they shall have a bible and it shall proceed forth from the jew mine ancient covenant people . and what thank they the jew for the bible which they receive from them ? yea what do the gentile mean ? do they remember the travail and the labor and the pain of the jew and their diligence unto me in bring forth salvation unto the gentile ? nephi o ye gentile have ye remember the jew mine ancient covenant people ? nay but ye have curse them and have hat them and have not seek to recover them . but behold i will return all these thing upon your own head for i the lord have not forget my people . nephi thou fool that shall say a bible we have get a bible and we need no more bible . have ye obtain a bible save it be by the jew ? nephi know ye not that there be more nation than one ? know ye not that i the lord your god have create all men and that i remember those who be upon the isle of the sea and that i rule in the heaven above and in the earth beneath and i bring forth my word unto the child of men yea even upon all the nation of the earth ? nephi wherefore murmur ye because that ye shall receive more of my word ? know ye not that the testimony of two nation be a witness unto you that i be god that i remember one nation like unto another ? wherefore i speak the same word unto one nation like unto another . and when the two nation shall run together the testimony of the two nation shall run together also . nephi and i do this that i may prove unto many that i be the same yesterday today and forever and that i speak forth my word accord to mine own pleasure . and because that i have speak one word ye need not suppose that i can not speak another for my work be not yet finish neither shall it be until the end of man neither from that time henceforth and forever . nephi wherefore because that ye have a bible ye need not suppose that it contain all my word neither need ye suppose that i have not cause more to be write . nephi for i command all men both in the east and in the west and in the north and in the south and in the island of the sea that they shall write the word which i speak unto them for out of the book which shall be write i will judge the world every man accord to their work accord to that which be write . nephi for behold i shall speak unto the jew and they shall write it and i shall also speak unto the nephites and they shall write it and i shall also speak unto the other tribe of the house of israel which i have lead away and they shall write it and i shall also speak unto all nation of the earth and they shall write it . nephi and it shall come to pass that the jew shall have the word of the nephites and the nephites shall have the word of the jew and the nephites and the jew shall have the word of the lost tribe of israel and the lost tribe of israel shall have the word of the nephites and the jew . nephi and it shall come to pass that my people which be of the house of israel shall be gather home unto the land of their possession and my word also shall be gather in one . and i will show unto them that fight against my word and against my people who be of the house of israel that i be god and that i covenant with abraham that i would remember his seed forever . nephi chapter nephi and now behold my beloved brother i would speak unto you for i nephi would not suffer that ye should suppose that ye be more righteous than the gentile shall be . for behold except ye shall keep the commandment of god ye shall all likewise perish and because of the word which have be speak ye need not suppose that the gentile be utterly destroy . nephi for behold i say unto you that a many of the gentile a will repent be the covenant people of the lord and a many of the jew a will not repent shall be cast off for the lord covenanteth with none save it be with them that repent and believe in his son who be the holy one of israel . nephi and now i would prophesy somewhat more concern the jew and the gentile . for after the book of which i have speak shall come forth and be write unto the gentile and seal up again unto the lord there shall be many which shall believe the word which be write and they shall carry them forth unto the remnant of our seed . nephi and then shall the remnant of our seed know concern u how that we come out from jerusalem and that they be descendant of the jew . nephi and the gospel of jesus christ shall be declare among them wherefore they shall be restore unto the knowledge of their father and also to the knowledge of jesus christ which be have among their father . nephi and then shall they rejoice for they shall know that it be a bless unto them from the hand of god and their scale of darkness shall begin to fall from their eye and many generation shall not pass away among them save they shall be a pure and delightsome people . nephi and it shall come to pass that the jew which be scatter also shall begin to believe in christ and they shall begin to gather in upon the face of the land and as many a shall believe in christ shall also become a delightsome people . nephi and it shall come to pass that the lord god shall commence his work among all nation kindred tongue and people to bring about the restoration of his people upon the earth . nephi and with righteousness shall the lord god judge the poor and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth . and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth and with the breath of his lip shall he slay the wicked . nephi for the time speedily cometh that the lord god shall cause a great division among the people and the wicked will he destroy and he will spare his people yea even if it so be that he must destroy the wicked by fire . nephi and righteousness shall be the girdle of his loin and faithfulness the girdle of his rein . nephi and then shall the wolf dwell with the lamb and the leopard shall lie down with the kid and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together and a little child shall lead them . nephi and the cow and the bear shall fee their young one shall lie down together and the lion shall eat straw like the ox . nephi and the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice 's den . nephi they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the lord a the water cover the sea . nephi wherefore the thing of all nation shall be make know yea all thing shall be make know unto the child of men . nephi there be nothing which be secret save it shall be reveal there be no work of darkness save it shall be make manifest in the light and there be nothing which be seal upon the earth save it shall be loose . nephi wherefore all thing which have be reveal unto the child of men shall at that day be reveal and satan shall have power over the heart of the child of men no more for a long time . and now my beloved brother i make an end of my saying . nephi chapter nephi and now i nephi make an end of my prophesy unto you my beloved brother . and i can not write but a few thing which i know must surely come to pass neither can i write but a few of the word of my brother jacob . nephi wherefore the thing which i have write sufficeth me save it be a few word which i must speak concern the doctrine of christ wherefore i shall speak unto you plainly accord to the plainness of my prophesying . nephi for my soul delighteth in plainness for after this manner doth the lord god work among the child of men . for the lord god giveth light unto the understanding for he speaketh unto men accord to their language unto their understanding . nephi wherefore i would that ye should remember that i have speak unto you concern that prophet which the lord show unto me that should baptize the lamb of god which should take away the sin of the world . nephi and now if the lamb of god he be holy should have need to be baptize by water to fulfil all righteousness o then how much more need have we be unholy to be baptize yea even by water ! nephi and now i would ask of you my beloved brother wherein the lamb of god do fulfil all righteousness in be baptize by water ? nephi know ye not that he be holy ? but notwithstanding he be holy he showeth unto the child of men that accord to the flesh he humbleth himself before the father and witnesseth unto the father that he would be obedient unto him in keep his commandment . nephi wherefore after he be baptize with water the holy ghost descend upon him in the form of a dove . nephi and again it showeth unto the child of men the straightness of the path and the narrowness of the gate by which they should enter he have set the example before them . nephi and he say unto the child of men follow thou me . wherefore my beloved brother can we follow jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandment of the father ? nephi and the father say repent ye repent ye and be baptize in the name of my beloved son . nephi and also the voice of the son come unto me say he that be baptize in my name to him will the father give the holy ghost like unto me wherefore follow me and do the thing which ye have see me do . nephi wherefore my beloved brother i know that if ye shall follow the son with full purpose of heart act no hypocrisy and no deception before god but with real intent repenting of your sin witness unto the father that ye be willing to take upon you the name of christ by baptism yea by follow your lord and your savior down into the water accord to his word behold then shall ye receive the holy ghost yea then cometh the baptism of fire and of the holy ghost and then can ye speak with the tongue of angel and shout praise unto the holy one of israel . nephi but behold my beloved brother thus come the voice of the son unto me say after ye have repent of your sin and witness unto the father that ye be willing to keep my commandment by the baptism of water and have receive the baptism of fire and of the holy ghost and can speak with a new tongue yea even with the tongue of angel and after this should deny me it would have be good for you that ye have not know me . nephi and i hear a voice from the father say yea the word of my beloved be true and faithful . he that endureth to the end the same shall be save . nephi and now my beloved brother i know by this that unless a man shall endure to the end in follow the example of the son of the living god he can not be save . nephi wherefore do the thing which i have tell you i have see that your lord and your redeemer should do for for this cause have they be show unto me that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter . for the gate by which ye should enter be repentance and baptism by water and then cometh a remission of your sin by fire and by the holy ghost . nephi and then be ye in this strait and narrow path which lead to eternal life yea ye have enter in by the gate ye have do accord to the commandment of the father and the son and ye have receive the holy ghost which witness of the father and the son unto the fulfilling of the promise which he hath make that if ye enter in by the way ye should receive . nephi and now my beloved brother after ye have get into this strait and narrow path i would ask if all be do ? behold i say unto you nay for ye have not come thus far save it be by the word of christ with unshaken faith in him rely wholly upon the merit of him who be mighty to save . nephi wherefore ye must press forward with a steadfastness in christ have a perfect brightness of hope and a love of god and of all men . wherefore if ye shall press forward feast upon the word of christ and endure to the end behold thus saith the father ye shall have eternal life . nephi and now behold my beloved brother this be the way and there be none other way nor name give under heaven whereby man can be save in the kingdom of god . and now behold this be the doctrine of christ and the only and true doctrine of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost which be one god without end . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now behold my beloved brother i suppose that ye ponder somewhat in your heart concern that which ye should do after ye have enter in by the way . but behold why do ye ponder these thing in your heart ? nephi do ye not remember that i say unto you that after ye have receive the holy ghost ye could speak with the tongue of angel ? and now how could ye speak with the tongue of angel save it be by the holy ghost ? nephi angel speak by the power of the holy ghost wherefore they speak the word of christ . wherefore i say unto you feast upon the word of christ for behold the word of christ will tell you all thing what ye should do . nephi wherefore now after i have speak these word if ye can not understand them it will be because ye ask not neither do ye knock wherefore ye be not bring into the light but must perish in the dark . nephi for behold again i say unto you that if ye will enter in by the way and receive the holy ghost it will show unto you all thing what ye should do . nephi behold this be the doctrine of christ and there will be no more doctrine give until after he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh . and when he shall manifest himself unto you in the flesh the thing which he shall say unto you shall ye observe to do . nephi and now i nephi can not say more the spirit stoppeth mine utterance and i be leave to mourn because of the unbelief and the wickedness and the ignorance and the stiffneckedness of men for they will not search knowledge nor understand great knowledge when it be give unto them in plainness even as plain a word can be . nephi and now my beloved brother i perceive that ye ponder still in your heart and it grieveth me that i must speak concern this thing . for if ye would hearken unto the spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray but teacheth him that he must not pray . nephi but behold i say unto you that ye must pray always and not faint that ye must not perform any thing unto the lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the father in the name of christ that he will consecrate thy performance unto thee that thy performance may be for the welfare of thy soul . nephi chapter nephi and now i nephi can not write all the thing which be teach among my people neither be i mighty in write like unto speaking for when a man speaketh by the power of the holy ghost the power of the holy ghost carrieth it unto the heart of the child of men . nephi but behold there be many that harden their heart against the holy spirit that it hath no place in them wherefore they cast many thing away which be write and esteem them a thing of naught . nephi but i nephi have write what i have write and i esteem it a of great worth and especially unto my people . for i pray continually for them by day and mine eye water my pillow by night because of them and i cry unto my god in faith and i know that he will hear my cry . nephi and i know that the lord god will consecrate my prayer for the gain of my people . and the word which i have write in weakness will be make strong unto them for it persuadeth them to do good it maketh know unto them of their father and it speaketh of jesus and persuadeth them to believe in him and to endure to the end which be life eternal . nephi and it speaketh harshly against sin accord to the plainness of the truth wherefore no man will be angry at the word which i have write save he shall be of the spirit of the devil . nephi i glory in plainness i glory in truth i glory in my jesus for he hath redeem my soul from hell . nephi i have charity for my people and great faith in christ that i shall meet many soul spotless at his judgment seat . nephi i have charity for the jew i say jew because i mean them from whence i come . nephi i also have charity for the gentile . but behold for none of these can i hope except they shall be reconcile unto christ and enter into the narrow gate and walk in the strait path which lead to life and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation . nephi and now my beloved brother and also jew and all ye end of the earth hearken unto these word and believe in christ and if ye believe not in these word believe in christ . and if ye shall believe in christ ye will believe in these word for they be the word of christ and he hath give them unto me and they teach all men that they should do good . nephi and if they be not the word of christ judge ye for christ will show unto you with power and great glory that they be his word at the last day and you and i shall stand face to face before his bar and ye shall know that i have be command of him to write these thing notwithstanding my weakness . nephi and i pray the father in the name of christ that many of u if not all may be save in his kingdom at that great and last day . nephi and now my beloved brother all those who be of the house of israel and all ye end of the earth i speak unto you a the voice of one cry from the dust farewell until that great day shall come . nephi and you that will not partake of the goodness of god and respect the word of the jew and also my word and the word which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the lamb of god behold i bid you an everlasting farewell for these word shall condemn you at the last day . nephi for what i seal on earth shall be bring against you at the judgment bar for thus hath the lord command me and i must obey . amen . the book of jacob the brother of nephi the word of his preach unto his brother . he confoundeth a man who seeketh to overthrow the doctrine of christ . a few word concern the history of the people of nephi . jacob chapter jacob for behold it come to pass that fifty and five year have pass away from the time that lehi leave jerusalem wherefore nephi give me jacob a commandment concern the small plate upon which these thing be engraven . jacob and he give me jacob a commandment that i should write upon these plat a few of the thing which i consider to be most precious that i should not touch save it be lightly concern the history of this people which be call the people of nephi . jacob for he say that the history of his people should be engraven upon his other plate and that i should preserve these plate and hand them down unto my seed from generation to generation . jacob and if there be preach which be sacred or revelation which be great or prophesy that i should engraven the head of them upon these plate and touch upon them as much a it be possible for christ 's sake and for the sake of our people . jacob for because of faith and great anxiety it truly have be make manifest unto u concern our people what thing should happen unto them . jacob and we also have many revelation and the spirit of much prophecy wherefore we know of christ and his kingdom which should come . jacob wherefore we labor diligently among our people that we might persuade them to come unto christ and partake of the goodness of god that they might enter into his rest lest by any mean he should swear in his wrath they should not enter in as in the provocation in the day of temptation while the child of israel be in the wilderness . jacob wherefore we would to god that we could persuade all men not to rebel against god to provoke him to anger but that all men would believe in christ and view his death and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world wherefore i jacob take it upon me to fulfil the commandment of my brother nephi . jacob now nephi begin to be old and he saw that he must soon die wherefore he anoint a man to be a king and a ruler over his people now accord to the reign of the king . jacob the people have love nephi exceedingly he have be a great protector for them have wield the sword of laban in their defence and have labor in all his day for their welfare jacob wherefore the people be desirous to retain in remembrance his name . and whoso should reign in his stead be call by the people second nephi third nephi and so forth accord to the reign of the king and thus they be call by the people let them be of whatever name they would . jacob and it come to pass that nephi die . jacob now the people which be not lamanites be nephites nevertheless they be call nephites jacobite josephites zoramites lamanites lemuelites and ishmaelites . jacob but i jacob shall not hereafter distinguish them by these name but i shall call them lamanites that seek to destroy the people of nephi and those who be friendly to nephi i shall call nephites or the people of nephi accord to the reign of the king . jacob and now it come to pass that the people of nephi under the reign of the second king begin to grow hard in their heart and indulge themselves somewhat in wicked practice such a like unto david of old desire many wife and concubine and also solomon his son . jacob yea and they also begin to search much gold and silver and begin to be lift up somewhat in pride . jacob wherefore i jacob give unto them these word a i teach them in the temple have first obtain mine errand from the lord . jacob for i jacob and my brother joseph have be consecrate priest and teacher of this people by the hand of nephi . jacob and we do magnify our office unto the lord take upon u the responsibility answer the sin of the people upon our own head if we do not teach them the word of god with all diligence wherefore by labor with our might their blood might not come upon our garment otherwise their blood would come upon our garment and we would not be find spotless at the last day . jacob chapter jacob the word which jacob the brother of nephi spake unto the people of nephi after the death of nephi jacob now my beloved brother i jacob accord to the responsibility which i be under to god to magnify mine office with soberness and that i might rid my garment of your sin i come up into the temple this day that i might declare unto you the word of god . jacob and ye yourselves know that i have hitherto be diligent in the office of my call but i this day be weigh down with much more desire and anxiety for the welfare of your soul than i have hitherto be . jacob for behold a yet ye have be obedient unto the word of the lord which i have give unto you . jacob but behold hearken ye unto me and know that by the help of the all powerful creator of heaven and earth i can tell you concern your thought how that ye be begin to labor in sin which sin appeareth very abominable unto me yea and abominable unto god . jacob yea it grieveth my soul and causeth me to shrink with shame before the presence of my maker that i must testify unto you concern the wickedness of your heart . jacob and also it grieveth me that i must use so much boldness of speech concern you before your wife and your child many of whose feeling be exceedingly tender and chaste and delicate before god which thing be please unto god jacob and it supposeth me that they have come up hither to hear the pleasing word of god yea the word which healeth the wounded soul . jacob wherefore it burdeneth my soul that i should be constrain because of the strict commandment which i have receive from god to admonish you accord to your crime to enlarge the wound of those who be already wound instead of console and heal their wound and those who have not be wound instead of feast upon the pleasing word of god have dagger place to pierce their soul and wind their delicate mind . jacob but notwithstanding the greatness of the task i must do accord to the strict command of god and tell you concern your wickedness and abomination in the presence of the pure in heart and the broken heart and under the glance of the pierce eye of the almighty god . jacob wherefore i must tell you the truth accord to the plainness of the word of god . for behold a i inquire of the lord thus come the word unto me say jacob get thou up into the temple on the morrow and declare the word which i shall give thee unto this people . jacob and now behold my brother this be the word which i declare unto you that many of you have begin to search for gold and for silver and for all manner of precious ore in the which this land which be a land of promise unto you and to your seed doth abound most plentifully . jacob and the hand of providence hath smile upon you most pleasingly that you have obtain many rich and because some of you have obtain more abundantly than that of your brother ye be lift up in the pride of your heart and wear stiff neck and high head because of the costliness of your apparel and persecute your brother because ye suppose that ye be good than they . jacob and now my brother do ye suppose that god justifieth you in this thing ? behold i say unto you nay . but he condemneth you and if ye persist in these thing his judgment must speedily come unto you . jacob o that he would show you that he can pierce you and with one glance of his eye he can smite you to the dust ! jacob o that he would rid you from this iniquity and abomination . and o that ye would listen unto the word of his command and let not this pride of your heart destroy your soul ! jacob think of your brother like unto yourselves and be familiar with all and free with your substance that they may be rich like unto you . jacob but before ye seek for rich seek ye for the kingdom of god . jacob and after ye have obtain a hope in christ ye shall obtain rich if ye seek them and ye will seek them for the intent to do good to clothe the naked and to fee the hungry and to liberate the captive and administer relief to the sick and the afflict . jacob and now my brother i have speak unto you concern pride and those of you which have afflict your neighbor and persecute him because ye be proud in your heart of the thing which god hath give you what say ye of it ? jacob do ye not suppose that such thing be abominable unto him who create all flesh ? and the one be be as precious in his sight a the other . and all flesh be of the dust and for the selfsame end hath he create them that they should keep his commandment and glorify him forever . jacob and now i make an end of speak unto you concern this pride . and be it not that i must speak unto you concern a grosser crime my heart would rejoice exceedingly because of you . jacob but the word of god burden me because of your grosser crime . for behold thus saith the lord this people begin to wax in iniquity they understand not the scripture for they seek to excuse themselves in commit whoredom because of the thing which be write concern david and solomon his son . jacob behold david and solomon truly have many wife and concubine which thing be abominable before me saith the lord . jacob wherefore thus saith the lord i have lead this people forth out of the land of jerusalem by the power of mine arm that i might raise up unto me a righteous branch from the fruit of the loin of joseph . jacob wherefore i the lord god will not suffer that this people shall do like unto them of old . jacob wherefore my brother hear me and hearken to the word of the lord for there shall not any man among you have save it be one wife and concubine he shall have none jacob for i the lord god delight in the chastity of woman . and whoredom be an abomination before me thus saith the lord of host . jacob wherefore this people shall keep my commandment saith the lord of host or curse be the land for their sake . jacob for if i will saith the lord of host raise up seed unto me i will command my people otherwise they shall hearken unto these thing . jacob for behold i the lord have see the sorrow and hear the mourning of the daughter of my people in the land of jerusalem yea and in all the land of my people because of the wickedness and abomination of their husband . jacob and i will not suffer saith the lord of host that the cry of the fair daughter of this people which i have lead out of the land of jerusalem shall come up unto me against the men of my people saith the lord of host . jacob for they shall not lead away captive the daughter of my people because of their tenderness save i shall visit them with a sore curse even unto destruction for they shall not commit whoredom like unto them of old saith the lord of host . jacob and now behold my brother ye know that these commandment be give to our father lehi wherefore ye have know them before and ye have come unto great condemnation for ye have do these thing which ye ought not to have do . jacob behold ye have do great iniquity than the lamanites our brother . ye have break the heart of your tender wife and lose the confidence of your child because of your bad example before them and the sobbing of their heart ascend up to god against you . and because of the strictness of the word of god which cometh down against you many heart die pierce with deep wound . jacob chapter jacob but behold i jacob would speak unto you that be pure in heart . look unto god with firmness of mind and pray unto him with exceed faith and he will console you in your affliction and he will plead your cause and send down justice upon those who seek your destruction . jacob o all ye that be pure in heart lift up your head and receive the pleasing word of god and feast upon his love for ye may if your mind be firm forever . jacob but wo wo unto you that be not pure in heart that be filthy this day before god for except ye repent the land be curse for your sake and the lamanites which be not filthy like unto you nevertheless they be curse with a sore curse shall scourge you even unto destruction . jacob and the time speedily cometh that except ye repent they shall possess the land of your inheritance and the lord god will lead away the righteous out from among you . jacob behold the lamanites your brother whom ye hate because of their filthiness and the cursing which hath come upon their skin be more righteous than you for they have not forget the commandment of the lord which be give unto our father that they should have save it be one wife and concubine they should have none and there should not be whoredom commit among them . jacob and now this commandment they observe to keep wherefore because of this observance in keep this commandment the lord god will not destroy them but will be merciful unto them and one day they shall become a blessed people . jacob behold their husband love their wife and their wife love their husband and their husband and their wife love their child and their unbelief and their hatred towards you be because of the iniquity of their father wherefore how much good be you than they in the sight of your great creator ? jacob o my brother i fear that unless ye shall repent of your sin that their skin will be white than yours when ye shall be bring with them before the throne of god . jacob wherefore a commandment i give unto you which be the word of god that ye revile no more against them because of the darkness of their skin neither shall ye revile against them because of their filthiness but ye shall remember your own filthiness and remember that their filthiness come because of their father . jacob wherefore ye shall remember your child how that ye have grieve their heart because of the example that ye have set before them and also remember that ye may because of your filthiness bring your child unto destruction and their sin be heap upon your head at the last day . jacob o my brother hearken unto my word arouse the faculty of your soul shake yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber of death and loose yourselves from the pain of hell that ye may not become angel to the devil to be cast into that lake of fire and brimstone which be the second death . jacob and now i jacob spake many more thing unto the people of nephi warn them against fornication and lasciviousness and every kind of sin tell them the awful consequence of them . jacob and a hundredth part of the proceeding of this people which now begin to be numerous can not be write upon these plate but many of their proceeding be write upon the large plate and their war and their contention and the reign of their king . jacob these plate be call the plate of jacob and they be make by the hand of nephi . and i make an end of speak these word . jacob chapter jacob now behold it come to pass that i jacob have minister much unto my people in word and i can not write but a little of my word because of the difficulty of engrave our word upon plate and we know that the thing which we write upon plate must remain jacob but whatsoever thing we write upon anything save it be upon plate must perish and vanish away but we can write a few word upon plate which will give our child and also our beloved brother a small degree of knowledge concern u or concern their father jacob now in this thing we do rejoice and we labor diligently to engraven these word upon plate hop that our beloved brother and our child will receive them with thankful heart and look upon them that they may learn with joy and not with sorrow neither with contempt concern their first parent . jacob for for this intent have we write these thing that they may know that we know of christ and we have a hope of his glory many hundred year before his come and not only we ourselves have a hope of his glory but also all the holy prophet which be before u . jacob behold they believe in christ and worship the father in his name and also we worship the father in his name . and for this intent we keep the law of moses it point our soul to him and for this cause it be sanctify unto u for righteousness even a it be account unto abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the command of god in offer up his son isaac which be a similitude of god and his only begotten son . jacob wherefore we search the prophet and we have many revelation and the spirit of prophecy and have all these witness we obtain a hope and our faith becometh unshaken insomuch that we truly can command in the name of jesus and the very trees obey u or the mountain or the wave of the sea . jacob nevertheless the lord god showeth u our weakness that we may know that it be by his grace and his great condescension unto the child of men that we have power to do these thing . jacob behold great and marvelous be the work of the lord . how unsearchable be the depth of the mystery of him and it be impossible that man should find out all his way . and no man knoweth of his way save it be reveal unto him wherefore brother despise not the revelation of god . jacob for behold by the power of his word man come upon the face of the earth which earth be create by the power of his word . wherefore if god be able to speak and the world be and to speak and man be create o then why not able to command the earth or the workmanship of his hand upon the face of it accord to his will and pleasure ? jacob wherefore brother seek not to counsel the lord but to take counsel from his hand . for behold ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom and in justice and in great mercy over all his work . jacob wherefore beloved brother be reconcile unto him through the atonement of christ his only beget son and ye may obtain a resurrection accord to the power of the resurrection which be in christ and be present a the first fruit of christ unto god have faith and obtain a good hope of glory in him before he manifesteth himself in the flesh . jacob and now beloved marvel not that i tell you these thing for why not speak of the atonement of christ and attain to a perfect knowledge of him a to attain to the knowledge of a resurrection and the world to come ? jacob behold my brother he that prophesieth let him prophesy to the understanding of men for the spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not . wherefore it speaketh of thing a they really be and of thing a they really will be wherefore these thing be manifest unto u plainly for the salvation of our soul . but behold we be not witness alone in these thing for god also spake them unto prophet of old . jacob but behold the jew be a stiffnecked people and they despise the word of plainness and kill the prophet and seek for thing that they could not understand . wherefore because of their blindness which blindness come by look beyond the mark they must need fall for god hath take away his plainness from them and deliver unto them many thing which they can not understand because they desire it . and because they desire it god hath do it that they may stumble . jacob and now i jacob be lead on by the spirit unto prophesy for i perceive by the working of the spirit which be in me that by the stumbling of the jew they will reject the stone upon which they might build and have safe foundation . jacob but behold accord to the scripture this stone shall become the great and the last and the only sure foundation upon which the jew can build . jacob and now my beloved how be it possible that these after have reject the sure foundation can ever build upon it that it may become the head of their corner ? jacob behold my beloved brother i will unfold this mystery unto you if i do not by any mean get shake from my firmness in the spirit and stumble because of my over anxiety for you . jacob chapter jacob behold my brother do ye not remember to have read the word of the prophet zeno which he spake unto the house of israel say jacob hearken o ye house of israel and hear the word of me a prophet of the lord . jacob for behold thus saith the lord i will liken thee o house of israel like unto a tame olive tree which a man take and nourish in his vineyard and it grow and waxed old and begin to decay . jacob and it come to pass that the master of the vineyard go forth and he saw that his olive tree begin to decay and he say i will prune it and dig about it and nourish it that perhaps it may shoot forth young and tender branch and it perish not . jacob and it come to pass that he prune it and digged about it and nourish it accord to his word . jacob and it come to pass that after many day it begin to put forth somewhat a little young and tender branch but behold the main top thereof begin to perish . jacob and it come to pass that the master of the vineyard saw it and he say unto his servant it grieveth me that i should lose this tree wherefore go and pluck the branch from a wild olive tree and bring them hither unto me and we will pluck off those main branch which be begin to wither away and we will cast them into the fire that they may be burn . jacob and behold saith the lord of the vineyard i take away many of these young and tender branch and i will graft them whithersoever i will and it mattereth not that if it so be that the root of this tree will perish i may preserve the fruit thereof unto myself wherefore i will take these young and tender branch and i will graft them whithersoever i will . jacob take thou the branch of the wild olive tree and graft them in in the stead thereof and these which i have pluck off i will cast into the fire and burn them that they may not cumber the ground of my vineyard . jacob and it come to pass that the servant of the lord of the vineyard do accord to the word of the lord of the vineyard and graft in the branch of the wild olive tree . jacob and the lord of the vineyard cause that it should be digged about and prune and nourish say unto his servant it grieveth me that i should lose this tree wherefore that perhaps i might preserve the root thereof that they perish not that i might preserve them unto myself i have do this thing . jacob wherefore go thy way watch the tree and nourish it accord to my word . jacob and these will i place in the nethermost part of my vineyard whithersoever i will it mattereth not unto thee and i do it that i may preserve unto myself the natural branch of the tree and also that i may lay up fruit thereof against the season unto myself for it grieveth me that i should lose this tree and the fruit thereof . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard go his way and hide the natural branch of the tame olive tree in the nethermost part of the vineyard some in one and some in another accord to his will and pleasure . jacob and it come to pass that a long time pass away and the lord of the vineyard say unto his servant come let u go down into the vineyard that we may labor in the vineyard . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard and also the servant go down into the vineyard to labor . and it come to pass that the servant say unto his master behold look here behold the tree . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard look and behold the tree in the which the wild olive branch have be graft and it have spring forth and begin to bear fruit . and he behold that it be good and the fruit thereof be like unto the natural fruit . jacob and he say unto the servant behold the branch of the wild tree have take hold of the moisture of the root thereof that the root thereof hath bring forth much strength and because of the much strength of the root thereof the wild branch have bring forth tame fruit . now if we have not graft in these branch the tree thereof would have perish . and now behold i shall lay up much fruit which the tree thereof hath bring forth and the fruit thereof i shall lay up against the season unto mine own self . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto the servant come let u go to the nethermost part of the vineyard and behold if the natural branch of the tree have not bring forth much fruit also that i may lay up of the fruit thereof against the season unto mine own self . jacob and it come to pass that they go forth whither the master have hide the natural branch of the tree and he say unto the servant behold these and he behold the first that it have bring forth much fruit and he behold also that it be good . and he say unto the servant take of the fruit thereof and lay it up against the season that i may preserve it unto mine own self for behold say he this long time have i nourish it and it hath brought forth much fruit . jacob and it come to pass that the servant say unto his master how comest thou hither to plant this tree or this branch of the tree ? for behold it be the poor spot in all the land of thy vineyard . jacob and the lord of the vineyard say unto him counsel me not i know that it be a poor spot of ground wherefore i say unto thee i have nourish it this long time and thou beholdest that it hath brought forth much fruit . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto his servant look hither behold i have plant another branch of the tree also and thou knowest that this spot of ground be poor than the first . but behold the tree . i have nourish it this long time and it hath brought forth much fruit therefore gather it and lay it up against the season that i may preserve it unto mine own self . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say again unto his servant look hither and behold another branch also which i have plant behold that i have nourish it also and it hath brought forth fruit . jacob and he say unto the servant look hither and behold the last . behold this have i plant in a good spot of ground and i have nourish it this long time and only a part of the tree hath bring forth tame fruit and the other part of the tree hath bring forth wild fruit behold i have nourish this tree like unto the others . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto the servant pluck off the branch that have not bring forth good fruit and cast them into the fire . jacob but behold the servant say unto him let u prune it and dig about it and nourish it a little long that perhaps it may bring forth good fruit unto thee that thou canst lay it up against the season . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard and the servant of the lord of the vineyard do nourish all the fruit of the vineyard . jacob and it come to pass that a long time have pass away and the lord of the vineyard say unto his servant come let u go down into the vineyard that we may labor again in the vineyard . for behold the time draweth near and the end soon cometh wherefore i must lay up fruit against the season unto mine own self . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard and the servant go down into the vineyard and they come to the tree whose natural branch have be break off and the wild branch have be graft in and behold all sort of fruit do cumber the tree . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard do taste of the fruit every sort accord to it number . and the lord of the vineyard say behold this long time have we nourish this tree and i have lay up unto myself against the season much fruit . jacob but behold this time it hath brought forth much fruit and there be none of it which be good . and behold there be all kind of bad fruit and it profiteth me nothing notwithstanding all our labor and now it grieveth me that i should lose this tree . jacob and the lord of the vineyard say unto the servant what shall we do unto the tree that i may preserve again good fruit thereof unto mine own self ? jacob and the servant say unto his master behold because thou didst graft in the branch of the wild olive tree they have nourish the root that they be alive and they have not perish wherefore thou beholdest that they be yet good . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto his servant the tree profiteth me nothing and the root thereof profit me nothing so long a it shall bring forth evil fruit . jacob nevertheless i know that the root be good and for mine own purpose i have preserve them and because of their much strength they have hitherto bring forth from the wild branch good fruit . jacob but behold the wild branch have grow and have overrun the root thereof and because that the wild branch have overcome the root thereof it hath bring forth much evil fruit and because that it hath brought forth so much evil fruit thou beholdest that it beginneth to perish and it will soon become ripen that it may be cast into the fire except we should do something for it to preserve it . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto his servant let u go down into the nethermost part of the vineyard and behold if the natural branch have also bring forth evil fruit . jacob and it come to pass that they go down into the nethermost part of the vineyard . and it come to pass that they behold that the fruit of the natural branch have become corrupt also yea the first and the second and also the last and they have all become corrupt . jacob and the wild fruit of the last have overcome that part of the tree which bring forth good fruit even that the branch have wither away and die . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard wept and say unto the servant what could i have do more for my vineyard ? jacob behold i know that all the fruit of the vineyard save it be these have become corrupt . and now these which have once bring forth good fruit have also become corrupted and now all the tree of my vineyard be good for nothing save it be to be hew down and cast into the fire . jacob and behold this last whose branch hath wither away i do plant in a good spot of ground yea even that which be choice unto me above all other part of the land of my vineyard . jacob and thou beheldest that i also cut down that which cumber this spot of ground that i might plant this tree in the stead thereof . jacob and thou beheldest that a part thereof bring forth good fruit and a part thereof bring forth wild fruit and because i pluck not the branch thereof and cast them into the fire behold they have overcome the good branch that it hath wither away . jacob and now behold notwithstanding all the care which we have take of my vineyard the tree thereof have become corrupt that they bring forth no good fruit and these i have hop to preserve to have lay up fruit thereof against the season unto mine own self . but behold they have become like unto the wild olive tree and they be of no worth but to be hew down and cast into the fire and it grieveth me that i should lose them . jacob but what could i have do more in my vineyard ? have i slacken mine hand that i have not nourish it nay i have nourish it and i have digged about it and i have prune it and i have dung it and i have stretch forth mine hand almost all the day long and the end draweth nigh . and it grieveth me that i should hew down all the tree of my vineyard and cast them into the fire that they should be burn . who be it that have corrupt my vineyard ? jacob and it come to pass that the servant say unto his master be it not the loftiness of thy vineyard have not the branch thereof overcome the root which be good ? and because the branch have overcome the root thereof behold they grow faster than the strength of the root take strength unto themselves . behold i say be not this the cause that the tree of thy vineyard have become corrupt ? jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard say unto the servant let u go to and hew down the tree of the vineyard and cast them into the fire that they shall not cumber the ground of my vineyard for i have do all . what could i have do more for my vineyard ? jacob but behold the servant say unto the lord of the vineyard spare it a little long . jacob and the lord say yea i will spare it a little long for it grieveth me that i should lose the tree of my vineyard . jacob wherefore let u take of the branch of these which i have plant in the nethermost part of my vineyard and let u graft them into the tree from whence they come and let u pluck from the tree those branch whose fruit be most bitter and graft in the natural branch of the tree in the stead thereof . jacob and this will i do that the tree may not perish that perhaps i may preserve unto myself the root thereof for mine own purpose . jacob and behold the root of the natural branch of the tree which i plant whithersoever i would be yet alive wherefore that i may preserve them also for mine own purpose i will take of the branch of this tree and i will graft them in unto them . yea i will graft in unto them the branch of their mother tree that i may preserve the root also unto mine own self that when they shall be sufficiently strong perhaps they may bring forth good fruit unto me and i may yet have glory in the fruit of my vineyard . jacob and it come to pass that they take from the natural tree which have become wild and graft in unto the natural tree which also have become wild . jacob and they also take of the natural tree which have become wild and graft into their mother tree . jacob and the lord of the vineyard say unto the servant pluck not the wild branch from the tree save it be those which be most bitter and in them ye shall graft accord to that which i have say . jacob and we will nourish again the tree of the vineyard and we will trim up the branch thereof and we will pluck from the tree those branch which be ripen that must perish and cast them into the fire . jacob and this i do that perhaps the root thereof may take strength because of their goodness and because of the change of the branch that the good may overcome the evil . jacob and because that i have preserve the natural branch and the root thereof and that i have graft in the natural branch again into their mother tree and have preserve the root of their mother tree that perhaps the tree of my vineyard may bring forth again good fruit and that i may have joy again in the fruit of my vineyard and perhaps that i may rejoice exceedingly that i have preserve the root and the branch of the first fruit jacob wherefore go to and call servant that we may labor diligently with our might in the vineyard that we may prepare the way that i may bring forth again the natural fruit which natural fruit be good and the most precious above all other fruit . jacob wherefore let u go to and labor with our might this last time for behold the end draweth nigh and this be for the last time that i shall prune my vineyard . jacob graft in the branch begin at the last that they may be first and that the first may be last and dig about the tree both old and young the first and the last and the last and the first that all may be nourish once again for the last time . jacob wherefore dig about them and prune them and dung them once more for the last time for the end draweth nigh . and if it be so that these last graft shall grow and bring forth the natural fruit then shall ye prepare the way for them that they may grow . jacob and a they begin to grow ye shall clear away the branch which bring forth bitter fruit accord to the strength of the good and the size thereof and ye shall not clear away the bad thereof all at once l the root thereof should be too strong for the graft and the graft thereof shall perish and i lose the tree of my vineyard . jacob for it grieveth me that i should lose the tree of my vineyard wherefore ye shall clear away the bad accord a the good shall grow that the root and the top may be equal in strength until the good shall overcome the bad and the bad be hew down and cast into the fire that they cumber not the ground of my vineyard and thus will i sweep away the bad out of my vineyard . jacob and the branch of the natural tree will i graft in again into the natural tree jacob and the branch of the natural tree will i graft into the natural branch of the tree and thus will i bring them together again that they shall bring forth the natural fruit and they shall be one . jacob and the bad shall be cast away yea even out of all the land of my vineyard for behold only this once will i prune my vineyard . jacob and it come to pass that the lord of the vineyard send his servant and the servant go and do a the lord have command him and bring other servant and they be few . jacob and the lord of the vineyard say unto them go to and labor in the vineyard with your might . for behold this be the last time that i shall nourish my vineyard for the end be nigh at hand and the season speedily cometh and if ye labor with your might with me ye shall have joy in the fruit which i shall lay up unto myself against the time which will soon come . jacob and it come to pass that the servant do go and labor with their might and the lord of the vineyard labor also with them and they do obey the commandment of the lord of the vineyard in all thing . jacob and there begin to be the natural fruit again in the vineyard and the natural branch begin to grow and thrive exceedingly and the wild branch begin to be pluck off and to be cast away and they do keep the root and the top thereof equal accord to the strength thereof . jacob and thus they labor with all diligence accord to the commandment of the lord of the vineyard even until the bad have be cast away out of the vineyard and the lord have preserve unto himself that the tree have become again the natural fruit and they become like unto one body and the fruit be equal and the lord of the vineyard have preserve unto himself the natural fruit which be most precious unto him from the beginning . jacob and it come to pass that when the lord of the vineyard saw that his fruit be good and that his vineyard be no more corrupt he call up his servant and say unto them behold for this last time have we nourished my vineyard and thou beholdest that i have do accord to my will and i have preserve the natural fruit that it be good even like a it be in the beginning . and bless art thou for because ye have be diligent in labor with me in my vineyard and have keep my commandment and have bring unto me again the natural fruit that my vineyard be no more corrupted and the bad be cast away behold ye shall have joy with me because of the fruit of my vineyard . jacob for behold for a long time will i lay up of the fruit of my vineyard unto mine own self against the season which speedily cometh and for the last time have i nourish my vineyard and prune it and dig about it and dung it wherefore i will lay up unto mine own self of the fruit for a long time accord to that which i have speak . jacob and when the time cometh that evil fruit shall again come into my vineyard then will i cause the good and the bad to be gather and the good will i preserve unto myself and the bad will i cast away into it own place . and then cometh the season and the end and my vineyard will i cause to be burn with fire . jacob chapter jacob and now behold my brother a i say unto you that i would prophesy behold this be my prophecy that the thing which this prophet zeno spake concern the house of israel in the which he liken them unto a tame olive tree must surely come to pass . jacob and the day that he shall set his hand again the second time to recover his people be the day yea even the last time that the servant of the lord shall go forth in his power to nourish and prune his vineyard and after that the end soon cometh . jacob and how bless be they who have labor diligently in his vineyard and how curse be they who shall be cast out into their own place ! and the world shall be burn with fire . jacob and how merciful be our god unto u for he remembereth the house of israel both root and branch and he stretch forth his hand unto them all the day long and they be a stiffnecked and a gainsaying people but as many a will not harden their heart shall be save in the kingdom of god . jacob wherefore my beloved brother i beseech of you in word of soberness that ye would repent and come with full purpose of heart and cleave unto god a he cleaveth unto you . and while his arm of mercy be extend towards you in the light of the day harden not your heart . jacob yea today if ye will hear his voice harden not your heart for why will ye die ? jacob for behold after ye have be nourish by the good word of god all the day long will ye bring forth evil fruit that ye must be hew down and cast into the fire ? jacob behold will ye reject these word ? will ye reject the word of the prophet and will ye reject all the word which have be speak concern christ after so many have speak concern him and deny the good word of christ and the power of god and the gift of the holy ghost and quench the holy spirit and make a mock of the great plan of redemption which hath be lay for you ? jacob know ye not that if ye will do these thing that the power of the redemption and the resurrection which be in christ will bring you to stand with shame and awful guilt before the bar of god ? jacob and accord to the power of justice for justice can not be deny ye must go away into that lake of fire and brimstone whose flame be unquenchable and whose smoke ascendeth up forever and ever which lake of fire and brimstone be endless torment . jacob o then my beloved brethren repent ye and enter in at the strait gate and continue in the way which be narrow until ye shall obtain eternal life . jacob o be wise what can i say more ? jacob finally i bid you farewell until i shall meet you before the please bar of god which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and fear . amen . jacob chapter jacob and now it come to pass after some year have pass away there come a man among the people of nephi whose name be sherem . jacob and it come to pass that he begin to preach among the people and to declare unto them that there should be no christ . and he preach many thing which be flatter unto the people and this he do that he might overthrow the doctrine of christ . jacob and he labor diligently that he might lead away the heart of the people insomuch that he do lead away many heart and he know that i jacob have faith in christ who should come he sought much opportunity that he might come unto me . jacob and he be learn that he have a perfect knowledge of the language of the people wherefore he could use much flattery and much power of speech accord to the power of the devil . jacob and he have hope to shake me from the faith notwithstanding the many revelation and the many thing which i have see concern these thing for i truly have see angel and they have minister unto me . and also i have hear the voice of the lord speaking unto me in very word from time to time wherefore i could not be shake . jacob and it come to pass that he come unto me and on this wise do he speak unto me say brother jacob i have seek much opportunity that i might speak unto you for i have hear and also know that thou goest about much preaching that which ye call the gospel or the doctrine of christ . jacob and ye have lead away much of this people that they pervert the right way of god and keep not the law of moses which be the right way and convert the law of moses into the worship of a be which ye say shall come many hundred year hence . and now behold i sherem declare unto you that this be blasphemy for no man knoweth of such thing for he can not tell of thing to come . and after this manner do sherem contend against me . jacob but behold the lord god pour in his spirit into my soul insomuch that i do confound him in all his word . jacob and i say unto him deniest thou the christ who shall come ? and he say if there should be a christ i would not deny him but i know that there be no christ neither have be nor ever will be . jacob and i say unto him believest thou the scripture ? and he say yea . jacob and i say unto him then ye do not understand them for they truly testify of christ . behold i say unto you that none of the prophet have write nor prophesy save they have speak concern this christ . jacob and this be not all it have be make manifest unto me for i have hear and see and it also have be make manifest unto me by the power of the holy ghost wherefore i know if there should be no atonement make all mankind must be lose . jacob and it come to pass that he say unto me show me a sign by this power of the holy ghost in the which ye know so much . jacob and i say unto him what be i that i should tempt god to show unto thee a sign in the thing which thou knowest to be true ? yet thou wilt deny it because thou art of the devil . nevertheless not my will be do but if god shall smite thee let that be a sign unto thee that he have power both in heaven and in earth and also that christ shall come . and thy will o lord be do and not mine . jacob and it come to pass that when i jacob have speak these word the power of the lord come upon him insomuch that he fell to the earth . and it come to pass that he be nourish for the space of many day . jacob and it come to pass that he say unto the people gather together on the morrow for i shall die wherefore i desire to speak unto the people before i shall die . jacob and it come to pass that on the morrow the multitude be gather together and he spake plainly unto them and deny the thing which he have teach them and confess the christ and the power of the holy ghost and the ministering of angel . jacob and he spake plainly unto them that he have be deceive by the power of the devil . and he spake of hell and of eternity and of eternal punishment . jacob and he say i fear l i have commit the unpardonable sin for i have lie unto god for i deny the christ and say that i believe the scripture and they truly testify of him . and because i have thus lie unto god i greatly fear l my case shall be awful but i confess unto god . jacob and it come to pass that when he have say these word he could say no more and he give up the ghost . jacob and when the multitude have witness that he spake these thing a he be about to give up the ghost they be astonish exceedingly insomuch that the power of god come down upon them and they be overcome that they fell to the earth . jacob now this thing be please unto me jacob for i have request it of my father who be in heaven for he have hear my cry and answer my prayer . jacob and it come to pass that peace and the love of god be restore again among the people and they search the scripture and hearken no more to the word of this wicked man . jacob and it come to pass that many mean be devise to reclaim and restore the lamanites to the knowledge of the truth but it all be vain for they delight in war and bloodshed and they have an eternal hatred against u their brother . and they seek by the power of their arm to destroy u continually . jacob wherefore the people of nephi do fortify against them with their arm and with all their might trust in the god and rock of their salvation wherefore they become a yet conqueror of their enemy . jacob and it come to pass that i jacob begin to be old and the record of this people be keep on the other plate of nephi wherefore i conclude this record declare that i have write accord to the best of my knowledge by say that the time pass away with u and also our life pass away like a it be unto u a dream we be a lonesome and a solemn people wanderer cast out from jerusalem bear in tribulation in a wilderness and hat of our brother which cause war and contention wherefore we do mourn out our day . jacob and i jacob saw that i must soon go down to my grave wherefore i say unto my son enos take these plate . and i tell him the thing which my brother nephi have command me and he promise obedience unto the command . and i make an end of my write upon these plate which write have be small and to the reader i bid farewell hop that many of my brother may read my word . brother adieu . the book of enos enos behold it come to pass that i enos know my father that he be a just man for he teach me in his language and also in the nurture and admonition of the lord and bless be the name of my god for it enos and i will tell you of the wrestle which i have before god before i receive a remission of my sin . enos behold i go to hunt beast in the forest and the word which i have often hear my father speak concern eternal life and the joy of the saint sink deep into my heart . enos and my soul hunger and i kneel down before my maker and i cry unto him in mighty prayer and supplication for mine own soul and all the day long do i cry unto him yea and when the night come i do still raise my voice high that it reach the heaven . enos and there come a voice unto me say enos thy sin be forgive thee and thou shalt be bless . enos and i enos know that god could not lie wherefore my guilt be sweep away . enos and i say lord how be it do ? enos and he say unto me because of thy faith in christ whom thou hast never before heard nor see . and many year pass away before he shall manifest himself in the flesh wherefore go to thy faith hath make thee whole . enos now it come to pass that when i have hear these word i begin to feel a desire for the welfare of my brother the nephites wherefore i do pour out my whole soul unto god for them . enos and while i be thus struggle in the spirit behold the voice of the lord come into my mind again say i will visit thy brother accord to their diligence in keep my commandment . i have give unto them this land and it be a holy land and i curse it not save it be for the cause of iniquity wherefore i will visit thy brother accord a i have say and their transgression will i bring down with sorrow upon their own head . enos and after i enos have hear these word my faith begin to be unshaken in the lord and i pray unto him with many long strugglings for my brother the lamanites . enos and it come to pass that after i have pray and labor with all diligence the lord say unto me i will grant unto thee accord to thy desire because of thy faith . enos and now behold this be the desire which i desire of him that if it should so be that my people the nephites should fall into transgression and by any mean be destroy and the lamanites should not be destroy that the lord god would preserve a record of my people the nephites even if it so be by the power of his holy arm that it might be bring forth at some future day unto the lamanites that perhaps they might be bring unto salvation enos for at the present our strugglings be vain in restore them to the true faith . and they swear in their wrath that if it be possible they would destroy our record and u and also all the tradition of our father . enos wherefore i know that the lord god be able to preserve our record i cry unto him continually for he have say unto me whatsoever thing ye shall ask in faith believing that ye shall receive in the name of christ ye shall receive it . enos and i have faith and i do cry unto god that he would preserve the record and he covenant with me that he would bring them forth unto the lamanites in his own due time . enos and i enos know it would be accord to the covenant which he have make wherefore my soul do rest . enos and the lord say unto me thy father have also require of me this thing and it shall be do unto them accord to their faith for their faith be like unto thine . enos and now it come to pass that i enos go about among the people of nephi prophesying of thing to come and testify of the thing which i have hear and see . enos and i bear record that the people of nephi do seek diligently to restore the lamanites unto the true faith in god . but our labor be vain their hatred be fix and they be lead by their evil nature that they become wild and ferocious and a bloodthirsty people full of idolatry and filthiness feed upon beast of prey dwell in tent and wander about in the wilderness with a short skin girdle about their loin and their head shaven and their skill be in the bow and in the cimeter and the ax . and many of them do eat nothing save it be raw meat and they be continually seek to destroy u . enos and it come to pass that the people of nephi do till the land and raise all manner of grain and of fruit and flock of herd and flock of all manner of cattle of every kind and goat and wild goat and also many horse . enos and there be exceedingly many prophet among u . and the people be a stiffnecked people hard to understand . enos and there be nothing save it be exceed harshness preaching and prophesying of war and contention and destruction and continually remind them of death and the duration of eternity and the judgment and the power of god and all these thing stir them up continually to keep them in the fear of the lord . i say there be nothing short of these thing and exceedingly great plainness of speech would keep them from go down speedily to destruction . and after this manner do i write concern them . enos and i saw war between the nephites and lamanites in the course of my day . enos and it come to pass that i begin to be old and an hundred and seventy and nine year have pass away from the time that our father lehi leave jerusalem . enos and i saw that i must soon go down to my grave have be work upon by the power of god that i must preach and prophesy unto this people and declare the word accord to the truth which be in christ . and i have declare it in all my day and have rejoice in it above that of the world . enos and i soon go to the place of my rest which be with my redeemer for i know that in him i shall rest . and i rejoice in the day when my mortal shall put on immortality and shall stand before him then shall i see his face with pleasure and he will say unto me come unto me ye bless there be a place prepare for you in the mansion of my father . amen . the book of jarom jarom now behold i jarom write a few word accord to the commandment of my father enos that our genealogy may be keep . jarom and a these plate be small and a these thing be write for the intent of the benefit of our brother the lamanites wherefore it must needs be that i write a little but i shall not write the thing of my prophesy nor of my revelation . for what could i write more than my father have write ? for have not they reveal the plan of salvation ? i say unto you yea and this sufficeth me . jarom behold it be expedient that much should be do among this people because of the hardness of their heart and the deafness of their ear and the blindness of their mind and the stiffness of their neck nevertheless god be exceedingly merciful unto them and have not a yet sweep them off from the face of the land . jarom and there be many among u who have many revelation for they be not all stiffnecked . and as many a be not stiffnecked and have faith have communion with the holy spirit which maketh manifest unto the child of men accord to their faith . jarom and now behold two hundred year have pass away and the people of nephi have wax strong in the land . they observe to keep the law of moses and the sabbath day holy unto the lord . and they profane not neither do they blaspheme . and the law of the land be exceedingly strict . jarom and they be scatter upon much of the face of the land and the lamanites also . and they be exceedingly more numerous than be they of the nephites and they love murder and would drink the blood of beast . jarom and it come to pass that they come many time against u the nephites to battle . but our king and our leader be mighty men in the faith of the lord and they teach the people the way of the lord wherefore we withstand the lamanites and sweep them away out of our land and begin to fortify our city or whatsoever place of our inheritance . jarom and we multiply exceedingly and spread upon the face of the land and become exceedingly rich in gold and in silver and in precious thing and in fine workmanship of wood in building and in machinery and also in iron and copper and brass and steel make all manner of tool of every kind to till the ground and weapon of war yea the sharp pointed arrow and the quiver and the dart and the javelin and all preparation for war . jarom and thus be prepare to meet the lamanites they do not prosper against u . but the word of the lord be verify which he spake unto our father say that inasmuch a ye will keep my commandment ye shall prosper in the land . jarom and it come to pass that the prophet of the lord do threaten the people of nephi accord to the word of god that if they do not keep the commandment but should fall into transgression they should be destroy from off the face of the land . jarom wherefore the prophet and the priest and the teacher do labor diligently exhort with all long suffer the people to diligence teach the law of moses and the intent for which it be give persuade them to look forward unto the messiah and believe in him to come a though he already be . and after this manner do they teach them . jarom and it come to pass that by so do they keep them from be destroy upon the face of the land for they do prick their heart with the word continually stir them up unto repentance . jarom and it come to pass that two hundred and thirty and eight year have pass away after the manner of war and contention and dissension for the space of much of the time . jarom and i jarom do not write more for the plate be small . but behold my brother ye can go to the other plate of nephi for behold upon them the record of our war be engraven accord to the writing of the king or those which they cause to be write . jarom and i deliver these plate into the hand of my son omni that they may be keep accord to the commandment of my father . the book of omni omni behold it come to pass that i omni be command by my father jarom that i should write somewhat upon these plate to preserve our genealogy omni wherefore in my day i would that ye should know that i fight much with the sword to preserve my people the nephites from fall into the hand of their enemy the lamanites . but behold i of myself be a wicked man and i have not keep the statute and the commandment of the lord a i ought to have do . omni and it come to pass that two hundred and seventy and six year have pass away and we have many season of peace and we have many season of serious war and bloodshed . yea and in fine two hundred and eighty and two year have pass away and i have keep these plate accord to the commandment of my father and i confer them upon my son amaron . and i make an end . omni and now i amaron write the thing whatsoever i write which be few in the book of my father . omni behold it come to pass that three hundred and twenty year have pass away and the more wicked part of the nephites be destroy . omni for the lord would not suffer after he have lead them out of the land of jerusalem and kept and preserve them from fall into the hand of their enemy yea he would not suffer that the word should not be verify which he spake unto our father say that inasmuch a ye will not keep my commandment ye shall not prosper in the land . omni wherefore the lord do visit them in great judgment nevertheless he do spare the righteous that they should not perish but do deliver them out of the hand of their enemy . omni and it come to pass that i do deliver the plate unto my brother chemish . omni now i chemish write what few thing i write in the same book with my brother for behold i saw the last which he write that he write it with his own hand and he write it in the day that he deliver them unto me . and after this manner we keep the record for it be accord to the commandment of our father . and i make an end . omni behold i abinadom be the son of chemish . behold it come to pass that i saw much war and contention between my people the nephites and the lamanites and i with my own sword have take the life of many of the lamanites in the defence of my brother . omni and behold the record of this people be engraven upon plate which be have by the king accord to the generation and i know of no revelation save that which have be write neither prophecy wherefore that which be sufficient be write . and i make an end . omni behold i be amaleki the son of abinadom . behold i will speak unto you somewhat concern mosiah who be make king over the land of zarahemla for behold he be warn of the lord that he should flee out of the land of nephi and as many a would hearken unto the voice of the lord should also depart out of the land with him into the wilderness omni and it come to pass that he do accord a the lord have command him . and they depart out of the land into the wilderness as many a would hearken unto the voice of the lord and they be lead by many preaching and prophesyings . and they be admonish continually by the word of god and they be lead by the power of his arm through the wilderness until they come down into the land which be call the land of zarahemla . omni and they discover a people who be call the people of zarahemla . now there be great rejoicing among the people of zarahemla and also zarahemla do rejoice exceedingly because the lord have send the people of mosiah with the plate of brass which contain the record of the jew . omni behold it come to pass that mosiah discover that the people of zarahemla come out from jerusalem at the time that zedekiah king of judah be carry away captive into babylon . omni and they journey in the wilderness and be bring by the hand of the lord across the great water into the land where mosiah discover them and they have dwell there from that time forth . omni and at the time that mosiah discover them they have become exceedingly numerous . nevertheless they have have many war and serious contention and have fall by the sword from time to time and their language have become corrupt and they have bring no record with them and they deny the be of their creator and mosiah nor the people of mosiah could understand them . omni but it come to pass that mosiah cause that they should be teach in his language . and it come to pass that after they be teach in the language of mosiah zarahemla give a genealogy of his father accord to his memory and they be write but not in these plate . omni and it come to pass that the people of zarahemla and of mosiah do unite together and mosiah be appoint to be their king . omni and it come to pass in the day of mosiah there be a large stone bring unto him with engraving on it and he do interpret the engraving by the gift and power of god . omni and they give an account of one coriantumr and the slain of his people . and coriantumr be discover by the people of zarahemla and he dwell with them for the space of nine moon . omni it also spake a few word concern his father . and his first parent come out from the tower at the time the lord confound the language of the people and the severity of the lord fell upon them accord to his judgment which be just and their bone lay scatter in the land northward . omni behold i amaleki be bear in the day of mosiah and i have live to see his death and benjamin his son reigneth in his stead . omni and behold i have see in the day of king benjamin a serious war and much bloodshed between the nephites and the lamanites . but behold the nephites do obtain much advantage over them yea insomuch that king benjamin do drive them out of the land of zarahemla . omni and it come to pass that i begin to be old and have no seed and know king benjamin to be a just man before the lord wherefore i shall deliver up these plate unto him exhort all men to come unto god the holy one of israel and believe in prophesy and in revelation and in the ministering of angel and in the gift of speak with tongue and in the gift of interpret language and in all thing which be good for there be nothing which be good save it come from the lord and that which be evil cometh from the devil . omni and now my beloved brother i would that ye should come unto christ who be the holy one of israel and partake of his salvation and the power of his redemption . yea come unto him and offer your whole soul a an offering unto him and continue in fasting and praying and endure to the end and a the lord liveth ye will be save . omni and now i would speak somewhat concern a certain number who go up into the wilderness to return to the land of nephi for there be a large number who be desirous to possess the land of their inheritance . omni wherefore they go up into the wilderness . and their leader be a strong and mighty man and a stiffnecked man wherefore he cause a contention among them and they be all slay save fifty in the wilderness and they return again to the land of zarahemla . omni and it come to pass that they also take others to a considerable number and take their journey again into the wilderness . omni and i amaleki have a brother who also go with them and i have not since know concern them . and i be about to lie down in my grave and these plate be full . and i make an end of my speaking . the word of mormon word of mormon and now i mormon be about to deliver up the record which i have be make into the hand of my son moroni behold i have witness almost all the destruction of my people the nephites . word of mormon and it be many hundred year after the come of christ that i deliver these record into the hand of my son and it supposeth me that he will witness the entire destruction of my people . but may god grant that he may survive them that he may write somewhat concern them and somewhat concern christ that perhaps some day it may profit them . word of mormon and now i speak somewhat concern that which i have write for after i have make an abridgment from the plate of nephi down to the reign of this king benjamin of whom amaleki spake i search among the record which have be deliver into my hand and i find these plate which contain this small account of the prophet from jacob down to the reign of this king benjamin and also many of the word of nephi . word of mormon and the thing which be upon these plate please me because of the prophecy of the come of christ and my father know that many of them have be fulfil yea and i also know that a many thing a have be prophesy concern u down to this day have be fulfil and as many a go beyond this day must surely come to pass word of mormon wherefore i choose these thing to finish my record upon them which remainder of my record i shall take from the plate of nephi and i can not write the hundredth part of the thing of my people . word of mormon but behold i shall take these plate which contain these prophesyings and revelation and put them with the remainder of my record for they be choice unto me and i know they will be choice unto my brother . word of mormon and i do this for a wise purpose for thus it whispereth me accord to the working of the spirit of the lord which be in me . and now i do not know all thing but the lord knoweth all thing which be to come wherefore he worketh in me to do accord to his will . word of mormon and my prayer to god be concern my brother that they may once again come to the knowledge of god yea the redemption of christ that they may once again be a delightsome people . word of mormon and now i mormon proceed to finish out my record which i take from the plate of nephi and i make it accord to the knowledge and the understanding which god have give me . word of mormon wherefore it come to pass that after amaleki have deliver up these plate into the hand of king benjamin he take them and put them with the other plate which contain record which have be hand down by the king from generation to generation until the day of king benjamin . word of mormon and they be hand down from king benjamin from generation to generation until they have fall into my hand . and i mormon pray to god that they may be preserve from this time henceforth . and i know that they will be preserve for there be great thing write upon them out of which my people and their brother shall be judge at the great and last day accord to the word of god which be write . word of mormon and now concern this king benjamin he have somewhat of contention among his own people . word of mormon and it come to pass also that the army of the lamanites come down out of the land of nephi to battle against his people . but behold king benjamin gather together his army and he do stand against them and he do fight with the strength of his own arm with the sword of laban . word of mormon and in the strength of the lord they do contend against their enemy until they have slay many thousand of the lamanites . and it come to pass that they do contend against the lamanites until they have drive them out of all the land of their inheritance . word of mormon and it come to pass that after there have be false christ and their mouth have be shut and they punish accord to their crime word of mormon and after there have be false prophet and false preacher and teacher among the people and all these have be punish accord to their crime and after there have be much contention and many dissension away unto the lamanites behold it come to pass that king benjamin with the assistance of the holy prophet who be among his people word of mormon for behold king benjamin be a holy man and he do reign over his people in righteousness and there be many holy men in the land and they do speak the word of god with power and with authority and they do use much sharpness because of the stiffneckedness of the people word of mormon wherefore with the help of these king benjamin by labor with all the might of his body and the faculty of his whole soul and also the prophet do once more establish peace in the land . the book of mosiah mosiah chapter mosiah and now there be no more contention in all the land of zarahemla among all the people who belong to king benjamin so that king benjamin have continual peace all the remainder of his day . mosiah and it come to pass that he have three son and he call their name mosiah and helorum and helaman . and he cause that they should be teach in all the language of his father that thereby they might become men of understanding and that they might know concern the prophecy which have be speak by the mouth of their father which be deliver them by the hand of the lord . mosiah and he also teach them concern the record which be engraven on the plate of brass say my son i would that ye should remember that be it not for these plate which contain these record and these commandment we must have suffer in ignorance even at this present time not know the mystery of god . mosiah for it be not possible that our father lehi could have remember all these thing to have teach them to his child except it be for the help of these plate for he have be teach in the language of the egyptian therefore he could read these engraving and teach them to his child that thereby they could teach them to their child and so fulfil the commandment of god even down to this present time . mosiah i say unto you my son be it not for these thing which have be keep and preserve by the hand of god that we might read and understand of his mystery and have his commandment always before our eye that even our father would have dwindle in unbelief and we should have be like unto our brother the lamanites who know nothing concern these thing or even do not believe them when they be teach them because of the tradition of their father which be not correct . mosiah o my son i would that ye should remember that these saying be true and also that these record be true . and behold also the plate of nephi which contain the record and the saying of our father from the time they leave jerusalem until now and they be true and we can know of their surety because we have them before our eye . mosiah and now my son i would that ye should remember to search them diligently that ye may profit thereby and i would that ye should keep the commandment of god that ye may prosper in the land accord to the promise which the lord make unto our father . mosiah and many more thing do king benjamin teach his son which be not write in this book . mosiah and it come to pass that after king benjamin have make an end of teach his son that he wax old and he saw that he must very soon go the way of all the earth therefore he think it expedient that he should confer the kingdom upon one of his son . mosiah therefore he have mosiah bring before him and these be the word which he spake unto him say my son i would that ye should make a proclamation throughout all this land among all this people or the people of zarahemla and the people of mosiah who dwell in the land that thereby they may be gather together for on the morrow i shall proclaim unto this my people out of mine own mouth that thou art a king and a ruler over this people whom the lord our god hath give u . mosiah and moreover i shall give this people a name that thereby they may be distinguish above all the people which the lord god hath bring out of the land of jerusalem and this i do because they have be a diligent people in keep the commandment of the lord . mosiah and i give unto them a name that never shall be blot out except it be through transgression . mosiah yea and moreover i say unto you that if this highly favored people of the lord should fall into transgression and become a wicked and an adulterous people that the lord will deliver them up that thereby they become weak like unto their brother and he will no more preserve them by his matchless and marvelous power a he have hitherto preserve our father . mosiah for i say unto you that if he have not extend his arm in the preservation of our father they must have fall into the hand of the lamanites and become victim to their hatred . mosiah and it come to pass that after king benjamin have make an end of these saying to his son that he give him charge concern all the affair of the kingdom . mosiah and moreover he also give him charge concern the record which be engraven on the plate of brass and also the plate of nephi and also the sword of laban and the ball or director which lead our father through the wilderness which be prepare by the hand of the lord that thereby they might be lead every one accord to the heed and diligence which they give unto him . mosiah therefore a they be unfaithful they do not prosper nor progress in their journey but be drive back and incur the displeasure of god upon them and therefore they be smite with famine and sore affliction to stir them up in remembrance of their duty . mosiah and now it come to pass that mosiah go and do a his father have command him and proclaim unto all the people who be in the land of zarahemla that thereby they might gather themselves together to go up to the temple to hear the word which his father should speak unto them . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that after mosiah have do a his father have command him and have make a proclamation throughout all the land that the people gather themselves together throughout all the land that they might go up to the temple to hear the word which king benjamin should speak unto them . mosiah and there be a great number even so many that they do not number them for they have multiply exceedingly and waxed great in the land . mosiah and they also take of the firstlings of their flock that they might offer sacrifice and burnt offering accord to the law of moses mosiah and also that they might give thanks to the lord their god who have bring them out of the land of jerusalem and who have deliver them out of the hand of their enemy and have appoint just men to be their teacher and also a just man to be their king who have establish peace in the land of zarahemla and who have teach them to keep the commandment of god that they might rejoice and be fill with love towards god and all men . mosiah and it come to pass that when they come up to the temple they pitch their tent round about every man accord to his family consisting of his wife and his son and his daughter and their son and their daughter from the eldest down to the young every family be separate one from another . mosiah and they pitch their tent round about the temple every man have his tent with the door thereof towards the temple that thereby they might remain in their tent and hear the word which king benjamin should speak unto them mosiah for the multitude be so great that king benjamin could not teach them all within the wall of the temple therefore he cause a tower to be erect that thereby his people might hear the word which he should speak unto them . mosiah and it come to pass that he begin to speak to his people from the tower and they could not all hear his word because of the greatness of the multitude therefore he cause that the word which he spake should be write and send forth among those that be not under the sound of his voice that they might also receive his word . mosiah and these be the word which he spake and cause to be write say my brother all ye that have assemble yourselves together you that can hear my word which i shall speak unto you this day for i have not command you to come up hither to trifle with the word which i shall speak but that you should hearken unto me and open your ear that ye may hear and your heart that ye may understand and your mind that the mystery of god may be unfold to your view . mosiah i have not command you to come up hither that ye should fear me or that ye should think that i of myself be more than a mortal man . mosiah but i be like a yourselves subject to all manner of infirmity in body and mind yet i have be choose by this people and consecrate by my father and be suffer by the hand of the lord that i should be a ruler and a king over this people and have be keep and preserve by his matchless power to serve you with all the might mind and strength which the lord hath grant unto me . mosiah i say unto you that a i have be suffer to spend my day in your service even up to this time and have not seek gold nor silver nor any manner of rich of you mosiah neither have i suffer that ye should be confine in dungeon nor that ye should make slave one of another nor that ye should murder or plunder or steal or commit adultery nor even have i suffer that ye should commit any manner of wickedness and have teach you that ye should keep the commandment of the lord in all thing which he hath command you mosiah and even i myself have labor with mine own hand that i might serve you and that ye should not be laden with tax and that there should nothing come upon you which be grievous to be borne and of all these thing which i have speak ye yourselves be witness this day . mosiah yet my brother i have not do these thing that i might boast neither do i tell these thing that thereby i might accuse you but i tell you these thing that ye may know that i can answer a clear conscience before god this day . mosiah behold i say unto you that because i say unto you that i have spend my day in your service i do not desire to boast for i have only be in the service of god . mosiah and behold i tell you these thing that ye may learn wisdom that ye may learn that when ye be in the service of your fellow being ye be only in the service of your god . mosiah behold ye have call me your king and if i whom ye call your king do labor to serve you then ought not ye to labor to serve one another ? mosiah and behold also if i whom ye call your king who have spend his day in your service and yet have be in the service of god do merit any thanks from you o how you ought to thank your heavenly king ! mosiah i say unto you my brother that if you should render all the thanks and praise which your whole soul have power to possess to that god who have create you and have keep and preserve you and have cause that ye should rejoice and have grant that ye should live in peace one with another mosiah i say unto you that if ye should serve him who have create you from the beginning and be preserve you from day to day by lend you breath that ye may live and move and do accord to your own will and even support you from one moment to another i say if ye should serve him with all your whole soul yet ye would be unprofitable servant . mosiah and behold all that he require of you be to keep his commandment and he have promise you that if ye would keep his commandment ye should prosper in the land and he never doth vary from that which he hath say therefore if ye do keep his commandment he doth bless you and prosper you . mosiah and now in the first place he hath create you and grant unto you your life for which ye be indebted unto him . mosiah and secondly he doth require that ye should do a he hath command you for which if ye do he doth immediately bless you and therefore he hath pay you . and ye be still indebted unto him and be and will be forever and ever therefore of what have ye to boast ? mosiah and now i ask can ye say aught of yourselves ? i answer you nay . ye can not say that ye be even as much a the dust of the earth yet ye be create of the dust of the earth but behold it belongeth to him who create you . mosiah and i even i whom ye call your king be no good than ye yourselves be for i be also of the dust . and ye behold that i be old and be about to yield up this mortal frame to it mother earth . mosiah therefore a i say unto you that i have serve you walk with a clear conscience before god even so i at this time have cause that ye should assemble yourselves together that i might be find blameless and that your blood should not come upon me when i shall stand to be judge of god of the thing whereof he hath command me concern you . mosiah i say unto you that i have cause that ye should assemble yourselves together that i might rid my garment of your blood at this period of time when i be about to go down to my grave that i might go down in peace and my immortal spirit may join the choir above in sing the praise of a just god . mosiah and moreover i say unto you that i have cause that ye should assemble yourselves together that i might declare unto you that i can no longer be your teacher nor your king mosiah for even at this time my whole frame doth tremble exceedingly while attempt to speak unto you but the lord god doth support me and hath suffer me that i should speak unto you and hath command me that i should declare unto you this day that my son mosiah be a king and a ruler over you . mosiah and now my brother i would that ye should do a ye have hitherto do . a ye have keep my commandment and also the commandment of my father and have prosper and have be keep from fall into the hand of your enemy even so if ye shall keep the commandment of my son or the commandment of god which shall be deliver unto you by him ye shall prosper in the land and your enemy shall have no power over you . mosiah but o my people beware l there shall arise contention among you and ye list to obey the evil spirit which be speak of by my father mosiah . mosiah for behold there be a wo pronounce upon him who listeth to obey that spirit for if he listeth to obey him and remaineth and dieth in his sin the same drinketh damnation to his own soul for he receiveth for his wage an everlasting punishment have transgress the law of god contrary to his own knowledge . mosiah i say unto you that there be not any among you except it be your little child that have not be taught concern these thing but what knoweth that ye be eternally indebted to your heavenly father to render to him all that you have and be and also have be teach concern the record which contain the prophecy which have be speak by the holy prophet even down to the time our father lehi leave jerusalem mosiah and also all that have be speak by our father until now . and behold also they spake that which be command them of the lord therefore they be just and true . mosiah and now i say unto you my brother that after ye have know and have be teach all these thing if ye should transgress and go contrary to that which have be speak that ye do withdraw yourselves from the spirit of the lord that it may have no place in you to guide you in wisdom 's path that ye may be bless prospered and preserve mosiah i say unto you that the man that doeth this the same cometh out in open rebellion against god therefore he listeth to obey the evil spirit and becometh an enemy to all righteousness therefore the lord have no place in him for he dwelleth not in unholy temple . mosiah therefore if that man repenteth not and remaineth and dieth an enemy to god the demand of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the lord and doth fill his breast with guilt and pain and anguish which be like an unquenchable fire whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever . mosiah and now i say unto you that mercy hath no claim on that man therefore his final doom be to endure a never end torment . mosiah o all ye old men and also ye young men and you little child who can understand my word for i have speak plainly unto you that ye might understand i pray that ye should awake to a remembrance of the awful situation of those that have fall into transgression . mosiah and moreover i would desire that ye should consider on the bless and happy state of those that keep the commandment of god . for behold they be bless in all thing both temporal and spiritual and if they hold out faithful to the end they be receive into heaven that thereby they may dwell with god in a state of never end happiness . o remember remember that these thing be true for the lord god hath speak it . mosiah chapter mosiah and again my brother i would call your attention for i have somewhat more to speak unto you for behold i have thing to tell you concern that which be to come . mosiah and the thing which i shall tell you be make know unto me by an angel from god . and he say unto me awake and i awoke and behold he stand before me . mosiah and he say unto me awake and hear the word which i shall tell thee for behold i be come to declare unto you the glad tidings of great joy . mosiah for the lord hath heard thy prayer and hath judged of thy righteousness and hath send me to declare unto thee that thou mayest rejoice and that thou mayest declare unto thy people that they may also be fill with joy . mosiah for behold the time cometh and be not far distant that with power the lord omnipotent who reigneth who be and be from all eternity to all eternity shall come down from heaven among the child of men and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay and shall go forth amongst men work mighty miracle such a heal the sick raise the dead cause the lame to walk the blind to receive their sight and the deaf to hear and cure all manner of disease . mosiah and he shall cast out devil or the evil spirit which dwell in the heart of the child of men . mosiah and lo he shall suffer temptation and pain of body hunger thirst and fatigue even more than man can suffer except it be unto death for behold blood cometh from every pore so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abomination of his people . mosiah and he shall be call jesus christ the son of god the father of heaven and earth the creator of all thing from the beginning and his mother shall be call mary . mosiah and lo he cometh unto his own that salvation might come unto the child of men even through faith on his name and even after all this they shall consider him a man and say that he hath a devil and shall scourge him and shall crucify him . mosiah and he shall rise the third day from the dead and behold he standeth to judge the world and behold all these thing be do that a righteous judgment might come upon the child of men . mosiah for behold and also his blood atoneth for the sin of those who have fall by the transgression of adam who have die not know the will of god concern them or who have ignorantly sin . mosiah but wo wo unto him who knoweth that he rebelleth against god ! for salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the lord jesus christ . mosiah and the lord god hath send his holy prophet among all the child of men to declare these thing to every kindred nation and tongue that thereby whosoever should believe that christ should come the same might receive remission of their sin and rejoice with exceedingly great joy even a though he have already come among them . mosiah yet the lord god saw that his people be a stiffnecked people and he appoint unto them a law even the law of moses . mosiah and many sign and wonder and type and shadow show he unto them concern his come and also holy prophet spake unto them concern his come and yet they harden their heart and understood not that the law of moses availeth nothing except it be through the atonement of his blood . mosiah and even if it be possible that little child could sin they could not be save but i say unto you they be bless for behold a in adam or by nature they fall even so the blood of christ atoneth for their sin . mosiah and moreover i say unto you that there shall be no other name give nor any other way nor mean whereby salvation can come unto the child of men only in and through the name of christ the lord omnipotent . mosiah for behold he judgeth and his judgment be just and the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy but men drink damnation to their own soul except they humble themselves and become a little child and believe that salvation be and be and be to come in and through the atone blood of christ the lord omnipotent . mosiah for the natural man be an enemy to god and have be from the fall of adam and will be forever and ever unless he yield to the enticings of the holy spirit and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of christ the lord and becometh a a child submissive meek humble patient full of love willing to submit to all thing which the lord seeth fit to inflict upon him even a a child doth submit to his father . mosiah and moreover i say unto you that the time shall come when the knowledge of the savior shall spread throughout every nation kindred tongue and people . mosiah and behold when that time cometh none shall be find blameless before god except it be little child only through repentance and faith on the name of the lord god omnipotent . mosiah and even at this time when thou shalt have teach thy people the thing which the lord thy god hath command thee even then be they find no more blameless in the sight of god only accord to the word which i have speak unto thee . mosiah and now i have speak the word which the lord god hath command me . mosiah and thus saith the lord they shall stand a a bright testimony against this people at the judgment day whereof they shall be judge every man accord to his work whether they be good or whether they be evil . mosiah and if they be evil they be consign to an awful view of their own guilt and abomination which doth cause them to shrink from the presence of the lord into a state of misery and endless torment from whence they can no more return therefore they have drink damnation to their own soul . mosiah therefore they have drink out of the cup of the wrath of god which justice could no more deny unto them than it could deny that adam should fall because of his partaking of the forbidden fruit therefore mercy could have claim on them no more forever . mosiah and their torment be a a lake of fire and brimstone whose flame be unquenchable and whose smoke ascendeth up forever and ever . thus hath the lord command me . amen . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that when king benjamin have make an end of speak the word which have be deliver unto him by the angel of the lord that he cast his eye round about on the multitude and behold they have fall to the earth for the fear of the lord have come upon them . mosiah and they have view themselves in their own carnal state even less than the dust of the earth . and they all cry aloud with one voice say o have mercy and apply the atone blood of christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sin and our heart may be purify for we believe in jesus christ the son of god who create heaven and earth and all thing who shall come down among the child of men . mosiah and it come to pass that after they have speak these word the spirit of the lord come upon them and they be fill with joy have receive a remission of their sin and have peace of conscience because of the exceed faith which they have in jesus christ who should come accord to the word which king benjamin have speak unto them . mosiah and king benjamin again open his mouth and begin to speak unto them say my friend and my brother my kindred and my people i would again call your attention that ye may hear and understand the remainder of my word which i shall speak unto you . mosiah for behold if the knowledge of the goodness of god at this time have awaken you to a sense of your nothingness and your worthless and fall state mosiah i say unto you if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of god and his matchless power and his wisdom and his patience and his long suffering towards the child of men and also the atonement which have be prepare from the foundation of the world that thereby salvation might come to him that should put his trust in the lord and should be diligent in keep his commandment and continue in the faith even unto the end of his life i mean the life of the mortal body mosiah i say that this be the man who receiveth salvation through the atonement which be prepare from the foundation of the world for all mankind which ever be since the fall of adam or who be or who ever shall be even unto the end of the world . mosiah and this be the mean whereby salvation cometh . and there be none other salvation save this which hath be speak of neither be there any condition whereby man can be save except the condition which i have tell you . mosiah believe in god believe that he be and that he create all thing both in heaven and in earth believe that he have all wisdom and all power both in heaven and in earth believe that man doth not comprehend all the thing which the lord can comprehend . mosiah and again believe that ye must repent of your sin and forsake them and humble yourselves before god and ask in sincerity of heart that he would forgive you and now if you believe all these thing see that ye do them . mosiah and again i say unto you a i have say before that a ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of god or if ye have know of his goodness and have taste of his love and have receive a remission of your sin which causeth such exceedingly great joy in your soul even so i would that ye should remember and always retain in remembrance the greatness of god and your own nothingness and his goodness and long suffering towards you unworthy creature and humble yourselves even in the depth of humility call on the name of the lord daily and stand steadfastly in the faith of that which be to come which be speak by the mouth of the angel . mosiah and behold i say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice and be fill with the love of god and always retain a remission of your sin and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that create you or in the knowledge of that which be just and true . mosiah and ye will not have a mind to injure one another but to live peaceably and to render to every man accord to that which be his due . mosiah and ye will not suffer your child that they go hungry or naked neither will ye suffer that they transgress the law of god and fight and quarrel one with another and serve the devil who be the master of sin or who be the evil spirit which hath be speak of by our father he be an enemy to all righteousness . mosiah but ye will teach them to walk in the way of truth and soberness ye will teach them to love one another and to serve one another . mosiah and also ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain and turn him out to perish . mosiah perhaps thou shalt say the man have bring upon himself his misery therefore i will stay my hand and will not give unto him of my food nor impart unto him of my substance that he may not suffer for his punishment be just mosiah but i say unto you o man whosoever doeth this the same hath great cause to repent and except he repenteth of that which he hath do he perisheth forever and hath no interest in the kingdom of god . mosiah for behold be we not all beggar ? do we not all depend upon the same be even god for all the substance which we have for both food and raiment and for gold and for silver and for all the rich which we have of every kind ? mosiah and behold even at this time ye have be call on his name and beg for a remission of your sin . and have he suffer that ye have beg in vain ? nay he have pour out his spirit upon you and have cause that your heart should be fill with joy and have cause that your mouth should be stop that ye could not find utterance so exceedingly great be your joy . mosiah and now if god who have create you on whom you be dependent for your life and for all that ye have and be doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that be right in faith believing that ye shall receive o then how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another . mosiah and if ye judge the man who putteth up his petition to you for your substance that he perish not and condemn him how much more just will be your condemnation for withhold your substance which doth not belong to you but to god to whom also your life belongeth and yet ye put up no petition nor repent of the thing which thou hast do . mosiah i say unto you wo be unto that man for his substance shall perish with him and now i say these thing unto those who be rich a pertain to the thing of this world . mosiah and again i say unto the poor ye who have not and yet have sufficient that ye remain from day to day i mean all you who deny the beggar because ye have not i would that ye say in your heart that i give not because i have not but if i have i would give . mosiah and now if ye say this in your heart ye remain guiltless otherwise ye be condemn and your condemnation be just for ye covet that which ye have not receive . mosiah and now for the sake of these thing which i have speak unto you that be for the sake of retain a remission of your sin from day to day that ye may walk guiltless before god i would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor every man accord to that which he hath such a feed the hungry clothing the naked visit the sick and administer to their relief both spiritually and temporally accord to their want . mosiah and see that all these thing be do in wisdom and order for it be not requisite that a man should run fast than he have strength . and again it be expedient that he should be diligent that thereby he might win the prize therefore all thing must be do in order . mosiah and i would that ye should remember that whosoever among you borroweth of his neighbor should return the thing that he borroweth accord a he doth agree or else thou shalt commit sin and perhaps thou shalt cause thy neighbor to commit sin also . mosiah and finally i can not tell you all the thing whereby ye may commit sin for there be diver way and mean even so many that i can not number them . mosiah but this much i can tell you that if ye do not watch yourselves and your thought and your word and your deed and observe the commandment of god and continue in the faith of what ye have hear concern the come of our lord even unto the end of your life ye must perish . and now o man remember and perish not . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that when king benjamin have thus speak to his people he send among them desire to know of his people if they believe the word which he have speak unto them . mosiah and they all cry with one voice say yea we believe all the word which thou hast speak unto u and also we know of their surety and truth because of the spirit of the lord omnipotent which have work a mighty change in u or in our heart that we have no more disposition to do evil but to do good continually . mosiah and we ourselves also through the infinite goodness of god and the manifestation of his spirit have great view of that which be to come and be it expedient we could prophesy of all thing . mosiah and it be the faith which we have have on the thing which our king have speak unto u that have bring u to this great knowledge whereby we do rejoice with such exceedingly great joy . mosiah and we be willing to enter into a covenant with our god to do his will and to be obedient to his commandment in all thing that he shall command u all the remainder of our day that we may not bring upon ourselves a never end torment a have be speak by the angel that we may not drink out of the cup of the wrath of god . mosiah and now these be the word which king benjamin desire of them and therefore he say unto them ye have speak the word that i desire and the covenant which ye have make be a righteous covenant . mosiah and now because of the covenant which ye have make ye shall be call the child of christ his son and his daughter for behold this day he hath spiritually beget you for ye say that your heart be change through faith on his name therefore ye be bear of him and have become his son and his daughter . mosiah and under this head ye be make free and there be no other head whereby ye can be make free . there be no other name give whereby salvation cometh therefore i would that ye should take upon you the name of christ all you that have enter into the covenant with god that ye should be obedient unto the end of your life . mosiah and it shall come to pass that whosoever doeth this shall be find at the right hand of god for he shall know the name by which he be call for he shall be call by the name of christ . mosiah and now it shall come to pass that whosoever shall not take upon him the name of christ must be call by some other name therefore he findeth himself on the left hand of god . mosiah and i would that ye should remember also that this be the name that i say i should give unto you that never should be blot out except it be through transgression therefore take heed that ye do not transgress that the name be not blot out of your heart . mosiah i say unto you i would that ye should remember to retain the name write always in your heart that ye be not find on the left hand of god but that ye hear and know the voice by which ye shall be call and also the name by which he shall call you . mosiah for how knoweth a man the master whom he have not serve and who be a stranger unto him and be far from the thought and intent of his heart ? mosiah and again doth a man take an as which belongeth to his neighbor and keep him ? i say unto you nay he will not even suffer that he shall fee among his flock but will drive him away and cast him out . i say unto you that even so shall it be among you if ye know not the name by which ye be call . mosiah therefore i would that ye should be steadfast and immovable always abound in good work that christ the lord god omnipotent may seal you his that you may be bring to heaven that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life through the wisdom and power and justice and mercy of him who create all thing in heaven and in earth who be god above all . amen . mosiah chapter mosiah and now king benjamin think it be expedient after have finish speak to the people that he should take the name of all those who have enter into a covenant with god to keep his commandment . mosiah and it come to pass that there be not one soul except it be little child but who have enter into the covenant and have take upon them the name of christ . mosiah and again it come to pass that when king benjamin have make an end of all these thing and have consecrate his son mosiah to be a ruler and a king over his people and have give him all the charge concern the kingdom and also have appoint priest to teach the people that thereby they might hear and know the commandment of god and to stir them up in remembrance of the oath which they have make he dismiss the multitude and they return every one accord to their family to their own house . mosiah and mosiah begin to reign in his father 's stead . and he begin to reign in the thirtieth year of his age making in the whole about four hundred and seventy six year from the time that lehi leave jerusalem . mosiah and king benjamin live three year and he die . mosiah and it come to pass that king mosiah do walk in the way of the lord and do observe his judgment and his statute and do keep his commandment in all thing whatsoever he command him . mosiah and king mosiah do cause his people that they should till the earth . and he also himself do till the earth that thereby he might not become burdensome to his people that he might do accord to that which his father have do in all thing . and there be no contention among all his people for the space of three year . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that after king mosiah have have continual peace for the space of three year he be desirous to know concern the people who go up to dwell in the land of lehi nephi or in the city of lehi nephi for his people have hear nothing from them from the time they leave the land of zarahemla therefore they weary him with their teasing . mosiah and it come to pass that king mosiah grant that sixteen of their strong men might go up to the land of lehi nephi to inquire concern their brother . mosiah and it come to pass that on the morrow they start to go up have with them one ammon he be a strong and mighty man and a descendant of zarahemla and he be also their leader . mosiah and now they know not the course they should travel in the wilderness to go up to the land of lehi nephi therefore they wander many day in the wilderness even forty day do they wander . mosiah and when they have wander forty day they come to a hill which be north of the land of shilom and there they pitch their tent . mosiah and ammon take three of his brother and their name be amaleki helem and hem and they go down into the land of nephi . mosiah and behold they meet the king of the people who be in the land of nephi and in the land of shilom and they be surround by the king 's guard and be take and be bind and be commit to prison . mosiah and it come to pass when they have be in prison two day they be again bring before the king and their band be loose and they stand before the king and be permit or rather command that they should answer the question which he should ask them . mosiah and he say unto them behold i be limhi the son of noah who be the son of zeniff who come up out of the land of zarahemla to inherit this land which be the land of their father who be make a king by the voice of the people . mosiah and now i desire to know the cause whereby ye be so bold a to come near the wall of the city when i myself be with my guard without the gate ? mosiah and now for this cause have i suffer that ye should be preserve that i might inquire of you or else i should have cause that my guard should have put you to death . ye be permit to speak . mosiah and now when ammon saw that he be permit to speak he go forth and bow himself before the king and rise again he say o king i be very thankful before god this day that i be yet alive and be permit to speak and i will endeavor to speak with boldness mosiah for i be assure that if ye have know me ye would not have suffer that i should have wear these band . for i be ammon and be a descendant of zarahemla and have come up out of the land of zarahemla to inquire concern our brother whom zeniff bring up out of that land . mosiah and now it come to pass that after limhi have hear the word of ammon he be exceedingly glad and say now i know of a surety that my brother who be in the land of zarahemla be yet alive . and now i will rejoice and on the morrow i will cause that my people shall rejoice also . mosiah for behold we be in bondage to the lamanites and be tax with a tax which be grievous to be borne . and now behold our brother will deliver u out of our bondage or out of the hand of the lamanites and we will be their slave for it be well that we be slave to the nephites than to pay tribute to the king of the lamanites . mosiah and now king limhi command his guard that they should no more bind ammon nor his brother but cause that they should go to the hill which be north of shilom and bring their brother into the city that thereby they might eat and drink and rest themselves from the labor of their journey for they have suffer many thing they have suffer hunger thirst and fatigue . mosiah and now it come to pass on the morrow that king limhi send a proclamation among all his people that thereby they might gather themselves together to the temple to hear the word which he should speak unto them . mosiah and it come to pass that when they have gather themselves together that he spake unto them in this wise say o ye my people lift up your head and be comfort for behold the time be at hand or be not far distant when we shall no longer be in subjection to our enemy notwithstanding our many strugglings which have be in vain yet i trust there remaineth an effectual struggle to be make . mosiah therefore lift up your head and rejoice and put your trust in god in that god who be the god of abraham and isaac and jacob and also that god who bring the child of israel out of the land of egypt and cause that they should walk through the red sea on dry ground and feed them with manna that they might not perish in the wilderness and many more thing do he do for them . mosiah and again that same god have bring our father out of the land of jerusalem and have keep and preserve his people even until now and behold it be because of our iniquity and abomination that he have bring u into bondage . mosiah and ye all be witness this day that zeniff who be make king over this people he be over zealous to inherit the land of his father therefore be deceive by the cunning and craftiness of king laman who have enter into a treaty with king zeniff and have yield up into his hand the possession of a part of the land or even the city of lehi nephi and the city of shilom and the land round about mosiah and all this he do for the sole purpose of bring this people into subjection or into bondage . and behold we at this time do pay tribute to the king of the lamanites to the amount of one half of our corn and our barley and even all our grain of every kind and one half of the increase of our flock and our herd and even one half of all we have or possess the king of the lamanites doth exact of u or our life . mosiah and now be not this grievous to be bear ? and be not this our affliction great ? now behold how great reason we have to mourn . mosiah yea i say unto you great be the reason which we have to mourn for behold how many of our brother have be slay and their blood have be spill in vain and all because of iniquity . mosiah for if this people have not fall into transgression the lord would not have suffer that this great evil should come upon them . but behold they would not hearken unto his word but there arose contention among them even so much that they do shed blood among themselves . mosiah and a prophet of the lord have they slay yea a chosen man of god who tell them of their wickedness and abomination and prophesy of many thing which be to come yea even the come of christ . mosiah and because he say unto them that christ be the god the father of all thing and say that he should take upon him the image of man and it should be the image after which man be create in the beginning or in other word he say that man be create after the image of god and that god should come down among the child of men and take upon him flesh and blood and go forth upon the face of the earth mosiah and now because he say this they do put him to death and many more thing do they do which bring down the wrath of god upon them . therefore who wondereth that they be in bondage and that they be smite with sore affliction ? mosiah for behold the lord hath say i will not succor my people in the day of their transgression but i will hedge up their way that they prosper not and their doings shall be a a stumble block before them . mosiah and again he saith if my people shall sow filthiness they shall reap the chaff thereof in the whirlwind and the effect thereof be poison . mosiah and again he saith if my people shall sow filthiness they shall reap the east wind which bringeth immediate destruction . mosiah and now behold the promise of the lord be fulfil and ye be smitten and afflicted . mosiah but if ye will turn to the lord with full purpose of heart and put your trust in him and serve him with all diligence of mind if ye do this he will accord to his own will and pleasure deliver you out of bondage . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that after king limhi have make an end of speak to his people for he spake many thing unto them and only a few of them have i write in this book he tell his people all the thing concern their brother who be in the land of zarahemla . mosiah and he cause that ammon should stand up before the multitude and rehearse unto them all that have happen unto their brother from the time that zeniff go up out of the land even until the time that he himself come up out of the land . mosiah and he also rehearse unto them the last word which king benjamin have teach them and explain them to the people of king limhi so that they might understand all the word which he spake . mosiah and it come to pass that after he have do all this that king limhi dismiss the multitude and cause that they should return every one unto his own house . mosiah and it come to pass that he cause that the plate which contain the record of his people from the time that they leave the land of zarahemla should be bring before ammon that he might read them . mosiah now as soon a ammon have read the record the king inquire of him to know if he could interpret language and ammon tell him that he could not . mosiah and the king say unto him be grieve for the affliction of my people i cause that forty and three of my people should take a journey into the wilderness that thereby they might find the land of zarahemla that we might appeal unto our brother to deliver u out of bondage . mosiah and they be lose in the wilderness for the space of many day yet they be diligent and find not the land of zarahemla but return to this land have travel in a land among many water have discover a land which be cover with bone of men and of beast and be also cover with ruin of building of every kind have discover a land which have be people with a people who be as numerous a the host of israel . mosiah and for a testimony that the thing that they have say be true they have bring twenty four plate which be fill with engraving and they be of pure gold . mosiah and behold also they have bring breastplate which be large and they be of brass and of copper and be perfectly sound . mosiah and again they have bring sword the hilt thereof have perish and the blade thereof be canker with rust and there be no one in the land that be able to interpret the language or the engraving that be on the plate . therefore i say unto thee canst thou translate ? mosiah and i say unto thee again knowest thou of any one that can translate ? for i be desirous that these record should be translate into our language for perhaps they will give u a knowledge of a remnant of the people who have be destroy from whence these record come or perhaps they will give u a knowledge of this very people who have be destroy and i be desirous to know the cause of their destruction . mosiah now ammon say unto him i can assuredly tell thee o king of a man that can translate the record for he have wherewith that he can look and translate all record that be of ancient date and it be a gift from god . and the thing be call interpreter and no man can look in them except he be command lest he should look for that he ought not and he should perish . and whosoever be command to look in them the same be call seer . mosiah and behold the king of the people who be in the land of zarahemla be the man that be command to do these thing and who have this high gift from god . mosiah and the king say that a seer be great than a prophet . mosiah and ammon say that a seer be a revelator and a prophet also and a gift which be great can no man have except he should possess the power of god which no man can yet a man may have great power give him from god . mosiah but a seer can know of thing which be past and also of thing which be to come and by them shall all thing be reveal or rather shall secret thing be make manifest and hidden thing shall come to light and thing which be not know shall be make know by them and also thing shall be make know by them which otherwise could not be know . mosiah thus god have provide a mean that man through faith might work mighty miracle therefore he becometh a great benefit to his fellow being . mosiah and now when ammon have make an end of speak these word the king rejoice exceedingly and give thanks to god say doubtless a great mystery be contain within these plate and these interpreter be doubtless prepare for the purpose of unfold all such mystery to the child of men . mosiah o how marvelous be the work of the lord and how long doth he suffer with his people yea and how blind and impenetrable be the understanding of the child of men for they will not seek wisdom neither do they desire that she should rule over them ! mosiah yea they be a a wild flock which fleeth from the shepherd and scattereth and be drive and be devour by the beast of the forest . mosiah chapter mosiah i zeniff have be teach in all the language of the nephites and have have a knowledge of the land of nephi or of the land of our father ' first inheritance and have be send a a spy among the lamanites that i might spy out their force that our army might come upon them and destroy them but when i saw that which be good among them i be desirous that they should not be destroy . mosiah therefore i contend with my brother in the wilderness for i would that our ruler should make a treaty with them but he be an austere and a bloodthirsty man command that i should be slay but i be rescue by the shedding of much blood for father fought against father and brother against brother until the great number of our army be destroy in the wilderness and we return those of u that be spar to the land of zarahemla to relate that tale to their wife and their child . mosiah and yet i be over zealous to inherit the land of our father collect as many a be desirous to go up to possess the land and start again on our journey into the wilderness to go up to the land but we be smite with famine and sore affliction for we be slow to remember the lord our god . mosiah nevertheless after many day ' wandering in the wilderness we pitch our tent in the place where our brother be slain which be near to the land of our father . mosiah and it come to pass that i go again with four of my men into the city in unto the king that i might know of the disposition of the king and that i might know if i might go in with my people and possess the land in peace . mosiah and i go in unto the king and he covenant with me that i might possess the land of lehi nephi and the land of shilom . mosiah and he also command that his people should depart out of the land and i and my people go into the land that we might possess it . mosiah and we begin to build building and to repair the wall of the city yea even the wall of the city of lehi nephi and the city of shilom . mosiah and we begin to till the ground yea even with all manner of seed with seed of corn and of wheat and of barley and with neas and with sheum and with seed of all manner of fruit and we do begin to multiply and prosper in the land . mosiah now it be the cunning and the craftiness of king laman to bring my people into bondage that he yield up the land that we might possess it . mosiah therefore it come to pass that after we have dwell in the land for the space of twelve year that king laman begin to grow uneasy l by any mean my people should wax strong in the land and that they could not overpower them and bring them into bondage . mosiah now they be a lazy and an idolatrous people therefore they be desirous to bring u into bondage that they might glut themselves with the labor of our hand yea that they might feast themselves upon the flock of our field . mosiah therefore it come to pass that king laman begin to stir up his people that they should contend with my people therefore there begin to be war and contention in the land . mosiah for in the thirteenth year of my reign in the land of nephi away on the south of the land of shilom when my people be water and feed their flock and till their land a numerous host of lamanites come upon them and begin to slay them and to take off their flock and the corn of their field . mosiah yea and it come to pass that they flee all that be not overtake even into the city of nephi and do call upon me for protection . mosiah and it come to pass that i do arm them with bow and with arrow with sword and with cimeters and with club and with sling and with all manner of weapon which we could invent and i and my people do go forth against the lamanites to battle . mosiah yea in the strength of the lord do we go forth to battle against the lamanites for i and my people do cry mightily to the lord that he would deliver u out of the hand of our enemy for we be awaken to a remembrance of the deliverance of our father . mosiah and god do hear our cry and do answer our prayer and we do go forth in his might yea we do go forth against the lamanites and in one day and a night we do slay three thousand and forty three we do slay them even until we have drive them out of our land . mosiah and i myself with mine own hand do help to bury their dead . and behold to our great sorrow and lamentation two hundred and seventy nine of our brother be slain . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that we again begin to establish the kingdom and we again begin to possess the land in peace . and i cause that there should be weapon of war make of every kind that thereby i might have weapon for my people against the time the lamanites should come up again to war against my people . mosiah and i set guard round about the land that the lamanites might not come upon u again unawares and destroy u and thus i do guard my people and my flock and keep them from fall into the hand of our enemy . mosiah and it come to pass that we do inherit the land of our father for many year yea for the space of twenty and two year . mosiah and i do cause that the men should till the ground and raise all manner of grain and all manner of fruit of every kind . mosiah and i do cause that the woman should spin and toil and work and work all manner of fine linen yea and cloth of every kind that we might clothe our nakedness and thus we do prosper in the land thus we do have continual peace in the land for the space of twenty and two year . mosiah and it come to pass that king laman die and his son begin to reign in his stead . and he begin to stir his people up in rebellion against my people therefore they begin to prepare for war and to come up to battle against my people . mosiah but i have send my spy out round about the land of shemlon that i might discover their preparation that i might guard against them that they might not come upon my people and destroy them . mosiah and it come to pass that they come up upon the north of the land of shilom with their numerous host men arm with bow and with arrow and with sword and with cimeters and with stone and with sling and they have their head shave that they be naked and they be gird with a leathern girdle about their loin . mosiah and it come to pass that i cause that the woman and child of my people should be hide in the wilderness and i also cause that all my old men that could bear arm and also all my young men that be able to bear arm should gather themselves together to go to battle against the lamanites and i do place them in their rank every man accord to his age . mosiah and it come to pass that we do go up to battle against the lamanites and i even i in my old age do go up to battle against the lamanites . and it come to pass that we do go up in the strength of the lord to battle . mosiah now the lamanites know nothing concern the lord nor the strength of the lord therefore they depend upon their own strength . yet they be a strong people a to the strength of men . mosiah they be a wild and ferocious and a blood thirsty people believe in the tradition of their father which be this believe that they be drive out of the land of jerusalem because of the iniquity of their father and that they be wrong in the wilderness by their brother and they be also wrong while cross the sea mosiah and again that they be wrong while in the land of their first inheritance after they have cross the sea and all this because that nephi be more faithful in keep the commandment of the lord therefore he be favor of the lord for the lord hear his prayer and answer them and he take the lead of their journey in the wilderness . mosiah and his brother be wroth with him because they understand not the dealing of the lord they be also wroth with him upon the water because they harden their heart against the lord . mosiah and again they be wroth with him when they have arrive in the promised land because they say that he have take the ruling of the people out of their hand and they seek to kill him . mosiah and again they be wroth with him because he depart into the wilderness a the lord have command him and take the record which be engraven on the plate of brass for they say that he rob them . mosiah and thus they have teach their child that they should hate them and that they should murder them and that they should rob and plunder them and do all they could to destroy them therefore they have an eternal hatred towards the child of nephi . mosiah for this very cause have king laman by his cunning and lie craftiness and his fair promise deceive me that i have bring this my people up into this land that they may destroy them yea and we have suffer these many year in the land . mosiah and now i zeniff after have tell all these thing unto my people concern the lamanites i do stimulate them to go to battle with their might put their trust in the lord therefore we do contend with them face to face . mosiah and it come to pass that we do drive them again out of our land and we slew them with a great slaughter even so many that we do not number them . mosiah and it come to pass that we return again to our own land and my people again begin to tend their flock and to till their ground . mosiah and now i be old do confer the kingdom upon one of my son therefore i say no more . and may the lord bless my people . amen . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that zeniff confer the kingdom upon noah one of his son therefore noah begin to reign in his stead and he do not walk in the way of his father . mosiah for behold he do not keep the commandment of god but he do walk after the desire of his own heart . and he have many wife and concubine . and he do cause his people to commit sin and do that which be abominable in the sight of the lord . yea and they do commit whoredom and all manner of wickedness . mosiah and he lay a tax of one fifth part of all they possess a fifth part of their gold and of their silver and a fifth part of their ziff and of their copper and of their brass and their iron and a fifth part of their fatlings and also a fifth part of all their grain . mosiah and all this do he take to support himself and his wife and his concubine and also his priest and their wife and their concubine thus he have change the affair of the kingdom . mosiah for he put down all the priest that have be consecrate by his father and consecrate new one in their stead such a be lift up in the pride of their heart . mosiah yea and thus they be support in their laziness and in their idolatry and in their whoredom by the tax which king noah have put upon his people thus do the people labor exceedingly to support iniquity . mosiah yea and they also become idolatrous because they be deceive by the vain and flattering word of the king and priest for they do speak flattering thing unto them . mosiah and it come to pass that king noah build many elegant and spacious building and he ornament them with fine work of wood and of all manner of precious thing of gold and of silver and of iron and of brass and of ziff and of copper mosiah and he also build him a spacious palace and a throne in the midst thereof all of which be of fine wood and be ornament with gold and silver and with precious thing . mosiah and he also cause that his workman should work all manner of fine work within the wall of the temple of fine wood and of copper and of brass . mosiah and the seat which be set apart for the high priest which be above all the other seat he do ornament with pure gold and he cause a breastwork to be build before them that they might rest their body and their arm upon while they should speak lie and vain word to his people . mosiah and it come to pass that he build a tower near the temple yea a very high tower even so high that he could stand upon the top thereof and overlook the land of shilom and also the land of shemlon which be possess by the lamanites and he could even look over all the land round about . mosiah and it come to pass that he cause many building to be build in the land shilom and he cause a great tower to be build on the hill north of the land shilom which have be a resort for the child of nephi at the time they flee out of the land and thus he do do with the rich which he obtain by the taxation of his people . mosiah and it come to pass that he place his heart upon his rich and he spend his time in riotous living with his wife and his concubine and so do also his priest spend their time with harlot . mosiah and it come to pass that he plant vineyard round about in the land and he build wine press and make wine in abundance and therefore he become a wine bibber and also his people . mosiah and it come to pass that the lamanites begin to come in upon his people upon small number and to slay them in their field and while they be tend their flock . mosiah and king noah send guard round about the land to keep them off but he do not send a sufficient number and the lamanites come upon them and kill them and drive many of their flock out of the land thus the lamanites begin to destroy them and to exercise their hatred upon them . mosiah and it come to pass that king noah send his army against them and they be drive back or they drive them back for a time therefore they return rejoice in their spoil . mosiah and now because of this great victory they be lift up in the pride of their heart they do boast in their own strength say that their fifty could stand against thousand of the lamanites and thus they do boast and do delight in blood and the shedding of the blood of their brother and this because of the wickedness of their king and priest . mosiah and it come to pass that there be a man among them whose name be abinadi and he go forth among them and begin to prophesy say behold thus saith the lord and thus hath he command me say go forth and say unto this people thus saith the lord wo be unto this people for i have see their abomination and their wickedness and their whoredom and except they repent i will visit them in mine anger . mosiah and except they repent and turn to the lord their god behold i will deliver them into the hand of their enemy yea and they shall be bring into bondage and they shall be afflict by the hand of their enemy . mosiah and it shall come to pass that they shall know that i be the lord their god and be a jealous god visit the iniquity of my people . mosiah and it shall come to pass that except this people repent and turn unto the lord their god they shall be bring into bondage and none shall deliver them except it be the lord the almighty god . mosiah yea and it shall come to pass that when they shall cry unto me i will be slow to hear their cry yea and i will suffer them that they be smite by their enemy . mosiah and except they repent in sackcloth and ash and cry mightily to the lord their god i will not hear their prayer neither will i deliver them out of their affliction and thus saith the lord and thus hath he command me . mosiah now it come to pass that when abinadi have speak these word unto them they be wroth with him and seek to take away his life but the lord deliver him out of their hand . mosiah now when king noah have hear of the word which abinadi have speak unto the people he be also wroth and he say who be abinadi that i and my people should be judge of him or who be the lord that shall bring upon my people such great affliction ? mosiah i command you to bring abinadi hither that i may slay him for he have say these thing that he might stir up my people to anger one with another and to raise contention among my people therefore i will slay him . mosiah now the eye of the people be blind therefore they harden their heart against the word of abinadi and they seek from that time forward to take him . and king noah harden his heart against the word of the lord and he do not repent of his evil doings . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that after the space of two year that abinadi come among them in disguise that they know him not and begin to prophesy among them say thus have the lord command me say abinadi go and prophesy unto this my people for they have harden their heart against my word they have repent not of their evil doings therefore i will visit them in my anger yea in my fierce anger will i visit them in their iniquity and abomination . mosiah yea wo be unto this generation ! and the lord say unto me stretch forth thy hand and prophesy say thus saith the lord it shall come to pass that this generation because of their iniquity shall be bring into bondage and shall be smite on the cheek yea and shall be drive by men and shall be slay and the vulture of the air and the dog yea and the wild beast shall devour their flesh . mosiah and it shall come to pass that the life of king noah shall be value even a a garment in a hot furnace for he shall know that i be the lord . mosiah and it shall come to pass that i will smite this my people with sore affliction yea with famine and with pestilence and i will cause that they shall howl all the day long . mosiah yea and i will cause that they shall have burden lash upon their back and they shall be drive before like a dumb as . mosiah and it shall come to pass that i will send forth hail among them and it shall smite them and they shall also be smite with the east wind and insect shall pester their land also and devour their grain . mosiah and they shall be smite with a great pestilence and all this will i do because of their iniquity and abomination . mosiah and it shall come to pass that except they repent i will utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth yet they shall leave a record behind them and i will preserve them for other nation which shall possess the land yea even this will i do that i may discover the abomination of this people to other nation . and many thing do abinadi prophesy against this people . mosiah and it come to pass that they be angry with him and they take him and carry him bound before the king and say unto the king behold we have bring a man before thee who have prophesy evil concern thy people and saith that god will destroy them . mosiah and he also prophesieth evil concerning thy life and saith that thy life shall be a a garment in a furnace of fire . mosiah and again he saith that thou shalt be a a stalk even a a dry stalk of the field which be run over by the beast and trodden under foot . mosiah and again he saith thou shalt be a the blossom of a thistle which when it be fully ripe if the wind bloweth it be driven forth upon the face of the land . and he pretendeth the lord hath speak it . and he saith all this shall come upon thee except thou repent and this because of thine iniquity . mosiah and now o king what great evil hast thou do or what great sin have thy people commit that we should be condemn of god or judge of this man ? mosiah and now o king behold we be guiltless and thou o king hast not sin therefore this man have lie concern you and he have prophesy in vain . mosiah and behold we be strong we shall not come into bondage or be take captive by our enemy yea and thou hast prosper in the land and thou shalt also prosper . mosiah behold here be the man we deliver him into thy hand thou mayest do with him a seemeth thee good . mosiah and it come to pass that king noah cause that abinadi should be cast into prison and he command that the priest should gather themselves together that he might hold a council with them what he should do with him . mosiah and it come to pass that they say unto the king bring him hither that we may question him and the king command that he should be bring before them . mosiah and they begin to question him that they might cross him that thereby they might have wherewith to accuse him but he answer them boldly and withstand all their question yea to their astonishment for he do withstand them in all their question and do confound them in all their word . mosiah and it come to pass that one of them say unto him what meaneth the word which be write and which have be teach by our father say mosiah how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of him that bringeth good tidings that publisheth peace that bringeth good tidings of good that publisheth salvation that saith unto zion thy god reigneth mosiah thy watchman shall lift up the voice with the voice together shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye when the lord shall bring again zion mosiah break forth into joy sing together ye waste place of jerusalem for the lord hath comfort his people he hath redeem jerusalem mosiah the lord hath make bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nation and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of our god ? mosiah and now abinadi say unto them be you priest and pretend to teach this people and to understand the spirit of prophesying and yet desire to know of me what these thing mean ? mosiah i say unto you wo be unto you for pervert the way of the lord ! for if ye understand these thing ye have not teach them therefore ye have pervert the way of the lord . mosiah ye have not apply your heart to understand therefore ye have not be wise . therefore what teach ye this people ? mosiah and they say we teach the law of moses . mosiah and again he say unto them if ye teach the law of moses why do ye not keep it ? why do ye set your heart upon rich ? why do ye commit whoredom and spend your strength with harlot yea and cause this people to commit sin that the lord have cause to send me to prophesy against this people yea even a great evil against this people ? mosiah know ye not that i speak the truth ? yea ye know that i speak the truth and you ought to tremble before god . mosiah and it shall come to pass that ye shall be smite for your iniquity for ye have say that ye teach the law of moses . and what know ye concern the law of moses ? doth salvation come by the law of moses ? what say ye ? mosiah and they answer and say that salvation do come by the law of moses . mosiah but now abinadi say unto them i know if ye keep the commandment of god ye shall be save yea if ye keep the commandment which the lord deliver unto moses in the mount of sinai say mosiah i be the lord thy god who hath bring thee out of the land of egypt out of the house of bondage . mosiah thou shalt have no other god before me . mosiah thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any likeness of any thing in heaven above or thing which be in the earth beneath . mosiah now abinadi say unto them have ye do all this ? i say unto you nay ye have not . and have ye taught this people that they should do all these thing ? i say unto you nay ye have not . mosiah chapter mosiah and now when the king have hear these word he say unto his priest away with this fellow and slay him for what have we to do with him for he be mad . mosiah and they stand forth and attempt to lay their hand on him but he withstand them and say unto them mosiah touch me not for god shall smite you if ye lay your hand upon me for i have not deliver the message which the lord send me to deliver neither have i tell you that which ye request that i should tell therefore god will not suffer that i shall be destroy at this time . mosiah but i must fulfil the commandment wherewith god have command me and because i have tell you the truth ye be angry with me . and again because i have speak the word of god ye have judge me that i be mad . mosiah now it come to pass after abinadi have speak these word that the people of king noah durst not lay their hand on him for the spirit of the lord be upon him and his face shone with exceed luster even a moses ' do while in the mount of sinai while speak with the lord . mosiah and he spake with power and authority from god and he continue his word say mosiah ye see that ye have not power to slay me therefore i finish my message . yea and i perceive that it cut you to your heart because i tell you the truth concern your iniquity . mosiah yea and my word fill you with wonder and amazement and with anger . mosiah but i finish my message and then it matter not whither i go if it so be that i be save . mosiah but this much i tell you what you do with me after this shall be a a type and a shadow of thing which be to come . mosiah and now i read unto you the remainder of the commandment of god for i perceive that they be not write in your heart i perceive that ye have study and taught iniquity the most part of your life . mosiah and now ye remember that i say unto you thou shall not make unto thee any graven image or any likeness of thing which be in heaven above or which be in the earth beneath or which be in the water under the earth . mosiah and again thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them nor serve them for i the lord thy god be a jealous god visit the iniquity of the father upon the child unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me mosiah and show mercy unto thousand of them that love me and keep my commandment . mosiah thou shalt not take the name of the lord thy god in vain for the lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain . mosiah remember the sabbath day to keep it holy . mosiah six day shalt thou labor and do all thy work mosiah but the seventh day the sabbath of the lord thy god thou shalt not do any work thou nor thy son nor thy daughter thy man servant nor thy maid servant nor thy cattle nor thy stranger that be within thy gate mosiah for in six day the lord make heaven and earth and the sea and all that in them be wherefore the lord bless the sabbath day and hallow it . mosiah honor thy father and thy mother that thy day may be long upon the land which the lord thy god giveth thee . mosiah thou shalt not kill . mosiah thou shalt not commit adultery . thou shalt not steal . mosiah thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor . mosiah thou shalt not covet thy neighbor 's house thou shalt not covet thy neighbor 's wife nor his man servant nor his maid servant nor his ox nor his as nor anything that be thy neighbor 's . mosiah and it come to pass that after abinadi have make an end of these saying that he say unto them have ye taught this people that they should observe to do all these thing for to keep these commandment ? mosiah i say unto you nay for if ye have the lord would not have cause me to come forth and to prophesy evil concern this people . mosiah and now ye have say that salvation cometh by the law of moses . i say unto you that it be expedient that ye should keep the law of moses a yet but i say unto you that the time shall come when it shall no more be expedient to keep the law of moses . mosiah and moreover i say unto you that salvation doth not come by the law alone and be it not for the atonement which god himself shall make for the sin and iniquity of his people that they must unavoidably perish notwithstanding the law of moses . mosiah and now i say unto you that it be expedient that there should be a law give to the child of israel yea even a very strict law for they be a stiffnecked people quick to do iniquity and slow to remember the lord their god mosiah therefore there be a law give them yea a law of performance and of ordinance a law which they be to observe strictly from day to day to keep them in remembrance of god and their duty towards him . mosiah but behold i say unto you that all these thing be type of thing to come . mosiah and now do they understand the law ? i say unto you nay they do not all understand the law and this because of the hardness of their heart for they understand not that there could not any man be save except it be through the redemption of god . mosiah for behold do not moses prophesy unto them concern the come of the messiah and that god should redeem his people ? yea and even all the prophet who have prophesy ever since the world begin have they not speak more or less concern these thing ? mosiah have they not say that god himself should come down among the child of men and take upon him the form of man and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth ? mosiah yea and have they not say also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead and that he himself should be oppress and afflict ? mosiah chapter mosiah yea even doth not isaiah say who hath believe our report and to whom be the arm of the lord reveal ? mosiah for he shall grow up before him a a tender plant and a a root out of dry ground he hath no form nor comeliness and when we shall see him there be no beauty that we should desire him . mosiah he be despise and reject of men a man of sorrow and acquaint with grief and we hide a it be our face from him he be despise and we esteem him not . mosiah surely he have bear our grief and carry our sorrow yet we do esteem him stricken smitten of god and afflict . mosiah but he be wound for our transgression he be bruise for our iniquity the chastisement of our peace be upon him and with his stripe we be heal . mosiah all we like sheep have go astray we have turn every one to his own way and the lord hath lay on him the iniquity of u all . mosiah he be oppress and he be afflict yet he open not his mouth he be bring a a lamb to the slaughter and a a sheep before her shearer be dumb so he open not his mouth . mosiah he be take from prison and from judgment and who shall declare his generation ? for he be cut off out of the land of the living for the transgression of my people be he stricken . mosiah and he make his grave with the wicked and with the rich in his death because he have do no evil neither be any deceit in his mouth . mosiah yet it please the lord to bruise him he hath put him to grief when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin he shall see his seed he shall prolong his day and the pleasure of the lord shall prosper in his hand . mosiah he shall see the travail of his soul and shall be satisfy by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many for he shall bear their iniquity . mosiah therefore will i divide him a portion with the great and he shall divide the spoil with the strong because he hath pour out his soul unto death and he be number with the transgressor and he bore the sin of many and make intercession for the transgressor . mosiah chapter mosiah and now abinadi say unto them i would that ye should understand that god himself shall come down among the child of men and shall redeem his people . mosiah and because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be call the son of god and have subject the flesh to the will of the father be the father and the son mosiah the father because he be conceive by the power of god and the son because of the flesh thus become the father and son mosiah and they be one god yea the very eternal father of heaven and of earth . mosiah and thus the flesh become subject to the spirit or the son to the father be one god suffereth temptation and yieldeth not to the temptation but suffereth himself to be mock and scourge and cast out and disown by his people . mosiah and after all this after work many mighty miracle among the child of men he shall be lead yea even a isaiah say a a sheep before the shearer be dumb so he open not his mouth . mosiah yea even so he shall be lead crucified and slay the flesh become subject even unto death the will of the son be swallow up in the will of the father . mosiah and thus god breaketh the band of death have gain the victory over death give the son power to make intercession for the child of men mosiah have ascend into heaven have the bowel of mercy be fill with compassion towards the child of men stand betwixt them and justice have break the band of death take upon himself their iniquity and their transgression have redeem them and satisfy the demand of justice . mosiah and now i say unto you who shall declare his generation ? behold i say unto you that when his soul have be make an offering for sin he shall see his seed . and now what say ye ? and who shall be his seed ? mosiah behold i say unto you that whosoever have hear the word of the prophet yea all the holy prophet who have prophesy concern the come of the lord i say unto you that all those who have hearken unto their word and believe that the lord would redeem his people and have look forward to that day for a remission of their sin i say unto you that these be his seed or they be heir of the kingdom of god . mosiah for these be they whose sin he have bear these be they for whom he have die to redeem them from their transgression . and now be they not his seed ? mosiah yea and be not the prophet every one that have open his mouth to prophesy that have not fall into transgression i mean all the holy prophet ever since the world begin ? i say unto you that they be his seed . mosiah and these be they who have publish peace who have bring good tidings of good who have publish salvation and say unto zion thy god reigneth ! mosiah and o how beautiful upon the mountain be their foot ! mosiah and again how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of those that be still publish peace ! mosiah and again how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of those who shall hereafter publish peace yea from this time henceforth and forever ! mosiah and behold i say unto you this be not all . for o how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of him that bringeth good tidings that be the founder of peace yea even the lord who have redeem his people yea him who have grant salvation unto his people mosiah for be it not for the redemption which he hath make for his people which be prepare from the foundation of the world i say unto you be it not for this all mankind must have perish . mosiah but behold the band of death shall be break and the son reigneth and hath power over the dead therefore he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead . mosiah and there cometh a resurrection even a first resurrection yea even a resurrection of those that have be and who be and who shall be even until the resurrection of christ for so shall he be call . mosiah and now the resurrection of all the prophet and all those that have believe in their word or all those that have keep the commandment of god shall come forth in the first resurrection therefore they be the first resurrection . mosiah they be raise to dwell with god who have redeem them thus they have eternal life through christ who have break the band of death . mosiah and these be those who have part in the first resurrection and these be they that have die before christ come in their ignorance not have salvation declare unto them . and thus the lord bringeth about the restoration of these and they have a part in the first resurrection or have eternal life be redeem by the lord . mosiah and little child also have eternal life . mosiah but behold and fear and tremble before god for ye ought to tremble for the lord redeemeth none such that rebel against him and die in their sin yea even all those that have perish in their sin ever since the world begin that have wilfully rebel against god that have know the commandment of god and would not keep them these be they that have no part in the first resurrection . mosiah therefore ought ye not to tremble ? for salvation cometh to none such for the lord hath redeem none such yea neither can the lord redeem such for he can not deny himself for he can not deny justice when it have it claim . mosiah and now i say unto you that the time shall come that the salvation of the lord shall be declare to every nation kindred tongue and people . mosiah yea lord thy watchman shall lift up their voice with the voice together shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye when the lord shall bring again zion . mosiah break forth into joy sing together ye waste place of jerusalem for the lord hath comfort his people he hath redeem jerusalem . mosiah the lord hath make bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nation and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of our god . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that after abinadi have speak these word he stretch forth his hand and say the time shall come when all shall see the salvation of the lord when every nation kindred tongue and people shall see eye to eye and shall confess before god that his judgment be just . mosiah and then shall the wicked be cast out and they shall have cause to howl and weep and wail and gnash their teeth and this because they would not hearken unto the voice of the lord therefore the lord redeemeth them not . mosiah for they be carnal and devilish and the devil have power over them yea even that old serpent that do beguile our first parent which be the cause of their fall which be the cause of all mankind become carnal sensual devilish know evil from good subject themselves to the devil . mosiah thus all mankind be lose and behold they would have be endlessly lose be it not that god redeem his people from their lose and fall state . mosiah but remember that he that persist in his own carnal nature and go on in the way of sin and rebellion against god remaineth in his fallen state and the devil hath all power over him . therefore he be a though there be no redemption make be an enemy to god and also be the devil an enemy to god . mosiah and now if christ have not come into the world speaking of thing to come a though they have already come there could have be no redemption . mosiah and if christ have not rise from the dead or have break the band of death that the grave should have no victory and that death should have no sting there could have be no resurrection . mosiah but there be a resurrection therefore the grave hath no victory and the sting of death be swallow up in christ . mosiah he be the light and the life of the world yea a light that be endless that can never be darken yea and also a life which be endless that there can be no more death . mosiah even this mortal shall put on immortality and this corruption shall put on incorruption and shall be bring to stand before the bar of god to be judge of him accord to their work whether they be good or whether they be evil mosiah if they be good to the resurrection of endless life and happiness and if they be evil to the resurrection of endless damnation be deliver up to the devil who hath subject them which be damnation mosiah have go accord to their own carnal will and desire have never call upon the lord while the arm of mercy be extend towards them for the arm of mercy be extend towards them and they would not they be warn of their iniquity and yet they would not depart from them and they be command to repent and yet they would not repent . mosiah and now ought ye not to tremble and repent of your sin and remember that only in and through christ ye can be save ? mosiah therefore if ye teach the law of moses also teach that it be a shadow of those thing which be to come mosiah teach them that redemption cometh through christ the lord who be the very eternal father . amen . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that when abinadi have finish these saying that the king command that the priest should take him and cause that he should be put to death . mosiah but there be one among them whose name be alma he also be a descendant of nephi . and he be a young man and he believe the word which abinadi have speak for he know concern the iniquity which abinadi have testify against them therefore he begin to plead with the king that he would not be angry with abinadi but suffer that he might depart in peace . mosiah but the king be more wroth and cause that alma should be cast out from among them and send his servant after him that they might slay him . mosiah but he flee from before them and hide himself that they find him not . and he be conceal for many day do write all the word which abinadi have speak . mosiah and it come to pass that the king cause that his guard should surround abinadi and take him and they bind him and cast him into prison . mosiah and after three day have counsel with his priest he cause that he should again be bring before him . mosiah and he say unto him abinadi we have find an accusation against thee and thou art worthy of death . mosiah for thou hast say that god himself should come down among the child of men and now for this cause thou shalt be put to death unless thou wilt recall all the word which thou hast speak evil concern me and my people . mosiah now abinadi say unto him i say unto you i will not recall the word which i have speak unto you concern this people for they be true and that ye may know of their surety i have suffer myself that i have fall into your hand . mosiah yea and i will suffer even until death and i will not recall my word and they shall stand a a testimony against you . and if ye slay me ye will shed innocent blood and this shall also stand a a testimony against you at the last day . mosiah and now king noah be about to release him for he fear his word for he fear that the judgment of god would come upon him . mosiah but the priest lift up their voice against him and begin to accuse him say he have revile the king . therefore the king be stir up in anger against him and he deliver him up that he might be slay . mosiah and it come to pass that they take him and bind him and scourge his skin with faggot yea even unto death . mosiah and now when the flame begin to scorch him he cry unto them say mosiah behold even a ye have do unto me so shall it come to pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer the pain that i do suffer even the pain of death by fire and this because they believe in the salvation of the lord their god . mosiah and it will come to pass that ye shall be afflict with all manner of disease because of your iniquity . mosiah yea and ye shall be smite on every hand and shall be drive and scatter to and fro even a a wild flock be drive by wild and ferocious beast . mosiah and in that day ye shall be hunt and ye shall be take by the hand of your enemy and then ye shall suffer a i suffer the pain of death by fire . mosiah thus god executeth vengeance upon those that destroy his people . o god receive my soul . mosiah and now when abinadi have say these word he fell have suffer death by fire yea have be put to death because he would not deny the commandment of god have seal the truth of his word by his death . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that alma who have flee from the servant of king noah repent of his sin and iniquity and go about privately among the people and begin to teach the word of abinadi mosiah yea concern that which be to come and also concern the resurrection of the dead and the redemption of the people which be to be bring to pass through the power and suffering and death of christ and his resurrection and ascension into heaven . mosiah and as many a would hear his word he do teach . and he teach them privately that it might not come to the knowledge of the king . and many do believe his word . mosiah and it come to pass that as many a do believe him do go forth to a place which be call mormon have receive it name from the king be in the border of the land have be infest by time or at season by wild beast . mosiah now there be in mormon a fountain of pure water and alma resort thither there be near the water a thicket of small tree where he do hide himself in the daytime from the search of the king . mosiah and it come to pass that as many a believe him go thither to hear his word . mosiah and it come to pass after many day there be a goodly number gather together at the place of mormon to hear the word of alma . yea all be gather together that believe on his word to hear him . and he do teach them and do preach unto them repentance and redemption and faith on the lord . mosiah and it come to pass that he say unto them behold here be the water of mormon for thus be they call and now a ye be desirous to come into the fold of god and to be call his people and be willing to bear one another 's burden that they may be light mosiah yea and be willing to mourn with those that mourn yea and comfort those that stand in need of comfort and to stand a witness of god at all time and in all thing and in all place that ye may be in even until death that ye may be redeem of god and be number with those of the first resurrection that ye may have eternal life mosiah now i say unto you if this be the desire of your heart what have you against be baptize in the name of the lord a a witness before him that ye have enter into a covenant with him that ye will serve him and keep his commandment that he may pour out his spirit more abundantly upon you ? mosiah and now when the people have hear these word they clap their hand for joy and exclaim this be the desire of our heart . mosiah and now it come to pass that alma take helam he be one of the first and go and stand forth in the water and cry say o lord pour out thy spirit upon thy servant that he may do this work with holiness of heart . mosiah and when he have say these word the spirit of the lord be upon him and he say helam i baptize thee have authority from the almighty god a a testimony that ye have enter into a covenant to serve him until you be dead a to the mortal body and may the spirit of the lord be pour out upon you and may he grant unto you eternal life through the redemption of christ whom he have prepare from the foundation of the world . mosiah and after alma have say these word both alma and helam be bury in the water and they arise and come forth out of the water rejoice be fill with the spirit . mosiah and again alma take another and go forth a second time into the water and baptize him accord to the first only he do not bury himself again in the water . mosiah and after this manner he do baptize every one that go forth to the place of mormon and they be in number about two hundred and four soul yea and they be baptize in the water of mormon and be fill with the grace of god . mosiah and they be call the church of god or the church of christ from that time forward . and it come to pass that whosoever be baptize by the power and authority of god be add to his church . mosiah and it come to pass that alma have authority from god ordain priest even one priest to every fifty of their number do he ordain to preach unto them and to teach them concern the thing pertain to the kingdom of god . mosiah and he command them that they should teach nothing save it be the thing which he have teach and which have be speak by the mouth of the holy prophet . mosiah yea even he command them that they should preach nothing save it be repentance and faith on the lord who have redeem his people . mosiah and he command them that there should be no contention one with another but that they should look forward with one eye have one faith and one baptism have their heart knit together in unity and in love one towards another . mosiah and thus he command them to preach . and thus they become the child of god . mosiah and he command them that they should observe the sabbath day and keep it holy and also every day they should give thanks to the lord their god . mosiah and he also command them that the priest whom he have ordain should labor with their own hand for their support . mosiah and there be one day in every week that be set apart that they should gather themselves together to teach the people and to worship the lord their god and also as often a it be in their power to assemble themselves together . mosiah and the priest be not to depend upon the people for their support but for their labor they be to receive the grace of god that they might wax strong in the spirit have the knowledge of god that they might teach with power and authority from god . mosiah and again alma command that the people of the church should impart of their substance every one accord to that which he have if he have more abundantly he should impart more abundantly and of him that have but little but little should be require and to him that have not should be give . mosiah and thus they should impart of their substance of their own free will and good desire towards god and to those priest that stand in need yea and to every needy naked soul . mosiah and this he say unto them have be command of god and they do walk uprightly before god impart to one another both temporally and spiritually accord to their need and their want . mosiah and now it come to pass that all this be do in mormon yea by the water of mormon in the forest that be near the water of mormon yea the place of mormon the water of mormon the forest of mormon how beautiful be they to the eye of them who there come to the knowledge of their redeemer yea and how bless be they for they shall sing to his praise forever . mosiah and these thing be do in the border of the land that they might not come to the knowledge of the king . mosiah but behold it come to pass that the king have discover a movement among the people send his servant to watch them . therefore on the day that they be assemble themselves together to hear the word of the lord they be discover unto the king . mosiah and now the king say that alma be stir up the people to rebellion against him therefore he send his army to destroy them . mosiah and it come to pass that alma and the people of the lord be apprise of the come of the king 's army therefore they take their tent and their family and depart into the wilderness . mosiah and they be in number about four hundred and fifty soul . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that the army of the king return have search in vain for the people of the lord . mosiah and now behold the force of the king be small have be reduce and there begin to be a division among the remainder of the people . mosiah and the less part begin to breathe out threatenings against the king and there begin to be a great contention among them . mosiah and now there be a man among them whose name be gideon and he be a strong man and an enemy to the king therefore he draw his sword and swore in his wrath that he would slay the king . mosiah and it come to pass that he fight with the king and when the king saw that he be about to overpower him he flee and run and get upon the tower which be near the temple . mosiah and gideon pursue after him and be about to get upon the tower to slay the king and the king cast his eye round about towards the land of shemlon and behold the army of the lamanites be within the border of the land . mosiah and now the king cry out in the anguish of his soul say gideon spare me for the lamanites be upon u and they will destroy u yea they will destroy my people . mosiah and now the king be not so much concern about his people a he be about his own life nevertheless gideon do spare his life . mosiah and the king command the people that they should flee before the lamanites and he himself do go before them and they do flee into the wilderness with their woman and their child . mosiah and it come to pass that the lamanites do pursue them and do overtake them and begin to slay them . mosiah now it come to pass that the king command them that all the men should leave their wife and their child and flee before the lamanites . mosiah now there be many that would not leave them but have rather stay and perish with them . and the rest leave their wife and their child and flee . mosiah and it come to pass that those who tarry with their wife and their child cause that their fair daughter should stand forth and plead with the lamanites that they would not slay them . mosiah and it come to pass that the lamanites have compassion on them for they be charm with the beauty of their woman . mosiah therefore the lamanites do spare their life and take them captive and carry them back to the land of nephi and grant unto them that they might possess the land under the condition that they would deliver up king noah into the hand of the lamanites and deliver up their property even one half of all they possess one half of their gold and their silver and all their precious thing and thus they should pay tribute to the king of the lamanites from year to year . mosiah and now there be one of the son of the king among those that be take captive whose name be limhi . mosiah and now limhi be desirous that his father should not be destroy nevertheless limhi be not ignorant of the iniquity of his father he himself be a just man . mosiah and it come to pass that gideon send men into the wilderness secretly to search for the king and those that be with him . and it come to pass that they meet the people in the wilderness all save the king and his priest . mosiah now they have swear in their heart that they would return to the land of nephi and if their wife and their child be slain and also those that have tarry with them that they would seek revenge and also perish with them . mosiah and the king command them that they should not return and they be angry with the king and cause that he should suffer even unto death by fire . mosiah and they be about to take the priest also and put them to death and they flee before them . mosiah and it come to pass that they be about to return to the land of nephi and they meet the men of gideon . and the men of gideon tell them of all that have happen to their wife and their child and that the lamanites have grant unto them that they might possess the land by pay a tribute to the lamanites of one half of all they possess . mosiah and the people tell the men of gideon that they have slay the king and his priest have flee from them far into the wilderness . mosiah and it come to pass that after they have end the ceremony that they return to the land of nephi rejoicing because their wife and their child be not slay and they tell gideon what they have do to the king . mosiah and it come to pass that the king of the lamanites make an oath unto them that his people should not slay them . mosiah and also limhi be the son of the king have the kingdom confer upon him by the people make oath unto the king of the lamanites that his people should pay tribute unto him even one half of all they possess . mosiah and it come to pass that limhi begin to establish the kingdom and to establish peace among his people . mosiah and the king of the lamanites set guard round about the land that he might keep the people of limhi in the land that they might not depart into the wilderness and he do support his guard out of the tribute which he do receive from the nephites . mosiah and now king limhi do have continual peace in his kingdom for the space of two year that the lamanites do not molest them nor seek to destroy them . mosiah chapter mosiah now there be a place in shemlon where the daughter of the lamanites do gather themselves together to sing and to dance and to make themselves merry . mosiah and it come to pass that there be one day a small number of them gather together to sing and to dance . mosiah and now the priest of king noah be ashamed to return to the city of nephi yea and also fear that the people would slay them therefore they durst not return to their wife and their child . mosiah and have tarry in the wilderness and have discover the daughter of the lamanites they lay and watch them mosiah and when there be but few of them gather together to dance they come forth out of their secret place and take them and carry them into the wilderness yea twenty and four of the daughter of the lamanites they carry into the wilderness . mosiah and it come to pass that when the lamanites find that their daughter have be miss they be angry with the people of limhi for they think it be the people of limhi . mosiah therefore they send their army forth yea even the king himself go before his people and they go up to the land of nephi to destroy the people of limhi . mosiah and now limhi have discover them from the tower even all their preparation for war do he discover therefore he gather his people together and laid wait for them in the field and in the forest . mosiah and it come to pass that when the lamanites have come up that the people of limhi begin to fall upon them from their waiting place and begin to slay them . mosiah and it come to pass that the battle become exceedingly sore for they fight like lion for their prey . mosiah and it come to pass that the people of limhi begin to drive the lamanites before them yet they be not half so numerous a the lamanites . but they fight for their life and for their wife and for their child therefore they exert themselves and like dragon do they fight . mosiah and it come to pass that they find the king of the lamanites among the number of their dead yet he be not dead have be wound and leave upon the ground so speedy be the flight of his people . mosiah and they take him and bind up his wound and bring him before limhi and say behold here be the king of the lamanites he have receive a wound have fall among their dead and they have leave him and behold we have bring him before you and now let u slay him . mosiah but limhi say unto them ye shall not slay him but bring him hither that i may see him . and they bring him . and limhi say unto him what cause have ye to come up to war against my people ? behold my people have not break the oath that i make unto you therefore why should ye break the oath which ye make unto my people ? mosiah and now the king say i have break the oath because thy people do carry away the daughter of my people therefore in my anger i do cause my people to come up to war against thy people . mosiah and now limhi have hear nothing concern this matter therefore he say i will search among my people and whosoever have do this thing shall perish . therefore he cause a search to be make among his people . mosiah now when gideon have hear these thing he be the king 's captain he go forth and say unto the king i pray thee forbear and do not search this people and lay not this thing to their charge . mosiah for do ye not remember the priest of thy father whom this people seek to destroy ? and be they not in the wilderness ? and be not they the one who have steal the daughter of the lamanites ? mosiah and now behold and tell the king of these thing that he may tell his people that they may be pacify towards u for behold they be already prepare to come against u and behold also there be but few of u . mosiah and behold they come with their numerous host and except the king doth pacify them towards u we must perish . mosiah for be not the word of abinadi fulfil which he prophesy against u and all this because we would not hearken unto the word of the lord and turn from our iniquity ? mosiah and now let u pacify the king and we fulfil the oath which we have make unto him for it be well that we should be in bondage than that we should lose our life therefore let u put a stop to the shedding of so much blood . mosiah and now limhi tell the king all the thing concern his father and the priest that have flee into the wilderness and attribute the carry away of their daughter to them . mosiah and it come to pass that the king be pacify towards his people and he say unto them let u go forth to meet my people without arm and i swear unto you with an oath that my people shall not slay thy people . mosiah and it come to pass that they follow the king and go forth without arm to meet the lamanites . and it come to pass that they do meet the lamanites and the king of the lamanites do bow himself down before them and do plead in behalf of the people of limhi . mosiah and when the lamanites saw the people of limhi that they be without arm they have compassion on them and be pacify towards them and return with their king in peace to their own land . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that limhi and his people return to the city of nephi and begin to dwell in the land again in peace . mosiah and it come to pass that after many day the lamanites begin again to be stir up in anger against the nephites and they begin to come into the border of the land round about . mosiah now they durst not slay them because of the oath which their king have make unto limhi but they would smite them on their cheek and exercise authority over them and begin to put heavy burden upon their back and drive them a they would a dumb as mosiah yea all this be do that the word of the lord might be fulfil . mosiah and now the affliction of the nephites be great and there be no way that they could deliver themselves out of their hand for the lamanites have surround them on every side . mosiah and it come to pass that the people begin to murmur with the king because of their affliction and they begin to be desirous to go against them to battle . and they do afflict the king sorely with their complaint therefore he grant unto them that they should do accord to their desire . mosiah and they gather themselves together again and put on their armor and go forth against the lamanites to drive them out of their land . mosiah and it come to pass that the lamanites do beat them and drive them back and slew many of them . mosiah and now there be a great mourning and lamentation among the people of limhi the widow mourning for her husband the son and the daughter mourn for their father and the brother for their brother . mosiah now there be a great many widow in the land and they do cry mightily from day to day for a great fear of the lamanites have come upon them . mosiah and it come to pass that their continual cry do stir up the remainder of the people of limhi to anger against the lamanites and they go again to battle but they be drive back again suffer much loss . mosiah yea they go again even the third time and suffer in the like manner and those that be not slay return again to the city of nephi . mosiah and they do humble themselves even to the dust subject themselves to the yoke of bondage submit themselves to be smite and to be drive to and fro and burden accord to the desire of their enemy . mosiah and they do humble themselves even in the depth of humility and they do cry mightily to god yea even all the day long do they cry unto their god that he would deliver them out of their affliction . mosiah and now the lord be slow to hear their cry because of their iniquity nevertheless the lord do hear their cry and begin to soften the heart of the lamanites that they begin to ease their burden yet the lord do not see fit to deliver them out of bondage . mosiah and it come to pass that they begin to prosper by degree in the land and begin to raise grain more abundantly and flock and herd that they do not suffer with hunger . mosiah now there be a great number of woman more than there be of men therefore king limhi command that every man should impart to the support of the widow and their child that they might not perish with hunger and this they do because of the greatness of their number that have be slay . mosiah now the people of limhi kept together in a body as much a it be possible and secure their grain and their flock mosiah and the king himself do not trust his person without the wall of the city unless he take his guard with him fear that he might by some mean fall into the hand of the lamanites . mosiah and he cause that his people should watch the land round about that by some mean they might take those priest that flee into the wilderness who have steal the daughter of the lamanites and that have cause such a great destruction to come upon them . mosiah for they be desirous to take them that they might punish them for they have come into the land of nephi by night and carry off their grain and many of their precious thing therefore they lay wait for them . mosiah and it come to pass that there be no more disturbance between the lamanites and the people of limhi even until the time that ammon and his brother come into the land . mosiah and the king have be without the gate of the city with his guard discover ammon and his brother and suppose them to be priest of noah therefore he cause that they should be take and bind and cast into prison . and have they be the priest of noah he would have cause that they should be put to death . mosiah but when he find that they be not but that they be his brother and have come from the land of zarahemla he be fill with exceedingly great joy . mosiah now king limhi have send previous to the come of ammon a small number of men to search for the land of zarahemla but they could not find it and they be lose in the wilderness . mosiah nevertheless they do find a land which have be people yea a land which be cover with dry bone yea a land which have be people and which have be destroy and they have suppose it to be the land of zarahemla return to the land of nephi have arrive in the border of the land not many day before the come of ammon . mosiah and they bring a record with them even a record of the people whose bone they have find and it be engraven on plate of ore. mosiah and now limhi be again fill with joy in learn from the mouth of ammon that king mosiah have a gift from god whereby he could interpret such engraving yea and ammon also do rejoice . mosiah yet ammon and his brother be fill with sorrow because so many of their brother have be slay mosiah and also that king noah and his priest have cause the people to commit so many sin and iniquity against god and they also do mourn for the death of abinadi and also for the departure of alma and the people that go with him who have form a church of god through the strength and power of god and faith on the word which have be speak by abinadi . mosiah yea they do mourn for their departure for they know not whither they have flee . now they would have gladly join with them for they themselves have enter into a covenant with god to serve him and keep his commandment . mosiah and now since the come of ammon king limhi have also enter into a covenant with god and also many of his people to serve him and keep his commandment . mosiah and it come to pass that king limhi and many of his people be desirous to be baptize but there be none in the land that have authority from god . and ammon decline do this thing consider himself an unworthy servant . mosiah therefore they do not at that time form themselves into a church wait upon the spirit of the lord . now they be desirous to become even a alma and his brother who have flee into the wilderness . mosiah they be desirous to be baptize a a witness and a testimony that they be willing to serve god with all their heart nevertheless they do prolong the time and an account of their baptism shall be give hereafter . mosiah and now all the study of ammon and his people and king limhi and his people be to deliver themselves out of the hand of the lamanites and from bondage . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that ammon and king limhi begin to consult with the people how they should deliver themselves out of bondage and even they do cause that all the people should gather themselves together and this they do that they might have the voice of the people concern the matter . mosiah and it come to pass that they could find no way to deliver themselves out of bondage except it be to take their woman and child and their flock and their herd and their tent and depart into the wilderness for the lamanites be so numerous it be impossible for the people of limhi to contend with them think to deliver themselves out of bondage by the sword . mosiah now it come to pass that gideon go forth and stand before the king and say unto him now o king thou hast hitherto hearken unto my word many time when we have be contend with our brother the lamanites . mosiah and now o king if thou hast not find me to be an unprofitable servant or if thou hast hitherto listen to my word in any degree and they have be of service to thee even so i desire that thou wouldst listen to my word at this time and i will be thy servant and deliver this people out of bondage . mosiah and the king grant unto him that he might speak . and gideon say unto him mosiah behold the back pas through the back wall on the back side of the city . the lamanites or the guard of the lamanites by night be drunken therefore let u send a proclamation among all this people that they gather together their flock and herd that they may drive them into the wilderness by night . mosiah and i will go accord to thy command and pay the last tribute of wine to the lamanites and they will be drunken and we will pass through the secret pas on the left of their camp when they be drunken and asleep . mosiah thus we will depart with our woman and our child our flock and our herd into the wilderness and we will travel around the land of shilom . mosiah and it come to pass that the king hearken unto the word of gideon . mosiah and king limhi cause that his people should gather their flock together and he send the tribute of wine to the lamanites and he also send more wine a a present unto them and they do drink freely of the wine which king limhi do send unto them . mosiah and it come to pass that the people of king limhi do depart by night into the wilderness with their flock and their herd and they go round about the land of shilom in the wilderness and bend their course towards the land of zarahemla be lead by ammon and his brother . mosiah and they have take all their gold and silver and their precious thing which they could carry and also their provision with them into the wilderness and they pursue their journey . mosiah and after be many day in the wilderness they arrive in the land of zarahemla and join mosiah 's people and become his subject . mosiah and it come to pass that mosiah receive them with joy and he also receive their record and also the record which have be find by the people of limhi . mosiah and now it come to pass when the lamanites have find that the people of limhi have depart out of the land by night that they send an army into the wilderness to pursue them mosiah and after they have pursue them two day they could no longer follow their track therefore they be lose in the wilderness . mosiah chapter mosiah now alma have be warn of the lord that the army of king noah would come upon them and have make it know to his people therefore they gather together their flock and take of their grain and depart into the wilderness before the army of king noah . mosiah and the lord do strengthen them that the people of king noah could not overtake them to destroy them . mosiah and they flee eight day ' journey into the wilderness . mosiah and they come to a land yea even a very beautiful and pleasant land a land of pure water . mosiah and they pitch their tent and begin to till the ground and begin to build building yea they be industrious and do labor exceedingly . mosiah and the people be desirous that alma should be their king for he be beloved by his people . mosiah but he say unto them behold it be not expedient that we should have a king for thus saith the lord ye shall not esteem one flesh above another or one man shall not think himself above another therefore i say unto you it be not expedient that ye should have a king . mosiah nevertheless if it be possible that ye could always have just men to be your king it would be well for you to have a king . mosiah but remember the iniquity of king noah and his priest and i myself be catch in a snare and do many thing which be abominable in the sight of the lord which cause me sore repentance mosiah nevertheless after much tribulation the lord do hear my cry and do answer my prayer and have make me an instrument in his hand in bring so many of you to a knowledge of his truth . mosiah nevertheless in this i do not glory for i be unworthy to glory of myself . mosiah and now i say unto you ye have be oppress by king noah and have be in bondage to him and his priest and have be bring into iniquity by them therefore ye be bind with the band of iniquity . mosiah and now a ye have be deliver by the power of god out of these bond yea even out of the hand of king noah and his people and also from the bond of iniquity even so i desire that ye should stand fast in this liberty wherewith ye have be make free and that ye trust no man to be a king over you . mosiah and also trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister except he be a man of god walking in his way and keep his commandment . mosiah thus do alma teach his people that every man should love his neighbor a himself that there should be no contention among them . mosiah and now alma be their high priest he be the founder of their church . mosiah and it come to pass that none receive authority to preach or to teach except it be by him from god . therefore he consecrate all their priest and all their teacher and none be consecrate except they be just men . mosiah therefore they do watch over their people and do nourish them with thing pertain to righteousness . mosiah and it come to pass that they begin to prosper exceedingly in the land and they call the land helam . mosiah and it come to pass that they do multiply and prosper exceedingly in the land of helam and they build a city which they call the city of helam . mosiah nevertheless the lord seeth fit to chasten his people yea he trieth their patience and their faith . mosiah nevertheless whosoever putteth his trust in him the same shall be lift up at the last day . yea and thus it be with this people . mosiah for behold i will show unto you that they be bring into bondage and none could deliver them but the lord their god yea even the god of abraham and isaac and of jacob . mosiah and it come to pass that he do deliver them and he do show forth his mighty power unto them and great be their rejoicing . mosiah for behold it come to pass that while they be in the land of helam yea in the city of helam while till the land round about behold an army of the lamanites be in the border of the land . mosiah now it come to pass that the brother of alma flee from their field and gather themselves together in the city of helam and they be much frighten because of the appearance of the lamanites . mosiah but alma go forth and stood among them and exhort them that they should not be frighten but that they should remember the lord their god and he would deliver them . mosiah therefore they hush their fear and begin to cry unto the lord that he would soften the heart of the lamanites that they would spare them and their wife and their child . mosiah and it come to pass the the lord do soften the heart of the lamanites . and alma and his brother go forth and deliver themselves up into their hand and the lamanites take possession of the land of helam . mosiah now the army of the lamanites which have follow after the people of king limhi have be lose in the wilderness for many day . mosiah and behold they have find those priest of king noah in a place which they call amulon and they have begin to possess the land of amulon and have begin to till the ground . mosiah now the name of the leader of those priest be amulon . mosiah and it come to pass that amulon do plead with the lamanites and he also send forth their wife who be the daughter of the lamanites to plead with their brother that they should not destroy their husband . mosiah and the lamanites have compassion on amulon and his brother and do not destroy them because of their wife . mosiah and amulon and his brother do join the lamanites and they be travel in the wilderness in search of the land of nephi when they discover the land of helam which be possess by alma and his brother . mosiah and it come to pass that the lamanites promise unto alma and his brother that if they would show them the way which lead to the land of nephi that they would grant unto them their life and their liberty . mosiah but after alma have show them the way that lead to the land of nephi the lamanites would not keep their promise but they set guard round about the land of helam over alma and his brother . mosiah and the remainder of them go to the land of nephi and a part of them return to the land of helam and also bring with them the wife and the child of the guard who have be leave in the land . mosiah and the king of the lamanites have grant unto amulon that he should be a king and a ruler over his people who be in the land of helam nevertheless he should have no power to do anything contrary to the will of the king of the lamanites . mosiah chapter mosiah and it come to pass that amulon do gain favor in the eye of the king of the lamanites therefore the king of the lamanites grant unto him and his brother that they should be appoint teacher over his people yea even over the people who be in the land of shemlon and in the land of shilom and in the land of amulon . mosiah for the lamanites have take possession of all these land therefore the king of the lamanites have appoint king over all these land . mosiah and now the name of the king of the lamanites be laman be call after the name of his father and therefore he be call king laman . and he be king over a numerous people . mosiah and he appoint teacher of the brother of amulon in every land which be possess by his people and thus the language of nephi begin to be teach among all the people of the lamanites . mosiah and they be a people friendly one with another nevertheless they know not god neither do the brother of amulon teach them anything concern the lord their god neither the law of moses nor do they teach them the word of abinadi mosiah but they teach them that they should keep their record and that they might write one to another . mosiah and thus the lamanites begin to increase in rich and begin to trade one with another and wax great and begin to be a cunning and a wise people a to the wisdom of the world yea a very cunning people delight in all manner of wickedness and plunder except it be among their own brother . mosiah and now it come to pass that amulon begin to exercise authority over alma and his brother and begin to persecute him and cause that his child should persecute their child . mosiah for amulon know alma that he have be one of the king 's priest and that it be he that believe the word of abinadi and be drive out before the king and therefore he be wroth with him for he be subject to king laman yet he exercise authority over them and put task upon them and put task master over them . mosiah and it come to pass that so great be their affliction that they begin to cry mightily to god . mosiah and amulon command them that they should stop their cry and he put guard over them to watch them that whosoever should be find call upon god should be put to death . mosiah and alma and his people do not raise their voice to the lord their god but do pour out their heart to him and he do know the thought of their heart . mosiah and it come to pass that the voice of the lord come to them in their affliction say lift up your head and be of good comfort for i know of the covenant which ye have make unto me and i will covenant with my people and deliver them out of bondage . mosiah and i will also ease the burden which be put upon your shoulder that even you can not feel them upon your back even while you be in bondage and this will i do that ye may stand a witness for me hereafter and that ye may know of a surety that i the lord god do visit my people in their affliction . mosiah and now it come to pass that the burden which be lay upon alma and his brother be make light yea the lord do strengthen them that they could bear up their burden with ease and they do submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the lord . mosiah and it come to pass that so great be their faith and their patience that the voice of the lord come unto them again say be of good comfort for on the morrow i will deliver you out of bondage . mosiah and he say unto alma thou shalt go before this people and i will go with thee and deliver this people out of bondage . mosiah now it come to pass that alma and his people in the night time gather their flock together and also of their grain yea even all the night time be they gather the flock together . mosiah and in the morning the lord cause a deep sleep to come upon the lamanites yea and all their task master be in a profound sleep . mosiah and alma and his people depart into the wilderness and when they have travel all day they pitch their tent in a valley and they call the valley alma because he lead their way in the wilderness . mosiah yea and in the valley of alma they pour out their thanks to god because he have be merciful unto them and ease their burden and have deliver them out of bondage for they be in bondage and none could deliver them except it be the lord their god . mosiah and they give thanks to god yea all their men and all their woman and all their child that could speak lift their voice in the praise of their god . mosiah and now the lord say unto alma haste thee and get thou and this people out of this land for the lamanites have awaken and do pursue thee therefore get thee out of this land and i will stop the lamanites in this valley that they come no further in pursuit of this people . mosiah and it come to pass that they depart out of the valley and take their journey into the wilderness . mosiah and after they have be in the wilderness twelve day they arrive in the land of zarahemla and king mosiah do also receive them with joy . mosiah chapter mosiah and now king mosiah cause that all the people should be gather together . mosiah now there be not so many of the child of nephi or so many of those who be descendant of nephi a there be of the people of zarahemla who be a descendant of mulek and those who come with him into the wilderness . mosiah and there be not so many of the people of nephi and of the people of zarahemla a there be of the lamanites yea they be not half so numerous . mosiah and now all the people of nephi be assemble together and also all the people of zarahemla and they be gather together in two body . mosiah and it come to pass that mosiah do read and cause to be read the record of zeniff to his people yea he read the record of the people of zeniff from the time they leave the land of zarahemla until they return again . mosiah and he also read the account of alma and his brother and all their affliction from the time they leave the land of zarahemla until the time they return again . mosiah and now when mosiah have make an end of read the record his people who tarry in the land be strike with wonder and amazement . mosiah for they know not what to think for when they behold those that have be deliver out of bondage they be fill with exceedingly great joy . mosiah and again when they think of their brother who have be slay by the lamanites they be fill with sorrow and even shed many tear of sorrow . mosiah and again when they think of the immediate goodness of god and his power in deliver alma and his brother out of the hand of the lamanites and of bondage they do raise their voice and give thanks to god . mosiah and again when they think upon the lamanites who be their brother of their sinful and polluted state they be fill with pain and anguish for the welfare of their soul . mosiah and it come to pass that those who be the child of amulon and his brother who have take to wife the daughter of the lamanites be displease with the conduct of their father and they would no longer be call by the name of their father therefore they take upon themselves the name of nephi that they might be call the child of nephi and be number among those who be call nephites . mosiah and now all the people of zarahemla be number with the nephites and this because the kingdom have be confer upon none but those who be descendant of nephi . mosiah and now it come to pass that when mosiah have make an end of speaking and reading to the people he desire that alma should also speak to the people . mosiah and alma do speak unto them when they be assemble together in large body and he go from one body to another preach unto the people repentance and faith on the lord . mosiah and he do exhort the people of limhi and his brother all those that have be deliver out of bondage that they should remember that it be the lord that do deliver them . mosiah and it come to pass that after alma have teach the people many thing and have make an end of speak to them that king limhi be desirous that he might be baptize and all his people be desirous that they might be baptize also . mosiah therefore alma do go forth into the water and do baptize them yea he do baptize them after the manner he do his brother in the water of mormon yea and as many a he do baptize do belong to the church of god and this because of their belief on the word of alma . mosiah and it come to pass that king mosiah grant unto alma that he might establish church throughout all the land of zarahemla and give him power to ordain priest and teacher over every church . mosiah now this be do because there be so many people that they could not all be govern by one teacher neither could they all hear the word of god in one assembly mosiah therefore they do assemble themselves together in different body be call church every church have their priest and their teacher and every priest preach the word accord a it be deliver to him by the mouth of alma . mosiah and thus notwithstanding there be many church they be all one church yea even the church of god for there be nothing preach in all the church except it be repentance and faith in god . mosiah and now there be seven church in the land of zarahemla . and it come to pass that whosoever be desirous to take upon them the name of christ or of god they do join the church of god mosiah and they be call the people of god . and the lord do pour out his spirit upon them and they be bless and prosper in the land . mosiah chapter mosiah now it come to pass that there be many of the rise generation that could not understand the word of king benjamin be little child at the time he spake unto his people and they do not believe the tradition of their father . mosiah they do not believe what have be say concern the resurrection of the dead neither do they believe concern the come of christ . mosiah and now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of god and their heart be harden . mosiah and they would not be baptize neither would they join the church . and they be a separate people a to their faith and remain so ever after even in their carnal and sinful state for they would not call upon the lord their god . mosiah and now in the reign of mosiah they be not half so numerous a the people of god but because of the dissension among the brother they become more numerous . mosiah for it come to pass that they do deceive many with their flattering word who be in the church and do cause them to commit many sin therefore it become expedient that those who commit sin that be in the church should be admonish by the church . mosiah and it come to pass that they be bring before the priest and deliver up unto the priest by the teacher and the priest bring them before alma who be the high priest . mosiah now king mosiah have give alma the authority over the church . mosiah and it come to pass that alma do not know concern them but there be many witness against them yea the people stand and testify of their iniquity in abundance . mosiah now there have not any such thing happen before in the church therefore alma be trouble in his spirit and he cause that they should be bring before the king . mosiah and he say unto the king behold here be many whom we have bring before thee who be accuse of their brother yea and they have be take in diver iniquity . and they do not repent of their iniquity therefore we have bring them before thee that thou mayest judge them accord to their crime . mosiah but king mosiah say unto alma behold i judge them not therefore i deliver them into thy hand to be judge . mosiah and now the spirit of alma be again troubled and he go and inquire of the lord what he should do concern this matter for he fear that he should do wrong in the sight of god . mosiah and it come to pass that after he have pour out his whole soul to god the voice of the lord come to him say mosiah bless art thou alma and bless be they who be baptize in the water of mormon . thou art bless because of thy exceed faith in the word alone of my servant abinadi . mosiah and bless be they because of their exceed faith in the word alone which thou hast speak unto them . mosiah and bless art thou because thou hast establish a church among this people and they shall be establish and they shall be my people . mosiah yea bless be this people who be willing to bear my name for in my name shall they be call and they be mine . mosiah and because thou hast inquired of me concern the transgressor thou art bless . mosiah thou art my servant and i covenant with thee that thou shalt have eternal life and thou shalt serve me and go forth in my name and shalt gather together my sheep . mosiah and he that will hear my voice shall be my sheep and him shall ye receive into the church and him will i also receive . mosiah for behold this be my church whosoever be baptize shall be baptize unto repentance . and whomsoever ye receive shall believe in my name and him will i freely forgive . mosiah for it be i that taketh upon me the sin of the world for it be i that hath create them and it be i that granteth unto him that believeth unto the end a place at my right hand . mosiah for behold in my name be they call and if they know me they shall come forth and shall have a place eternally at my right hand . mosiah and it shall come to pass that when the second trump shall sound then shall they that never know me come forth and shall stand before me . mosiah and then shall they know that i be the lord their god that i be their redeemer but they would not be redeem . mosiah and then i will confess unto them that i never know them and they shall depart into everlasting fire prepare for the devil and his angel . mosiah therefore i say unto you that he that will not hear my voice the same shall ye not receive into my church for him i will not receive at the last day . mosiah therefore i say unto you go and whosoever transgresseth against me him shall ye judge accord to the sin which he have commit and if he confess his sin before thee and me and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart him shall ye forgive and i will forgive him also . mosiah yea and as often a my people repent will i forgive them their trespass against me . mosiah and ye shall also forgive one another your trespass for verily i say unto you he that forgiveth not his neighbor 's trespass when he say that he repent the same hath bring himself under condemnation . mosiah now i say unto you go and whosoever will not repent of his sin the same shall not be number among my people and this shall be observe from this time forward . mosiah and it come to pass when alma have hear these word he write them down that he might have them and that he might judge the people of that church accord to the commandment of god . mosiah and it come to pass that alma go and judge those that have be take in iniquity accord to the word of the lord . mosiah and whosoever repent of their sin and do confess them them he do number among the people of the church mosiah and those that would not confess their sin and repent of their iniquity the same be not number among the people of the church and their name be blot out . mosiah and it come to pass that alma do regulate all the affair of the church and they begin again to have peace and to prosper exceedingly in the affair of the church walk circumspectly before god receive many and baptize many . mosiah and now all these thing do alma and his fellow laborer do who be over the church walking in all diligence teach the word of god in all thing suffer all manner of affliction be persecute by all those who do not belong to the church of god . mosiah and they do admonish their brother and they be also admonish every one by the word of god accord to his sin or to the sin which he have commit be command of god to pray without cease and to give thanks in all thing . mosiah chapter mosiah and now it come to pass that the persecution which be inflict on the church by the unbeliever become so great that the church begin to murmur and complain to their leader concern the matter and they do complain to alma . and alma lay the case before their king mosiah . and mosiah consult with his priest . mosiah and it come to pass that king mosiah send a proclamation throughout the land round about that there should not any unbeliever persecute any of those who belong to the church of god . mosiah and there be a strict command throughout all the church that there should be no persecution among them that there should be an equality among all men mosiah that they should let no pride nor haughtiness disturb their peace that every man should esteem his neighbor a himself labor with their own hand for their support . mosiah yea and all their priest and teacher should labor with their own hand for their support in all case save it be in sickness or in much want and do these thing they do abound in the grace of god . mosiah and there begin to be much peace again in the land and the people begin to be very numerous and begin to scatter abroad upon the face of the earth yea on the north and on the south on the east and on the west build large city and village in all quarter of the land . mosiah and the lord do visit them and prosper them and they become a large and wealthy people . mosiah now the son of mosiah be number among the unbeliever and also one of the son of alma be number among them he be call alma after his father nevertheless he become a very wicked and an idolatrous man . and he be a man of many word and do speak much flattery to the people therefore he lead many of the people to do after the manner of his iniquity . mosiah and he become a great hinderment to the prosperity of the church of god steal away the heart of the people cause much dissension among the people give a chance for the enemy of god to exercise his power over them . mosiah and now it come to pass that while he be go about to destroy the church of god for he do go about secretly with the son of mosiah seek to destroy the church and to lead astray the people of the lord contrary to the commandment of god or even the king mosiah and a i say unto you a they be go about rebel against god behold the angel of the lord appear unto them and he descend a it be in a cloud and he spake a it be with a voice of thunder which cause the earth to shake upon which they stand mosiah and so great be their astonishment that they fell to the earth and understood not the word which he spake unto them . mosiah nevertheless he cry again say alma arise and stand forth for why persecutest thou the church of god ? for the lord hath say this be my church and i will establish it and nothing shall overthrow it save it be the transgression of my people . mosiah and again the angel say behold the lord hath hear the prayer of his people and also the prayer of his servant alma who be thy father for he have pray with much faith concern thee that thou mightest be bring to the knowledge of the truth therefore for this purpose have i come to convince thee of the power and authority of god that the prayer of his servant might be answer accord to their faith . mosiah and now behold can ye dispute the power of god ? for behold doth not my voice shake the earth ? and can ye not also behold me before you ? and i be send from god . mosiah now i say unto thee go and remember the captivity of thy father in the land of helam and in the land of nephi and remember how great thing he have do for them for they be in bondage and he have deliver them . and now i say unto thee alma go thy way and seek to destroy the church no more that their prayer may be answer and this even if thou wilt of thyself be cast off . mosiah and now it come to pass that these be the last word which the angel spake unto alma and he depart . mosiah and now alma and those that be with him fell again to the earth for great be their astonishment for with their own eye they have behold an angel of the lord and his voice be a thunder which shake the earth and they know that there be nothing save the power of god that could shake the earth and cause it to tremble a though it would part asunder . mosiah and now the astonishment of alma be so great that he become dumb that he could not open his mouth yea and he become weak even that he could not move his hand therefore he be take by those that be with him and carry helpless even until he be lay before his father . mosiah and they rehearse unto his father all that have happen unto them and his father rejoice for he know that it be the power of god . mosiah and he cause that a multitude should be gather together that they might witness what the lord have do for his son and also for those that be with him . mosiah and he cause that the priest should assemble themselves together and they begin to fast and to pray to the lord their god that he would open the mouth of alma that he might speak and also that his limb might receive their strength that the eye of the people might be open to see and know of the goodness and glory of god . mosiah and it come to pass after they have fast and pray for the space of two day and two night the limb of alma receive their strength and he stand up and begin to speak unto them bid them to be of good comfort mosiah for say he i have repent of my sin and have be redeem of the lord behold i be bear of the spirit . mosiah and the lord say unto me marvel not that all mankind yea men and woman all nation kindred tongue and people must be bear again yea born of god change from their carnal and fallen state to a state of righteousness be redeem of god become his son and daughter mosiah and thus they become new creature and unless they do this they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of god . mosiah i say unto you unless this be the case they must be cast off and this i know because i be like to be cast off . mosiah nevertheless after wad through much tribulation repent nigh unto death the lord in mercy hath see fit to snatch me out of an everlasting burning and i be bear of god . mosiah my soul hath be redeem from the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity . i be in the dark abyss but now i behold the marvelous light of god . my soul be rack with eternal torment but i be snatch and my soul be pain no more . mosiah i reject my redeemer and deny that which have be speak of by our father but now that they may foresee that he will come and that he remembereth every creature of his create he will make himself manifest unto all . mosiah yea every knee shall bow and every tongue confess before him . yea even at the last day when all men shall stand to be judge of him then shall they confess that he be god then shall they confess who live without god in the world that the judgment of an everlasting punishment be just upon them and they shall quake and tremble and shrink beneath the glance of his all search eye . mosiah and now it come to pass that alma begin from this time forward to teach the people and those who be with alma at the time the angel appear unto them travel round about through all the land publishing to all the people the thing which they have hear and see and preach the word of god in much tribulation be greatly persecute by those who be unbeliever be smite by many of them . mosiah but notwithstanding all this they do impart much consolation to the church confirm their faith and exhort them with long suffering and much travail to keep the commandment of god . mosiah and four of them be the son of mosiah and their name be ammon and aaron and omner and himni these be the name of the son of mosiah . mosiah and they travel throughout all the land of zarahemla and among all the people who be under the reign of king mosiah zealously strive to repair all the injury which they have do to the church confess all their sin and publish all the thing which they have see and explain the prophecy and the scripture to all who desire to hear them . mosiah and thus they be instrument in the hand of god in bring many to the knowledge of the truth yea to the knowledge of their redeemer . mosiah and how bless be they ! for they do publish peace they do publish good tidings of good and they do declare unto the people that the lord reigneth . mosiah chapter mosiah now it come to pass that after the son of mosiah have do all these thing they take a small number with them and return to their father the king and desire of him that he would grant unto them that they might with these whom they have select go up to the land of nephi that they might preach the thing which they have hear and that they might impart the word of god to their brother the lamanites mosiah that perhaps they might bring them to the knowledge of the lord their god and convince them of the iniquity of their father and that perhaps they might cure them of their hatred towards the nephites that they might also be bring to rejoice in the lord their god that they might become friendly to one another and that there should be no more contention in all the land which the lord their god have give them . mosiah now they be desirous that salvation should be declare to every creature for they could not bear that any human soul should perish yea even the very thought that any soul should endure endless torment do cause them to quake and tremble . mosiah and thus do the spirit of the lord work upon them for they be the very vile of sinner . and the lord saw fit in his infinite mercy to spare them nevertheless they suffer much anguish of soul because of their iniquity suffer much and fear that they should be cast off forever . mosiah and it come to pass that they do plead with their father many day that they might go up to the land of nephi . mosiah and king mosiah go and inquire of the lord if he should let his son go up among the lamanites to preach the word . mosiah and the lord say unto mosiah let them go up for many shall believe on their word and they shall have eternal life and i will deliver thy son out of the hand of the lamanites . mosiah and it come to pass that mosiah grant that they might go and do accord to their request . mosiah and they take their journey into the wilderness to go up to preach the word among the lamanites and i shall give an account of their proceeding hereafter . mosiah now king mosiah have no one to confer the kingdom upon for there be not any of his son who would accept of the kingdom . mosiah therefore he take the record which be engraven on the plate of brass and also the plate of nephi and all the thing which he have keep and preserve accord to the commandment of god after have translate and cause to be write the record which be on the plate of gold which have be find by the people of limhi which be deliver to him by the hand of limhi mosiah and this he do because of the great anxiety of his people for they be desirous beyond measure to know concern those people who have be destroy . mosiah and now he translate them by the mean of those two stone which be fasten into the two rim of a bow . mosiah now these thing be prepare from the beginning and be hand down from generation to generation for the purpose of interpret language mosiah and they have be keep and preserve by the hand of the lord that he should discover to every creature who should possess the land the iniquity and abomination of his people mosiah and whosoever have these thing be call seer after the manner of old time . mosiah now after mosiah have finish translate these record behold it give an account of the people who be destroy from the time that they be destroy back to the building of the great tower at the time the lord confound the language of the people and they be scatter abroad upon the face of all the earth yea and even from that time back until the creation of adam . mosiah now this account do cause the people of mosiah to mourn exceedingly yea they be fill with sorrow nevertheless it give them much knowledge in the which they do rejoice . mosiah and this account shall be write hereafter for behold it be expedient that all people should know the thing which be write in this account . mosiah and now a i say unto you that after king mosiah have do these thing he take the plate of brass and all the thing which he have keep and confer them upon alma who be the son of alma yea all the record and also the interpreter and confer them upon him and command him that he should keep and preserve them and also keep a record of the people hand them down from one generation to another even a they have be hand down from the time that lehi leave jerusalem . mosiah chapter mosiah now when mosiah have do this he send out throughout all the land among all the people desire to know their will concern who should be their king . mosiah and it come to pass that the voice of the people come say we be desirous that aaron thy son should be our king and our ruler . mosiah now aaron have go up to the land of nephi therefore the king could not confer the kingdom upon him neither would aaron take upon him the kingdom neither be any of the son of mosiah willing to take upon them the kingdom . mosiah therefore king mosiah send again among the people yea even a write word send he among the people . and these be the word that be write say mosiah behold o ye my people or my brother for i esteem you a such i desire that ye should consider the cause which ye be call to consider for ye be desirous to have a king . mosiah now i declare unto you that he to whom the kingdom doth rightly belong have decline and will not take upon him the kingdom . mosiah and now if there should be another appoint in his stead behold i fear there would rise contention among you . and who knoweth but what my son to whom the kingdom doth belong should turn to be angry and draw away a part of this people after him which would cause war and contention among you which would be the cause of shed much blood and pervert the way of the lord yea and destroy the soul of many people . mosiah now i say unto you let u be wise and consider these thing for we have no right to destroy my son neither should we have any right to destroy another if he should be appoint in his stead . mosiah and if my son should turn again to his pride and vain thing he would recall the thing which he have say and claim his right to the kingdom which would cause him and also this people to commit much sin . mosiah and now let u be wise and look forward to these thing and do that which will make for the peace of this people . mosiah therefore i will be your king the remainder of my day nevertheless let u appoint judge to judge this people accord to our law and we will newly arrange the affair of this people for we will appoint wise men to be judge that will judge this people accord to the commandment of god . mosiah now it be well that a man should be judge of god than of man for the judgment of god be always just but the judgment of man be not always just . mosiah therefore if it be possible that you could have just men to be your king who would establish the law of god and judge this people accord to his commandment yea if ye could have men for your king who would do even a my father benjamin do for this people i say unto you if this could always be the case then it would be expedient that ye should always have king to rule over you . mosiah and even i myself have labor with all the power and faculty which i have possess to teach you the commandment of god and to establish peace throughout the land that there should be no war nor contention no steal nor plunder nor murder nor any manner of iniquity mosiah and whosoever have commit iniquity him have i punish accord to the crime which he have commit accord to the law which have be give to u by our father . mosiah now i say unto you that because all men be not just it be not expedient that ye should have a king or king to rule over you . mosiah for behold how much iniquity doth one wicked king cause to be commit yea and what great destruction ! mosiah yea remember king noah his wickedness and his abomination and also the wickedness and abomination of his people . behold what great destruction do come upon them and also because of their iniquity they be bring into bondage . mosiah and be it not for the interposition of their all wise creator and this because of their sincere repentance they must unavoidably remain in bondage until now . mosiah but behold he do deliver them because they do humble themselves before him and because they cry mightily unto him he do deliver them out of bondage and thus doth the lord work with his power in all case among the child of men extend the arm of mercy towards them that put their trust in him . mosiah and behold now i say unto you ye can not dethrone an iniquitous king save it be through much contention and the shedding of much blood . mosiah for behold he have his friend in iniquity and he keepeth his guard about him and he teareth up the law of those who have reign in righteousness before him and he trampleth under his foot the commandment of god mosiah and he enacteth law and sendeth them forth among his people yea law after the manner of his own wickedness and whosoever doth not obey his law he causeth to be destroy and whosoever doth rebel against him he will send his army against them to war and if he can he will destroy them and thus an unrighteous king doth pervert the way of all righteousness . mosiah and now behold i say unto you it be not expedient that such abomination should come upon you . mosiah therefore choose you by the voice of this people judge that ye may be judge accord to the law which have be give you by our father which be correct and which be give them by the hand of the lord . mosiah now it be not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which be right but it be common for the less part of the people to desire that which be not right therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law to do your business by the voice of the people . mosiah and if the time come that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity then be the time that the judgment of god will come upon you yea then be the time he will visit you with great destruction even a he have hitherto visit this land . mosiah and now if ye have judge and they do not judge you accord to the law which have be give ye can cause that they may be judge of a high judge . mosiah if your high judge do not judge righteous judgment ye shall cause that a small number of your low judge should be gather together and they shall judge your high judge accord to the voice of the people . mosiah and i command you to do these thing in the fear of the lord and i command you to do these thing and that ye have no king that if these people commit sin and iniquity they shall be answer upon their own head . mosiah for behold i say unto you the sin of many people have be cause by the iniquity of their king therefore their iniquity be answer upon the head of their king . mosiah and now i desire that this inequality should be no more in this land especially among this my people but i desire that this land be a land of liberty and every man may enjoy his right and privilege alike so long a the lord see fit that we may live and inherit the land yea even as long a any of our posterity remain upon the face of the land . mosiah and many more thing do king mosiah write unto them unfold unto them all the trial and trouble of a righteous king yea all the travail of soul for their people and also all the murmuring of the people to their king and he explain it all unto them . mosiah and he tell them that these thing ought not to be but that the burden should come upon all the people that every man might bear his part . mosiah and he also unfold unto them all the disadvantage they labor under by have an unrighteous king to rule over them mosiah yea all his iniquity and abomination and all the war and contention and bloodshed and the stealing and the plundering and the committing of whoredom and all manner of iniquity which can not be enumerate tell them that these thing ought not to be that they be expressly repugnant to the commandment of god . mosiah and now it come to pass after king mosiah have send these thing forth among the people they be convince of the truth of his word . mosiah therefore they relinquish their desire for a king and become exceedingly anxious that every man should have an equal chance throughout all the land yea and every man express a willingness to answer for his own sin . mosiah therefore it come to pass that they assemble themselves together in body throughout the land to cast in their voice concern who should be their judge to judge them accord to the law which have be give them and they be exceedingly rejoice because of the liberty which have be grant unto them . mosiah and they do wax strong in love towards mosiah yea they do esteem him more than any other man for they do not look upon him a a tyrant who be seek for gain yea for that lucre which doth corrupt the soul for he have not exact rich of them neither have he delight in the shedding of blood but he have establish peace in the land and he have grant unto his people that they should be deliver from all manner of bondage therefore they do esteem him yea exceedingly beyond measure . mosiah and it come to pass that they do appoint judge to rule over them or to judge them accord to the law and this they do throughout all the land . mosiah and it come to pass that alma be appoint to be the first chief judge he be also the high priest his father have confer the office upon him and have give him the charge concern all the affair of the church . mosiah and now it come to pass that alma do walk in the way of the lord and he do keep his commandment and he do judge righteous judgment and there be continual peace through the land . mosiah and thus commence the reign of the judge throughout all the land of zarahemla among all the people who be call the nephites and alma be the first and chief judge . mosiah and now it come to pass that his father die be eighty and two year old have live to fulfil the commandment of god . mosiah and it come to pass that mosiah die also in the thirty and third year of his reign be sixty and three year old making in the whole five hundred and nine year from the time lehi leave jerusalem . mosiah and thus end the reign of the king over the people of nephi and thus end the day of alma who be the founder of their church . the book of alma the son of alma the account of alma who be the son of alma the first and chief judge over the people of nephi and also the high priest over the church . an account of the reign of the judge and the war and contention among the people . and also an account of a war between the nephites and the lamanites accord to the record of alma the first and chief judge . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that in the first year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi from this time forward king mosiah have go the way of all the earth have war a good warfare walk uprightly before god leave none to reign in his stead nevertheless he have establish law and they be acknowledge by the people therefore they be oblige to abide by the law which he have make . alma and it come to pass that in the first year of the reign of alma in the judgment seat there be a man bring before him to be judge a man who be large and be note for his much strength . alma and he have go about among the people preach to them that which he term to be the word of god bear down against the church declare unto the people that every priest and teacher ought to become popular and they ought not to labor with their hand but that they ought to be support by the people . alma and he also testify unto the people that all mankind should be save at the last day and that they need not fear nor tremble but that they might lift up their head and rejoice for the lord have create all men and have also redeem all men and in the end all men should have eternal life . alma and it come to pass that he do teach these thing so much that many do believe on his word even so many that they begin to support him and give him money . alma and he begin to be lift up in the pride of his heart and to wear very costly apparel yea and even begin to establish a church after the manner of his preaching . alma and it come to pass a he be go to preach to those who believe on his word he meet a man who belong to the church of god yea even one of their teacher and he begin to contend with him sharply that he might lead away the people of the church but the man withstand him admonish him with the word of god . alma now the name of the man be gideon and it be he who be an instrument in the hand of god in deliver the people of limhi out of bondage . alma now because gideon withstand him with the word of god he be wroth with gideon and draw his sword and begin to smite him . now gideon be stricken with many year therefore he be not able to withstand his blow therefore he be slay by the sword . alma and the man who slew him be take by the people of the church and be bring before alma to be judge accord to the crime which he have commit . alma and it come to pass that he stand before alma and plead for himself with much boldness . alma but alma say unto him behold this be the first time that priestcraft have be introduce among this people . and behold thou art not only guilty of priestcraft but hast endeavor to enforce it by the sword and be priestcraft to be enforce among this people it would prove their entire destruction . alma and thou hast shed the blood of a righteous man yea a man who have do much good among this people and be we to spare thee his blood would come upon u for vengeance . alma therefore thou art condemn to die accord to the law which have be give u by mosiah our last king and it have be acknowledge by this people therefore this people must abide by the law . alma and it come to pass that they take him and his name be nehor and they carry him upon the top of the hill manti and there he be cause or rather do acknowledge between the heaven and the earth that what he have teach to the people be contrary to the word of god and there he suffer an ignominious death . alma nevertheless this do not put an end to the spreading of priestcraft through the land for there be many who love the vain thing of the world and they go forth preach false doctrine and this they do for the sake of rich and honor . alma nevertheless they durst not lie if it be know for fear of the law for liar be punish therefore they pretend to preach accord to their belief and now the law could have no power on any man for his belief . alma and they durst not steal for fear of the law for such be punish neither durst they rob nor murder for he that murder be punish unto death . alma but it come to pass that whosoever do not belong to the church of god begin to persecute those that do belong to the church of god and have take upon them the name of christ . alma yea they do persecute them and afflict them with all manner of word and this because of their humility because they be not proud in their own eye and because they do impart the word of god one with another without money and without price . alma now there be a strict law among the people of the church that there should not any man belonging to the church arise and persecute those that do not belong to the church and that there should be no persecution among themselves . alma nevertheless there be many among them who begin to be proud and begin to contend warmly with their adversary even unto blow yea they would smite one another with their fist . alma now this be in the second year of the reign of alma and it be a cause of much affliction to the church yea it be the cause of much trial with the church . alma for the heart of many be harden and their name be blot out that they be remember no more among the people of god . and also many withdraw themselves from among them . alma now this be a great trial to those that do stand fast in the faith nevertheless they be steadfast and immovable in keep the commandment of god and they bore with patience the persecution which be heap upon them . alma and when the priest leave their labor to impart the word of god unto the people the people also leave their labor to hear the word of god . and when the priest have impart unto them the word of god they all return again diligently unto their labor and the priest not esteem himself above his hearer for the preacher be no good than the hearer neither be the teacher any good than the learner and thus they be all equal and they do all labor every man accord to his strength . alma and they do impart of their substance every man accord to that which he have to the poor and the needy and the sick and the afflict and they do not wear costly apparel yet they be neat and comely . alma and thus they do establish the affair of the church and thus they begin to have continual peace again notwithstanding all their persecution . alma and now because of the steadiness of the church they begin to be exceedingly rich have abundance of all thing whatsoever they stand in need an abundance of flock and herd and fatlings of every kind and also abundance of grain and of gold and of silver and of precious thing and abundance of silk and fine twin linen and all manner of good homely cloth . alma and thus in their prosperous circumstance they do not send away any who be naked or that be hungry or that be athirst or that be sick or that have not be nourish and they do not set their heart upon rich therefore they be liberal to all both old and young both bond and free both male and female whether out of the church or in the church have no respect to person a to those who stand in need . alma and thus they do prosper and become far more wealthy than those who do not belong to their church . alma for those who do not belong to their church do indulge themselves in sorcery and in idolatry or idleness and in babbling and in envyings and strife wear costly apparel be lift up in the pride of their own eye persecute lie thieve rob commit whoredom and murder and all manner of wickedness nevertheless the law be put in force upon all those who do transgress it inasmuch a it be possible . alma and it come to pass that by thus exercise the law upon them every man suffer accord to that which he have do they become more still and durst not commit any wickedness if it be know therefore there be much peace among the people of nephi until the fifth year of the reign of the judge . alma chapter alma and it come to pass in the commencement of the fifth year of their reign there begin to be a contention among the people for a certain man be call amlici he be a very cunning man yea a wise man a to the wisdom of the world he be after the order of the man that slew gideon by the sword who be execute accord to the law alma now this amlici have by his cunning draw away much people after him even so much that they begin to be very powerful and they begin to endeavor to establish amlici to be king over the people . alma now this be alarm to the people of the church and also to all those who have not be draw away after the persuasion of amlici for they know that accord to their law that such thing must be establish by the voice of the people . alma therefore if it be possible that amlici should gain the voice of the people he be a wicked man would deprive them of their right and privilege of the church for it be his intent to destroy the church of god . alma and it come to pass that the people assemble themselves together throughout all the land every man accord to his mind whether it be for or against amlici in separate body have much dispute and wonderful contention one with another . alma and thus they do assemble themselves together to cast in their voice concern the matter and they be lay before the judge . alma and it come to pass that the voice of the people come against amlici that he be not make king over the people . alma now this do cause much joy in the heart of those who be against him but amlici do stir up those who be in his favor to anger against those who be not in his favor . alma and it come to pass that they gather themselves together and do consecrate amlici to be their king . alma now when amlici be make king over them he command them that they should take up arm against their brother and this he do that he might subject them to him . alma now the people of amlici be distinguish by the name of amlici be call amlicites and the remainder be call nephites or the people of god . alma therefore the people of the nephites be aware of the intent of the amlicites and therefore they do prepare to meet them yea they do arm themselves with sword and with cimeters and with bow and with arrow and with stone and with sling and with all manner of weapon of war of every kind . alma and thus they be prepare to meet the amlicites at the time of their coming . and there be appoint captain and high captain and chief captain accord to their number . alma and it come to pass that amlici do arm his men with all manner of weapon of war of every kind and he also appoint ruler and leader over his people to lead them to war against their brother . alma and it come to pass that the amlicites come upon the hill amnihu which be east of the river sidon which ran by the land of zarahemla and there they begin to make war with the nephites . alma now alma be the chief judge and the governor of the people of nephi therefore he go up with his people yea with his captain and chief captain yea at the head of his army against the amlicites to battle . alma and they begin to slay the amlicites upon the hill east of sidon . and the amlicites do contend with the nephites with great strength insomuch that many of the nephites do fall before the amlicites . alma nevertheless the lord do strengthen the hand of the nephites that they slew the amlicites with great slaughter that they begin to flee before them . alma and it come to pass that the nephites do pursue the amlicites all that day and do slay them with much slaughter insomuch that there be slain of the amlicites twelve thousand five hundred thirty and two soul and there be slain of the nephites six thousand five hundred sixty and two soul . alma and it come to pass that when alma could pursue the amlicites no longer he cause that his people should pitch their tent in the valley of gideon the valley be call after that gideon who be slay by the hand of nehor with the sword and in this valley the nephites do pitch their tent for the night . alma and alma sent spy to follow the remnant of the amlicites that he might know of their plan and their plot whereby he might guard himself against them that he might preserve his people from be destroy . alma now those whom he have send out to watch the camp of the amlicites be call zeram and amnor and manti and limher these be they who go out with their men to watch the camp of the amlicites . alma and it come to pass that on the morrow they return into the camp of the nephites in great haste be greatly astonish and strike with much fear say alma behold we follow the camp of the amlicites and to our great astonishment in the land of minon above the land of zarahemla in the course of the land of nephi we saw a numerous host of the lamanites and behold the amlicites have join them alma and they be upon our brother in that land and they be flee before them with their flock and their wife and their child towards our city and except we make haste they obtain possession of our city and our father and our wife and our child be slay . alma and it come to pass that the people of nephi take their tent and depart out of the valley of gideon towards their city which be the city of zarahemla . alma and behold a they be cross the river sidon the lamanites and the amlicites be a numerous almost a it be a the sand of the sea come upon them to destroy them . alma nevertheless the nephites be strengthen by the hand of the lord have pray mightily to him that he would deliver them out of the hand of their enemy therefore the lord do hear their cry and do strengthen them and the lamanites and the amlicites do fall before them . alma and it come to pass that alma fight with amlici with the sword face to face and they do contend mightily one with another . alma and it come to pass that alma be a man of god be exercise with much faith cry say o lord have mercy and spare my life that i may be an instrument in thy hand to save and preserve this people . alma now when alma have say these word he contend again with amlici and he be strengthen insomuch that he slew amlici with the sword . alma and he also contend with the king of the lamanites but the king of the lamanites flee back from before alma and send his guard to contend with alma . alma but alma with his guard contend with the guard of the king of the lamanites until he slew and drive them back . alma and thus he clear the ground or rather the bank which be on the west of the river sidon throw the body of the lamanites who have be slay into the water of sidon that thereby his people might have room to cross and contend with the lamanites and the amlicites on the west side of the river sidon . alma and it come to pass that when they have all cross the river sidon that the lamanites and the amlicites begin to flee before them notwithstanding they be so numerous that they could not be number . alma and they flee before the nephites towards the wilderness which be west and north away beyond the border of the land and the nephites do pursue them with their might and do slay them . alma yea they be meet on every hand and slain and drive until they be scatter on the west and on the north until they have reach the wilderness which be call hermounts and it be that part of the wilderness which be infest by wild and ravenous beast . alma and it come to pass that many die in the wilderness of their wound and be devour by those beast and also the vulture of the air and their bone have be find and have be heap up on the earth . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that the nephites who be not slay by the weapon of war after have bury those who have be slain now the number of the slain be not number because of the greatness of their number after they have finish bury their dead they all return to their land and to their house and their wife and their child . alma now many woman and child have be slay with the sword and also many of their flock and their herd and also many of their field of grain be destroy for they be tread down by the host of men . alma and now a many of the lamanites and the amlicites who have be slay upon the bank of the river sidon be cast into the water of sidon and behold their bone be in the depth of the sea and they be many . alma and the amlicites be distinguish from the nephites for they have mark themselves with red in their forehead after the manner of the lamanites nevertheless they have not shorn their head like unto the lamanites . alma now the head of the lamanites be shorn and they be naked save it be skin which be gird about their loin and also their armor which be gird about them and their bow and their arrow and their stone and their sling and so forth . alma and the skin of the lamanites be dark accord to the mark which be set upon their father which be a curse upon them because of their transgression and their rebellion against their brother who consist of nephi jacob and joseph and sam who be just and holy men . alma and their brother seek to destroy them therefore they be curse and the lord god set a mark upon them yea upon laman and lemuel and also the son of ishmael and ishmaelitish woman . alma and this be do that their seed might be distinguish from the seed of their brother that thereby the lord god might preserve his people that they might not mix and believe in incorrect tradition which would prove their destruction . alma and it come to pass that whosoever do mingle his seed with that of the lamanites do bring the same curse upon his seed . alma therefore whosoever suffer himself to be lead away by the lamanites be call under that head and there be a mark set upon him . alma and it come to pass that whosoever would not believe in the tradition of the lamanites but believe those record which be bring out of the land of jerusalem and also in the tradition of their father which be correct who believe in the commandment of god and keep them be call the nephites or the people of nephi from that time forth alma and it be they who have keep the record which be true of their people and also of the people of the lamanites . alma now we will return again to the amlicites for they also have a mark set upon them yea they set the mark upon themselves yea even a mark of red upon their forehead . alma thus the word of god be fulfil for these be the word which he say to nephi behold the lamanites have i curse and i will set a mark on them that they and their seed may be separate from thee and thy seed from this time henceforth and forever except they repent of their wickedness and turn to me that i may have mercy upon them . alma and again i will set a mark upon him that mingleth his seed with thy brother that they may be curse also . alma and again i will set a mark upon him that fighteth against thee and thy seed . alma and again i say he that departeth from thee shall no more be call thy seed and i will bless thee and whomsoever shall be call thy seed henceforth and forever and these be the promise of the lord unto nephi and to his seed . alma now the amlicites know not that they be fulfil the word of god when they begin to mark themselves in their forehead nevertheless they have come out in open rebellion against god therefore it be expedient that the curse should fall upon them . alma now i would that ye should see that they bring upon themselves the curse and even so doth every man that be curse bring upon himself his own condemnation . alma now it come to pass that not many day after the battle which be fight in the land of zarahemla by the lamanites and the amlicites that there be another army of the lamanites come in upon the people of nephi in the same place where the first army meet the amlicites . alma and it come to pass that there be an army send to drive them out of their land . alma now alma himself be afflict with a wound do not go up to battle at this time against the lamanites alma but he send up a numerous army against them and they go up and slew many of the lamanites and drive the remainder of them out of the border of their land . alma and then they return again and begin to establish peace in the land be trouble no more for a time with their enemy . alma now all these thing be do yea all these war and contention be commence and end in the fifth year of the reign of the judge . alma and in one year be thousand and ten of thousand of souls sent to the eternal world that they might reap their reward accord to their work whether they be good or whether they be bad to reap eternal happiness or eternal misery accord to the spirit which they list to obey whether it be a good spirit or a bad one . alma for every man receiveth wage of him whom he listeth to obey and this accord to the word of the spirit of prophecy therefore let it be accord to the truth . and thus endeth the fifth year of the reign of the judge . alma chapter alma now it come to pass in the sixth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi there be no contention nor war in the land of zarahemla alma but the people be afflict yea greatly afflict for the loss of their brother and also for the loss of their flock and herd and also for the loss of their field of grain which be trodden under foot and destroy by the lamanites . alma and so great be their affliction that every soul have cause to mourn and they believe that it be the judgment of god send upon them because of their wickedness and their abomination therefore they be awaken to a remembrance of their duty . alma and they begin to establish the church more fully yea and many be baptize in the water of sidon and be join to the church of god yea they be baptize by the hand of alma who have be consecrate the high priest over the people of the church by the hand of his father alma . alma and it come to pass in the seventh year of the reign of the judge there be about three thousand five hundred soul that unite themselves to the church of god and be baptize . and thus endeth the seventh year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi and there be continual peace in all that time . alma and it come to pass in the eighth year of the reign of the judge that the people of the church begin to wax proud because of their exceeding rich and their fine silk and their fine twin linen and because of their many flock and herd and their gold and their silver and all manner of precious thing which they have obtain by their industry and in all these thing be they lift up in the pride of their eye for they begin to wear very costly apparel . alma now this be the cause of much affliction to alma yea and to many of the people whom alma have consecrate to be teacher and priest and elder over the church yea many of them be sorely grieve for the wickedness which they saw have begin to be among their people . alma for they saw and beheld with great sorrow that the people of the church begin to be lift up in the pride of their eye and to set their heart upon rich and upon the vain thing of the world that they begin to be scornful one towards another and they begin to persecute those that do not believe accord to their own will and pleasure . alma and thus in this eighth year of the reign of the judge there begin to be great contention among the people of the church yea there be envyings and strife and malice and persecution and pride even to exceed the pride of those who do not belong to the church of god . alma and thus end the eighth year of the reign of the judge and the wickedness of the church be a great stumbling block to those who do not belong to the church and thus the church begin to fail in it progress . alma and it come to pass in the commencement of the ninth year alma saw the wickedness of the church and he saw also that the example of the church begin to lead those who be unbeliever on from one piece of iniquity to another thus bring on the destruction of the people . alma yea he saw great inequality among the people some lift themselves up with their pride despise others turn their back upon the needy and the naked and those who be hungry and those who be athirst and those who be sick and afflicted . alma now this be a great cause for lamentation among the people while others be abase themselves succor those who stand in need of their succor such a impart their substance to the poor and the needy feed the hungry and suffer all manner of affliction for christ 's sake who should come accord to the spirit of prophecy alma look forward to that day thus retain a remission of their sin be fill with great joy because of the resurrection of the dead accord to the will and power and deliverance of jesus christ from the band of death . alma and now it come to pass that alma have see the affliction of the humble follower of god and the persecution which be heap upon them by the remainder of his people and see all their inequality begin to be very sorrowful nevertheless the spirit of the lord do not fail him . alma and he select a wise man who be among the elder of the church and give him power accord to the voice of the people that he might have power to enact law accord to the law which have be give and to put them in force accord to the wickedness and the crime of the people . alma now this man 's name be nephihah and he be appoint chief judge and he sit in the judgment seat to judge and to govern the people . alma now alma do not grant unto him the office of be high priest over the church but he retain the office of high priest unto himself but he deliver the judgment seat unto nephihah . alma and this he do that he himself might go forth among his people or among the people of nephi that he might preach the word of god unto them to stir them up in remembrance of their duty and that he might pull down by the word of god all the pride and craftiness and all the contention which be among his people see no way that he might reclaim them save it be in bear down in pure testimony against them . alma and thus in the commencement of the ninth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi alma deliver up the judgment seat to nephihah and confine himself wholly to the high priesthood of the holy order of god to the testimony of the word accord to the spirit of revelation and prophecy . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that alma begin to deliver the word of god unto the people first in the land of zarahemla and from thence throughout all the land . alma and these be the word which he spake to the people in the church which be establish in the city of zarahemla accord to his own record say alma i alma have be consecrate by my father alma to be a high priest over the church of god he have power and authority from god to do these thing behold i say unto you that he begin to establish a church in the land which be in the border of nephi yea the land which be call the land of mormon yea and he do baptize his brother in the water of mormon . alma and behold i say unto you they be deliver out of the hand of the people of king noah by the mercy and power of god . alma and behold after that they be bring into bondage by the hand of the lamanites in the wilderness yea i say unto you they be in captivity and again the lord do deliver them out of bondage by the power of his word and we be bring into this land and here we begin to establish the church of god throughout this land also . alma and now behold i say unto you my brother you that belong to this church have you sufficiently retain in remembrance the captivity of your father ? yea and have you sufficiently retain in remembrance his mercy and long suffering towards them ? and moreover have ye sufficiently retain in remembrance that he have deliver their soul from hell ? alma behold he change their heart yea he awaken them out of a deep sleep and they awake unto god . behold they be in the midst of darkness nevertheless their soul be illuminate by the light of the everlasting word yea they be encircle about by the band of death and the chain of hell and an everlasting destruction do await them . alma and now i ask of you my brother be they destroy ? behold i say unto you nay they be not . alma and again i ask be the band of death broken and the chain of hell which encircle them about be they loose ? i say unto you yea they be loose and their soul do expand and they do sing redeeming love . and i say unto you that they be save . alma and now i ask of you on what condition be they save ? yea what ground have they to hope for salvation ? what be the cause of their be loose from the band of death yea and also the chain of hell ? alma behold i can tell you do not my father alma believe in the word which be deliver by the mouth of abinadi ? and be he not a holy prophet ? do he not speak the word of god and my father alma believe them ? alma and accord to his faith there be a mighty change wrought in his heart . behold i say unto you that this be all true . alma and behold he preach the word unto your father and a mighty change be also work in their heart and they humble themselves and put their trust in the true and living god . and behold they be faithful until the end therefore they be save . alma and now behold i ask of you my brother of the church have ye spiritually be bear of god ? have ye receive his image in your countenance ? have ye experience this mighty change in your heart ? alma do ye exercise faith in the redemption of him who create you ? do you look forward with an eye of faith and view this mortal body raise in immortality and this corruption raise in incorruption to stand before god to be judge accord to the deed which have be do in the mortal body ? alma i say unto you can you imagine to yourselves that ye hear the voice of the lord say unto you in that day come unto me ye bless for behold your work have be the work of righteousness upon the face of the earth ? alma or do ye imagine to yourselves that ye can lie unto the lord in that day and say lord our work have be righteous work upon the face of the earth and that he will save you ? alma or otherwise can ye imagine yourselves bring before the tribunal of god with your soul fill with guilt and remorse have a remembrance of all your guilt yea a perfect remembrance of all your wickedness yea a remembrance that ye have set at defiance the commandment of god ? alma i say unto you can ye look up to god at that day with a pure heart and clean hand ? i say unto you can you look up have the image of god engraven upon your countenance ? alma i say unto you can ye think of be save when you have yield yourselves to become subject to the devil ? alma i say unto you ye will know at that day that ye can not be save for there can no man be save except his garment be wash white yea his garment must be purify until they be cleanse from all stain through the blood of him of whom it have be speak by our father who should come to redeem his people from their sin . alma and now i ask of you my brethren how will any of you feel if ye shall stand before the bar of god have your garment stain with blood and all manner of filthiness ? behold what will these thing testify against you ? alma behold will they not testify that ye be murderer yea and also that ye be guilty of all manner of wickedness ? alma behold my brother do ye suppose that such an one can have a place to sit down in the kingdom of god with abraham with isaac and with jacob and also all the holy prophet whose garment be cleanse and be spotless pure and white ? alma i say unto you nay except ye make our creator a liar from the beginning or suppose that he be a liar from the begin ye can not suppose that such can have place in the kingdom of heaven but they shall be cast out for they be the child of the kingdom of the devil . alma and now behold i say unto you my brother if ye have experience a change of heart and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeem love i would ask can ye feel so now ? alma have ye walk keep yourselves blameless before god ? could ye say if ye be call to die at this time within yourselves that ye have be sufficiently humble ? that your garment have be cleanse and make white through the blood of christ who will come to redeem his people from their sin ? alma behold be ye stripped of pride ? i say unto you if ye be not ye be not prepared to meet god . behold ye must prepare quickly for the kingdom of heaven be soon at hand and such an one hath not eternal life . alma behold i say be there one among you who be not strip of envy ? i say unto you that such an one be not prepared and i would that he should prepare quickly for the hour be close at hand and he knoweth not when the time shall come for such an one be not find guiltless . alma and again i say unto you be there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother or that heapeth upon him persecution ? alma wo unto such an one for he be not prepared and the time be at hand that he must repent or he can not be save ! alma yea even wo unto all ye worker of iniquity repent repent for the lord god hath speak it ! alma behold he sendeth an invitation unto all men for the arm of mercy be extend towards them and he saith repent and i will receive you . alma yea he saith come unto me and ye shall partake of the fruit of the tree of life yea ye shall eat and drink of the bread and the water of life freely alma yea come unto me and bring forth work of righteousness and ye shall not be hew down and cast into the fire alma for behold the time be at hand that whosoever bringeth forth not good fruit or whosoever doeth not the work of righteousness the same have cause to wail and mourn . alma o ye worker of iniquity ye that be puff up in the vain thing of the world ye that have profess to have know the way of righteousness nevertheless have go astray a sheep have no shepherd notwithstanding a shepherd hath call after you and be still call after you but ye will not hearken unto his voice ! alma behold i say unto you that the good shepherd doth call you yea and in his own name he doth call you which be the name of christ and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd to the name by which ye be call behold ye be not the sheep of the good shepherd . alma and now if ye be not the sheep of the good shepherd of what fold be ye ? behold i say unto you that the devil be your shepherd and ye be of his fold and now who can deny this ? behold i say unto you whosoever denieth this be a liar and a child of the devil . alma for i say unto you that whatsoever be good cometh from god and whatsoever be evil cometh from the devil . alma therefore if a man bringeth forth good work he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd and he doth follow him but whosoever bringeth forth evil work the same becometh a child of the devil for he hearkeneth unto his voice and doth follow him . alma and whosoever doeth this must receive his wage of him therefore for his wage he receiveth death a to thing pertain unto righteousness be dead unto all good work . alma and now my brother i would that ye should hear me for i speak in the energy of my soul for behold i have speak unto you plainly that ye can not err or have speak accord to the commandment of god . alma for i be call to speak after this manner accord to the holy order of god which be in christ jesus yea i be command to stand and testify unto this people the thing which have be speak by our father concern the thing which be to come . alma and this be not all . do ye not suppose that i know of these thing myself ? behold i testify unto you that i do know that these thing whereof i have speak be true . and how do ye suppose that i know of their surety ? alma behold i say unto you they be make know unto me by the holy spirit of god . behold i have fast and pray many day that i might know these thing of myself . and now i do know of myself that they be true for the lord god hath make them manifest unto me by his holy spirit and this be the spirit of revelation which be in me . alma and moreover i say unto you that it have thus be reveal unto me that the word which have be speak by our father be true even so accord to the spirit of prophecy which be in me which be also by the manifestation of the spirit of god . alma i say unto you that i know of myself that whatsoever i shall say unto you concern that which be to come be true and i say unto you that i know that jesus christ shall come yea the son the only begotten of the father full of grace and mercy and truth . and behold it be he that cometh to take away the sin of the world yea the sin of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name . alma and now i say unto you that this be the order after which i be call yea to preach unto my beloved brother yea and every one that dwelleth in the land yea to preach unto all both old and young both bond and free yea i say unto you the age and also the middle age and the rise generation yea to cry unto them that they must repent and be bear again . alma yea thus saith the spirit repent all ye end of the earth for the kingdom of heaven be soon at hand yea the son of god cometh in his glory in his might majesty power and dominion . yea my beloved brother i say unto you that the spirit saith behold the glory of the king of all the earth and also the king of heaven shall very soon shine forth among all the child of men . alma and also the spirit saith unto me yea crieth unto me with a mighty voice say go forth and say unto this people repent for except ye repent ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of heaven . alma and again i say unto you the spirit saith behold the ax be lay at the root of the tree therefore every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hew down and cast into the fire yea a fire which can not be consume even an unquenchable fire . behold and remember the holy one hath speak it . alma and now my beloved brother i say unto you can ye withstand these saying yea can ye lay aside these thing and trample the holy one under your foot yea can ye be puff up in the pride of your heart yea will ye still persist in the wearing of costly apparel and set your heart upon the vain thing of the world upon your rich ? alma yea will ye persist in suppose that ye be good one than another yea will ye persist in the persecution of your brother who humble themselves and do walk after the holy order of god wherewith they have be bring into this church have be sanctify by the holy spirit and they do bring forth work which be meet for repentance alma yea and will you persist in turn your back upon the poor and the needy and in withhold your substance from them ? alma and finally all ye that will persist in your wickedness i say unto you that these be they who shall be hew down and cast into the fire except they speedily repent . alma and now i say unto you all you that be desirous to follow the voice of the good shepherd come ye out from the wicked and be ye separate and touch not their unclean thing and behold their name shall be blot out that the name of the wicked shall not be number among the name of the righteous that the word of god may be fulfil which saith the name of the wicked shall not be mingle with the name of my people alma for the name of the righteous shall be write in the book of life and unto them will i grant an inheritance at my right hand . and now my brother what have ye to say against this ? i say unto you if ye speak against it it matter not for the word of god must be fulfil . alma for what shepherd be there among you have many sheep doth not watch over them that the wolf enter not and devour his flock ? and behold if a wolf enter his flock doth he not drive him out ? yea and at the last if he can he will destroy him . alma and now i say unto you that the good shepherd doth call after you and if you will hearken unto his voice he will bring you into his fold and ye be his sheep and he commandeth you that ye suffer no ravenous wolf to enter among you that ye may not be destroy . alma and now i alma do command you in the language of him who hath command me that ye observe to do the word which i have speak unto you . alma i speak by way of command unto you that belong to the church and unto those who do not belong to the church i speak by way of invitation say come and be baptize unto repentance that ye also may be partaker of the fruit of the tree of life . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that after alma have make an end of speak unto the people of the church which be establish in the city of zarahemla he ordain priest and elder by lay on his hand accord to the order of god to preside and watch over the church . alma and it come to pass that whosoever do not belong to the church who repent of their sin be baptize unto repentance and be receive into the church . alma and it also come to pass that whosoever do belong to the church that do not repent of their wickedness and humble themselves before god i mean those who be lift up in the pride of their heart the same be reject and their name be blot out that their name be not number among those of the righteous . alma and thus they begin to establish the order of the church in the city of zarahemla . alma now i would that ye should understand that the word of god be liberal unto all that none be deprive of the privilege of assemble themselves together to hear the word of god . alma nevertheless the child of god be command that they should gather themselves together oft and join in fasting and mighty prayer in behalf of the welfare of the soul of those who know not god . alma and now it come to pass that when alma have make these regulation he depart from them yea from the church which be in the city of zarahemla and go over upon the east of the river sidon into the valley of gideon there have be a city build which be call the city of gideon which be in the valley that be call gideon be call after the man who be slay by the hand of nehor with the sword . alma and alma go and begin to declare the word of god unto the church which be establish in the valley of gideon accord to the revelation of the truth of the word which have be speak by his father and accord to the spirit of prophecy which be in him accord to the testimony of jesus christ the son of god who should come to redeem his people from their sin and the holy order by which he be call . and thus it be write . amen . alma chapter alma behold my beloved brother see that i have be permit to come unto you therefore i attempt to address you in my language yea by my own mouth see that it be the first time that i have speak unto you by the word of my mouth i have be wholly confine to the judgment seat have have much business that i could not come unto you . alma and even i could not have come now at this time be it not that the judgment seat hath be give to another to reign in my stead and the lord in much mercy hath grant that i should come unto you . alma and behold i have come have great hope and much desire that i should find that ye have humble yourselves before god and that ye have continue in the supplicating of his grace that i should find that ye be blameless before him that i should find that ye be not in the awful dilemma that our brother be in at zarahemla . alma but bless be the name of god that he hath give me to know yea hath give unto me the exceedingly great joy of know that they be establish again in the way of his righteousness . alma and i trust accord to the spirit of god which be in me that i shall also have joy over you nevertheless i do not desire that my joy over you should come by the cause of so much affliction and sorrow which i have have for the brother at zarahemla for behold my joy cometh over them after wad through much affliction and sorrow . alma but behold i trust that ye be not in a state of so much unbelief a be your brother i trust that ye be not lift up in the pride of your heart yea i trust that ye have not set your heart upon rich and the vain thing of the world yea i trust that you do not worship idol but that ye do worship the true and living god and that ye look forward for the remission of your sin with an everlasting faith which be to come . alma for behold i say unto you there be many thing to come and behold there be one thing which be of more importance than they all for behold the time be not far distant that the redeemer liveth and cometh among his people . alma behold i do not say that he will come among u at the time of his dwelling in his mortal tabernacle for behold the spirit hath not say unto me that this should be the case . now a to this thing i do not know but this much i do know that the lord god hath power to do all thing which be accord to his word . alma but behold the spirit hath say this much unto me say cry unto this people say repent ye and prepare the way of the lord and walk in his path which be straight for behold the kingdom of heaven be at hand and the son of god cometh upon the face of the earth . alma and behold he shall be bear of mary at jerusalem which be the land of our forefather she be a virgin a precious and chosen vessel who shall be overshadow and conceive by the power of the holy ghost and bring forth a son yea even the son of god . alma and he shall go forth suffer pain and affliction and temptation of every kind and this that the word might be fulfil which saith he will take upon him the pain and the sickness of his people . alma and he will take upon him death that he may loose the band of death which bind his people and he will take upon him their infirmity that his bowel may be fill with mercy accord to the flesh that he may know accord to the flesh how to succor his people accord to their infirmity . alma now the spirit knoweth all thing nevertheless the son of god suffereth accord to the flesh that he might take upon him the sin of his people that he might blot out their transgression accord to the power of his deliverance and now behold this be the testimony which be in me . alma now i say unto you that ye must repent and be bear again for the spirit saith if ye be not bear again ye can not inherit the kingdom of heaven therefore come and be baptize unto repentance that ye may be wash from your sin that ye may have faith on the lamb of god who taketh away the sin of the world who be mighty to save and to cleanse from all unrighteousness . alma yea i say unto you come and fear not and lay aside every sin which easily doth beset you which doth bind you down to destruction yea come and go forth and show unto your god that ye be willing to repent of your sin and enter into a covenant with him to keep his commandment and witness it unto him this day by go into the water of baptism . alma and whosoever doeth this and keepeth the commandment of god from thenceforth the same will remember that i say unto him yea he will remember that i have say unto him he shall have eternal life accord to the testimony of the holy spirit which testifieth in me . alma and now my beloved brother do you believe these thing ? behold i say unto you yea i know that ye believe them and the way that i know that ye believe them be by the manifestation of the spirit which be in me . and now because your faith be strong concern that yea concern the thing which i have speak great be my joy . alma for a i say unto you from the beginning that i have much desire that ye be not in the state of dilemma like your brother even so i have find that my desire have be gratify . alma for i perceive that ye be in the path of righteousness i perceive that ye be in the path which lead to the kingdom of god yea i perceive that ye be make his path straight . alma i perceive that it have be make know unto you by the testimony of his word that he can not walk in crooked path neither doth he vary from that which he hath say neither hath he a shadow of turn from the right to the left or from that which be right to that which be wrong therefore his course be one eternal round . alma and he doth not dwell in unholy temple neither can filthiness or anything which be unclean be receive into the kingdom of god therefore i say unto you the time shall come yea and it shall be at the last day that he who be filthy shall remain in his filthiness . alma and now my beloved brother i have say these thing unto you that i might awaken you to a sense of your duty to god that ye may walk blameless before him that ye may walk after the holy order of god after which ye have be receive . alma and now i would that ye should be humble and be submissive and gentle easy to be entreat full of patience and long suffer be temperate in all thing be diligent in keep the commandment of god at all time ask for whatsoever thing ye stand in need both spiritual and temporal always return thanks unto god for whatsoever thing ye do receive . alma and see that ye have faith hope and charity and then ye will always abound in good work . alma and may the lord bless you and keep your garment spotless that ye may at last be bring to sit down with abraham isaac and jacob and the holy prophet who have be ever since the world begin have your garment spotless even a their garment be spotless in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out . alma and now my beloved brother i have speak these word unto you accord to the spirit which testifieth in me and my soul doth exceedingly rejoice because of the exceed diligence and heed which ye have give unto my word . alma and now may the peace of god rest upon you and upon your house and land and upon your flock and herd and all that you possess your woman and your child accord to your faith and good work from this time forth and forever . and thus i have speak . amen . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that alma return from the land of gideon after have teach the people of gideon many thing which can not be write have establish the order of the church accord a he have before do in the land of zarahemla yea he return to his own house at zarahemla to rest himself from the labor which he have perform . alma and thus end the ninth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and it come to pass in the commencement of the tenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi that alma depart from thence and take his journey over into the land of melek on the west of the river sidon on the west by the border of the wilderness . alma and he begin to teach the people in the land of melek accord to the holy order of god by which he have be call and he begin to teach the people throughout all the land of melek . alma and it come to pass that the people come to him throughout all the border of the land which be by the wilderness side . and they be baptize throughout all the land alma so that when he have finish his work at melek he depart thence and travel three day ' journey on the north of the land of melek and he come to a city which be call ammonihah . alma now it be the custom of the people of nephi to call their land and their city and their village yea even all their small village after the name of him who first possess them and thus it be with the land of ammonihah . alma and it come to pass that when alma have come to the city of ammonihah he begin to preach the word of god unto them . alma now satan have get great hold upon the heart of the people of the city of ammonihah therefore they would not hearken unto the word of alma . alma nevertheless alma labor much in the spirit wrestling with god in mighty prayer that he would pour out his spirit upon the people who be in the city that he would also grant that he might baptize them unto repentance . alma nevertheless they harden their heart say unto him behold we know that thou art alma and we know that thou art high priest over the church which thou hast establish in many part of the land accord to your tradition and we be not of thy church and we do not believe in such foolish tradition . alma and now we know that because we be not of thy church we know that thou hast no power over u and thou hast deliver up the judgment seat unto nephihah therefore thou art not the chief judge over u . alma now when the people have say this and withstand all his word and revile him and spit upon him and cause that he should be cast out of their city he depart thence and take his journey towards the city which be call aaron . alma and it come to pass that while he be journey thither be weigh down with sorrow wad through much tribulation and anguish of soul because of the wickedness of the people who be in the city of ammonihah it come to pass while alma be thus weigh down with sorrow behold an angel of the lord appear unto him say alma bless art thou alma therefore lift up thy head and rejoice for thou hast great cause to rejoice for thou hast be faithful in keep the commandment of god from the time which thou receivedst thy first message from him . behold i be he that deliver it unto you . alma and behold i be send to command thee that thou return to the city of ammonihah and preach again unto the people of the city yea preach unto them . yea say unto them except they repent the lord god will destroy them . alma for behold they do study at this time that they may destroy the liberty of thy people for thus saith the lord which be contrary to the statute and judgment and commandment which he have give unto his people . alma now it come to pass that after alma have receive his message from the angel of the lord he return speedily to the land of ammonihah . and he enter the city by another way yea by the way which be on the south of the city of ammonihah . alma and a he enter the city he be an hungered and he say to a man will ye give to an humble servant of god something to eat ? alma and the man say unto him i be a nephite and i know that thou art a holy prophet of god for thou art the man whom an angel say in a vision thou shalt receive . therefore go with me into my house and i will impart unto thee of my food and i know that thou wilt be a blessing unto me and my house . alma and it come to pass that the man receive him into his house and the man be call amulek and he bring forth bread and meat and set before alma . alma and it come to pass that alma ate bread and be fill and he bless amulek and his house and he give thanks unto god . alma and after he have eat and be fill he say unto amulek i be alma and be the high priest over the church of god throughout the land . alma and behold i have be call to preach the word of god among all this people accord to the spirit of revelation and prophecy and i be in this land and they would not receive me but they cast me out and i be about to set my back towards this land forever . alma but behold i have be command that i should turn again and prophesy unto this people yea and to testify against them concern their iniquity . alma and now amulek because thou hast feed me and take me in thou art bless for i be an hungered for i have fast many day . alma and alma tarry many day with amulek before he begin to preach unto the people . alma and it come to pass that the people do wax more gross in their iniquity . alma and the word come to alma say go and also say unto my servant amulek go forth and prophesy unto this people say repent ye for thus saith the lord except ye repent i will visit this people in mine anger yea and i will not turn my fierce anger away . alma and alma go forth and also amulek among the people to declare the word of god unto them and they be fill with the holy ghost . alma and they have power give unto them insomuch that they could not be confine in dungeon neither be it possible that any man could slay them nevertheless they do not exercise their power until they be bind in band and cast into prison . now this be do that the lord might show forth his power in them . alma and it come to pass that they go forth and begin to preach and to prophesy unto the people accord to the spirit and power which the lord have give them . alma chapter alma and again i alma have be command of god that i should take amulek and go forth and preach again unto this people or the people who be in the city of ammonihah it come to pass a i begin to preach unto them they begin to contend with me say alma who art thou ? suppose ye that we shall believe the testimony of one man although he should preach unto u that the earth should pass away ? alma now they understand not the word which they spake for they know not that the earth should pass away . alma and they say also we will not believe thy word if thou shouldst prophesy that this great city should be destroy in one day . alma now they know not that god could do such marvelous work for they be a hard hearted and a stiffnecked people . alma and they say who be god that sendeth no more authority than one man among this people to declare unto them the truth of such great and marvelous thing ? alma and they stand forth to lay their hand on me but behold they do not . and i stood with boldness to declare unto them yea i do boldly testify unto them say alma behold o ye wicked and perverse generation how have ye forget the tradition of your father yea how soon ye have forget the commandment of god . alma do ye not remember that our father lehi be bring out of jerusalem by the hand of god ? do ye not remember that they be all lead by him through the wilderness ? alma and have ye forgotten so soon how many time he deliver our father out of the hand of their enemy and preserve them from be destroy even by the hand of their own brother ? alma yea and if it have not be for his matchless power and his mercy and his long suffering towards u we should unavoidably have be cut off from the face of the earth long before this period of time and perhaps be consign to a state of endless misery and woe . alma behold now i say unto you that he commandeth you to repent and except ye repent ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of god . but behold this be not all he have command you to repent or he will utterly destroy you from off the face of the earth yea he will visit you in his anger and in his fierce anger he will not turn away . alma behold do ye not remember the word which he spake unto lehi say that inasmuch a ye shall keep my commandment ye shall prosper in the land ? and again it be say that inasmuch a ye will not keep my commandment ye shall be cut off from the presence of the lord . alma now i would that ye should remember that inasmuch a the lamanites have not keep the commandment of god they have be cut off from the presence of the lord . now we see that the word of the lord have be verify in this thing and the lamanites have be cut off from his presence from the beginning of their transgression in the land . alma nevertheless i say unto you that it shall be more tolerable for them in the day of judgment than for you if ye remain in your sin yea and even more tolerable for them in this life than for you except ye repent . alma for there be many promise which be extend to the lamanites for it be because of the tradition of their father that cause them to remain in their state of ignorance therefore the lord will be merciful unto them and prolong their existence in the land . alma and at some period of time they will be bring to believe in his word and to know of the incorrectness of the tradition of their father and many of them will be save for the lord will be merciful unto all who call on his name . alma but behold i say unto you that if ye persist in your wickedness that your day shall not be prolong in the land for the lamanites shall be send upon you and if ye repent not they shall come in a time when you know not and ye shall be visit with utter destruction and it shall be accord to the fierce anger of the lord . alma for he will not suffer you that ye shall live in your iniquity to destroy his people . i say unto you nay he would rather suffer that the lamanites might destroy all his people who be call the people of nephi if it be possible that they could fall into sin and transgression after have have so much light and so much knowledge give unto them of the lord their god alma yea after have be such a highly favored people of the lord yea after have be favor above every other nation kindred tongue or people after have have all thing make know unto them accord to their desire and their faith and prayer of that which have be and which be and which be to come alma have be visit by the spirit of god have converse with angel and have be speak unto by the voice of the lord and have the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation and also many gift the gift of speak with tongue and the gift of preaching and the gift of the holy ghost and the gift of translation alma yea and after have be deliver of god out of the land of jerusalem by the hand of the lord have be save from famine and from sickness and all manner of disease of every kind and they have wax strong in battle that they might not be destroy have be bring out of bondage time after time and have be keep and preserve until now and they have be prosper until they be rich in all manner of thing alma and now behold i say unto you that if this people who have receive so many blessing from the hand of the lord should transgress contrary to the light and knowledge which they do have i say unto you that if this be the case that if they should fall into transgression it would be far more tolerable for the lamanites than for them . alma for behold the promise of the lord be extend to the lamanites but they be not unto you if ye transgress for have not the lord expressly promise and firmly decree that if ye will rebel against him that ye shall utterly be destroy from off the face of the earth ? alma and now for this cause that ye may not be destroy the lord have send his angel to visit many of his people declare unto them that they must go forth and cry mightily unto this people say repent ye for the kingdom of heaven be nigh at hand alma and not many day hence the son of god shall come in his glory and his glory shall be the glory of the only begotten of the father full of grace equity and truth full of patience mercy and long suffering quick to hear the cry of his people and to answer their prayer . alma and behold he cometh to redeem those who will be baptize unto repentance through faith on his name . alma therefore prepare ye the way of the lord for the time be at hand that all men shall reap a reward of their work accord to that which they have be if they have be righteous they shall reap the salvation of their soul accord to the power and deliverance of jesus christ and if they have be evil they shall reap the damnation of their soul accord to the power and captivation of the devil . alma now behold this be the voice of the angel cry unto the people . alma and now my beloved brother for ye be my brother and ye ought to be beloved and ye ought to bring forth work which be meet for repentance see that your heart have be grossly harden against the word of god and see that ye be a lost and a fallen people . alma now it come to pass that when i alma have speak these word behold the people be wroth with me because i say unto them that they be a hard hearted and a stiffnecked people . alma and also because i say unto them that they be a lose and a fall people they be angry with me and seek to lay their hand upon me that they might cast me into prison . alma but it come to pass that the lord do not suffer them that they should take me at that time and cast me into prison . alma and it come to pass that amulek go and stand forth and begin to preach unto them also . and now the word of amulek be not all write nevertheless a part of his word be write in this book . alma chapter alma now these be the word which amulek preach unto the people who be in the land of ammonihah say alma i be amulek i be the son of giddonah who be the son of ishmael who be a descendant of aminadi and it be the same aminadi who interpret the writing which be upon the wall of the temple which be write by the finger of god . alma and aminadi be a descendant of nephi who be the son of lehi who come out of the land of jerusalem who be a descendant of manasseh who be the son of joseph who be sell into egypt by the hand of his brother . alma and behold i be also a man of no small reputation among all those who know me yea and behold i have many kindred and friend and i have also acquire much rich by the hand of my industry . alma nevertheless after all this i never have know much of the way of the lord and his mystery and marvelous power . i say i never have know much of these thing but behold i mistake for i have see much of his mystery and his marvelous power yea even in the preservation of the life of this people . alma nevertheless i do harden my heart for i be call many time and i would not hear therefore i know concern these thing yet i would not know therefore i go on rebel against god in the wickedness of my heart even until the fourth day of this seventh month which be in the tenth year of the reign of the judge . alma a i be journey to see a very near kindred behold an angel of the lord appear unto me and say amulek return to thine own house for thou shalt fee a prophet of the lord yea a holy man who be a chosen man of god for he have fast many day because of the sin of this people and he be an hungered and thou shalt receive him into thy house and fee him and he shall bless thee and thy house and the blessing of the lord shall rest upon thee and thy house . alma and it come to pass that i obey the voice of the angel and return towards my house . and a i be go thither i find the man whom the angel say unto me thou shalt receive into thy house and behold it be this same man who have be speak unto you concern the thing of god . alma and the angel say unto me he be a holy man wherefore i know he be a holy man because it be say by an angel of god . alma and again i know that the thing whereof he hath testify be true for behold i say unto you that a the lord liveth even so have he send his angel to make these thing manifest unto me and this he have do while this alma hath dwelt at my house . alma for behold he hath bless mine house he hath bless me and my woman and my child and my father and my kinsfolk yea even all my kindred hath he bless and the blessing of the lord hath rest upon u accord to the word which he spake . alma and now when amulek have speak these word the people begin to be astonish see there be more than one witness who testify of the thing whereof they be accuse and also of the thing which be to come accord to the spirit of prophecy which be in them . alma nevertheless there be some among them who think to question them that by their cunning device they might catch them in their word that they might find witness against them that they might deliver them to their judge that they might be judge accord to the law and that they might be slay or cast into prison accord to the crime which they could make appear or witness against them . alma now it be those men who seek to destroy them who be lawyer who be hire or appoint by the people to administer the law at their time of trial or at the trial of the crime of the people before the judge . alma now these lawyer be learn in all the art and cunning of the people and this be to enable them that they might be skilful in their profession . alma and it come to pass that they begin to question amulek that thereby they might make him cross his word or contradict the word which he should speak . alma now they know not that amulek could know of their design . but it come to pass a they begin to question him he perceive their thought and he say unto them o ye wicked and perverse generation ye lawyer and hypocrite for ye be lay the foundation of the devil for ye be lay trap and snare to catch the holy one of god . alma ye be lay plan to pervert the way of the righteous and to bring down the wrath of god upon your head even to the utter destruction of this people . alma yea well do mosiah say who be our last king when he be about to deliver up the kingdom have no one to confer it upon cause that this people should be govern by their own voice yea well do he say that if the time should come that the voice of this people should choose iniquity that be if the time should come that this people should fall into transgression they would be ripe for destruction . alma and now i say unto you that well doth the lord judge of your iniquity well doth he cry unto this people by the voice of his angel repent ye repent for the kingdom of heaven be at hand . alma yea well doth he cry by the voice of his angel that i will come down among my people with equity and justice in my hand . alma yea and i say unto you that if it be not for the prayer of the righteous who be now in the land that ye would even now be visit with utter destruction yet it would not be by flood a be the people in the day of noah but it would be by famine and by pestilence and the sword . alma but it be by the prayer of the righteous that ye be spar now therefore if ye will cast out the righteous from among you then will not the lord stay his hand but in his fierce anger he will come out against you then ye shall be smite by famine and by pestilence and by the sword and the time be soon at hand except ye repent . alma and now it come to pass that the people be more angry with amulek and they cry out say this man doth revile against our law which be just and our wise lawyer whom we have select . alma but amulek stretch forth his hand and cry the mightier unto them say o ye wicked and perverse generation why hath satan get such great hold upon your heart ? why will ye yield yourselves unto him that he may have power over you to blind your eye that ye will not understand the word which be speak accord to their truth ? alma for behold have i testify against your law ? ye do not understand ye say that i have speak against your law but i have not but i have speak in favor of your law to your condemnation . alma and now behold i say unto you that the foundation of the destruction of this people be begin to be lay by the unrighteousness of your lawyer and your judge . alma and now it come to pass that when amulek have speak these word the people cry out against him say now we know that this man be a child of the devil for he hath lie unto u for he hath speak against our law . and now he say that he have not speak against it . alma and again he have revile against our lawyer and our judge . alma and it come to pass that the lawyer put it into their heart that they should remember these thing against him . alma and there be one among them whose name be zeezrom . now he be the foremost to accuse amulek and alma he be one of the most expert among them have much business to do among the people . alma now the object of these lawyer be to get gain and they get gain accord to their employ . alma chapter alma now it be in the law of mosiah that every man who be a judge of the law or those who be appoint to be judge should receive wage accord to the time which they labor to judge those who be bring before them to be judge . alma now if a man owe another and he would not pay that which he do owe he be complain of to the judge and the judge execute authority and send forth officer that the man should be bring before him and he judge the man accord to the law and the evidence which be bring against him and thus the man be compel to pay that which he owe or be strip or be cast out from among the people a a thief and a robber . alma and the judge receive for his wage accord to his time a senine of gold for a day or a senum of silver which be equal to a senine of gold and this be accord to the law which be give . alma now these be the name of the different piece of their gold and of their silver accord to their value . and the name be give by the nephites for they do not reckon after the manner of the jew who be at jerusalem neither do they measure after the manner of the jew but they alter their reckoning and their measure accord to the mind and the circumstance of the people in every generation until the reign of the judge they have be establish by king mosiah . alma now the reckoning be thus a senine of gold a seon of gold a shum of gold and a limnah of gold . alma a senum of silver an amnor of silver an ezrom of silver and an onti of silver . alma a senum of silver be equal to a senine of gold and either for a measure of barley and also for a measure of every kind of grain . alma now the amount of a seon of gold be twice the value of a senine . alma and a shum of gold be twice the value of a seon . alma and a limnah of gold be the value of them all . alma and an amnor of silver be as great a two senums . alma and an ezrom of silver be as great a four senums . alma and an onti be as great a them all . alma now this be the value of the less number of their reckoning alma a shiblon be half of a senum therefore a shiblon for half a measure of barley . alma and a shiblum be a half of a shiblon . alma and a leah be the half of a shiblum . alma now this be their number accord to their reckoning . alma now an antion of gold be equal to three shiblons . alma now it be for the sole purpose to get gain because they receive their wage accord to their employ therefore they do stir up the people to rioting and all manner of disturbance and wickedness that they might have more employ that they might get money accord to the suit which be bring before them therefore they do stir up the people against alma and amulek . alma and this zeezrom begin to question amulek say will ye answer me a few question which i shall ask you ? now zeezrom be a man who be expert in the device of the devil that he might destroy that which be good therefore he say unto amulek will ye answer the question which i shall put unto you ? alma and amulek say unto him yea if it be accord to the spirit of the lord which be in me for i shall say nothing which be contrary to the spirit of the lord . and zeezrom say unto him behold here be six onties of silver and all these will i give thee if thou wilt deny the existence of a supreme be . alma now amulek say o thou child of hell why tempt ye me ? knowest thou that the righteous yieldeth to no such temptation ? alma believest thou that there be no god ? i say unto you nay thou knowest that there be a god but thou lovest that lucre more than him . alma and now thou hast lie before god unto me . thou saidst unto me behold these six onties which be of great worth i will give unto thee when thou hadst it in thy heart to retain them from me and it be only thy desire that i should deny the true and living god that thou mightest have cause to destroy me . and now behold for this great evil thou shalt have thy reward . alma and zeezrom say unto him thou sayest there be a true and live god ? alma and amulek say yea there be a true and living god . alma now zeezrom say be there more than one god ? alma and he answer no . alma now zeezrom say unto him again how knowest thou these thing ? alma and he say an angel hath make them know unto me . alma and zeezrom say again who be he that shall come ? be it the son of god ? alma and he say unto him yea . alma and zeezrom say again shall he save his people in their sin ? and amulek answer and say unto him i say unto you he shall not for it be impossible for him to deny his word . alma now zeezrom say unto the people see that ye remember these thing for he say there be but one god yet he saith that the son of god shall come but he shall not save his people a though he have authority to command god . alma now amulek saith again unto him behold thou hast lie for thou sayest that i spake a though i have authority to command god because i say he shall not save his people in their sin . alma and i say unto you again that he can not save them in their sin for i can not deny his word and he hath say that no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven therefore how can ye be save except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven ? therefore ye can not be save in your sin . alma now zeezrom saith again unto him be the son of god the very eternal father ? alma and amulek say unto him yea he be the very eternal father of heaven and of earth and all thing which in them be he be the beginning and the end the first and the last alma and he shall come into the world to redeem his people and he shall take upon him the transgression of those who believe on his name and these be they that shall have eternal life and salvation cometh to none else . alma therefore the wicked remain a though there have be no redemption make except it be the loosing of the band of death for behold the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before god and be judge accord to their work . alma now there be a death which be call a temporal death and the death of christ shall loose the band of this temporal death that all shall be raise from this temporal death . alma the spirit and the body shall be reunite again in it perfect form both limb and joint shall be restore to it proper frame even a we now be at this time and we shall be bring to stand before god know even a we know now and have a bright recollection of all our guilt . alma now this restoration shall come to all both old and young both bond and free both male and female both the wicked and the righteous and even there shall not so much a a hair of their head be lose but every thing shall be restore to it perfect frame a it be now or in the body and shall be bring and be arraign before the bar of christ the son and god the father and the holy spirit which be one eternal god to be judge accord to their work whether they be good or whether they be evil . alma now behold i have speak unto you concern the death of the mortal body and also concern the resurrection of the mortal body . i say unto you that this mortal body be raise to an immortal body that be from death even from the first death unto life that they can die no more their spirit unite with their body never to be divide thus the whole become spiritual and immortal that they can no more see corruption . alma now when amulek have finish these word the people begin again to be astonish and also zeezrom begin to tremble . and thus end the word of amulek or this be all that i have write . alma chapter alma now alma see that the word of amulek have silence zeezrom for he behold that amulek have catch him in his lying and deceive to destroy him and see that he begin to tremble under a consciousness of his guilt he open his mouth and begin to speak unto him and to establish the word of amulek and to explain thing beyond or to unfold the scripture beyond that which amulek have do . alma now the word that alma spake unto zeezrom be hear by the people round about for the multitude be great and he spake on this wise alma now zeezrom see that thou hast be take in thy lying and craftiness for thou hast not lie unto men only but thou hast lie unto god for behold he know all thy thought and thou seest that thy thought be make know unto u by his spirit alma and thou seest that we know that thy plan be a very subtle plan a to the subtlety of the devil for to lie and to deceive this people that thou mightest set them against u to revile u and to cast u out alma now this be a plan of thine adversary and he hath exercise his power in thee . now i would that ye should remember that what i say unto thee i say unto all . alma and behold i say unto you all that this be a snare of the adversary which he have lay to catch this people that he might bring you into subjection unto him that he might encircle you about with his chain that he might chain you down to everlasting destruction accord to the power of his captivity . alma now when alma have speak these word zeezrom begin to tremble more exceedingly for he be convince more and more of the power of god and he be also convince that alma and amulek have a knowledge of him for he be convince that they know the thought and intent of his heart for power be give unto them that they might know of these thing accord to the spirit of prophecy . alma and zeezrom begin to inquire of them diligently that he might know more concern the kingdom of god . and he say unto alma what do this mean which amulek hath spoken concern the resurrection of the dead that all shall rise from the dead both the just and the unjust and be bring to stand before god to be judge accord to their work ? alma and now alma begin to expound these thing unto him say it be give unto many to know the mystery of god nevertheless they be lay under a strict command that they shall not impart only accord to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the child of men accord to the heed and diligence which they give unto him . alma and therefore he that will harden his heart the same receiveth the less portion of the word and he that will not harden his heart to him be give the great portion of the word until it be give unto him to know the mystery of god until he know them in full . alma and they that will harden their heart to them be give the less portion of the word until they know nothing concern his mystery and then they be take captive by the devil and lead by his will down to destruction . now this be what be mean by the chain of hell . alma and amulek hath speak plainly concern death and be raise from this mortality to a state of immortality and be bring before the bar of god to be judge accord to our work . alma then if our heart have be harden yea if we have harden our heart against the word insomuch that it have not be find in u then will our state be awful for then we shall be condemn . alma for our word will condemn u yea all our work will condemn u we shall not be find spotless and our thought will also condemn u and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our god and we would fain be glad if we could command the rock and the mountain to fall upon u to hide u from his presence . alma but this can not be we must come forth and stand before him in his glory and in his power and in his might majesty and dominion and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all his judgment be just that he be just in all his work and that he be merciful unto the child of men and that he have all power to save every man that believeth on his name and bringeth forth fruit meet for repentance . alma and now behold i say unto you then cometh a death even a second death which be a spiritual death then be a time that whosoever dieth in his sin a to a temporal death shall also die a spiritual death yea he shall die a to thing pertain unto righteousness . alma then be the time when their torment shall be a a lake of fire and brimstone whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and then be the time that they shall be chain down to an everlasting destruction accord to the power and captivity of satan he have subject them accord to his will . alma then i say unto you they shall be a though there have be no redemption make for they can not be redeem accord to god 's justice and they can not die see there be no more corruption . alma now it come to pass that when alma have make an end of speak these word the people begin to be more astonished alma but there be one antionah who be a chief ruler among them come forth and say unto him what be this that thou hast say that man should rise from the dead and be change from this mortal to an immortal state that the soul can never die ? alma what do the scripture mean which saith that god place cherub and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of eden l our first parent should enter and partake of the fruit of the tree of life and live forever ? and thus we see that there be no possible chance that they should live forever . alma now alma say unto him this be the thing which i be about to explain now we see that adam do fall by the partaking of the forbidden fruit accord to the word of god and thus we see that by his fall all mankind become a lost and fall people . alma and now behold i say unto you that if it have be possible for adam to have partake of the fruit of the tree of life at that time there would have be no death and the word would have be void make god a liar for he say if thou eat thou shalt surely die . alma and we see that death come upon mankind yea the death which have be speak of by amulek which be the temporal death nevertheless there be a space grant unto man in which he might repent therefore this life become a probationary state a time to prepare to meet god a time to prepare for that endless state which have be speak of by u which be after the resurrection of the dead . alma now if it have not be for the plan of redemption which be lay from the foundation of the world there could have be no resurrection of the dead but there be a plan of redemption laid which shall bring to pass the resurrection of the dead of which have be speak . alma and now behold if it be possible that our first parent could have go forth and partaken of the tree of life they would have be forever miserable have no preparatory state and thus the plan of redemption would have be frustrate and the word of god would have be void take none effect . alma but behold it be not so but it be appoint unto men that they must die and after death they must come to judgment even that same judgment of which we have speak which be the end . alma and after god have appoint that these thing should come unto man behold then he saw that it be expedient that man should know concern the thing whereof he have appoint unto them alma therefore he send angel to converse with them who cause men to behold of his glory . alma and they begin from that time forth to call on his name therefore god converse with men and make know unto them the plan of redemption which have be prepare from the foundation of the world and this he make know unto them accord to their faith and repentance and their holy work . alma wherefore he give commandment unto men they have first transgress the first commandment a to thing which be temporal and become a god know good from evil place themselves in a state to act or be place in a state to act accord to their will and pleasures whether to do evil or to do good alma therefore god give unto them commandment after have make know unto them the plan of redemption that they should not do evil the penalty thereof be a second death which be an everlasting death a to thing pertain unto righteousness for on such the plan of redemption could have no power for the work of justice could not be destroy accord to the supreme goodness of god . alma but god do call on men in the name of his son this be the plan of redemption which be lay say if ye will repent and harden not your heart then will i have mercy upon you through mine only beget son alma therefore whosoever repenteth and hardeneth not his heart he shall have claim on mercy through mine only beget son unto a remission of his sin and these shall enter into my rest . alma and whosoever will harden his heart and will do iniquity behold i swear in my wrath that he shall not enter into my rest . alma and now my brother behold i say unto you that if ye will harden your heart ye shall not enter into the rest of the lord therefore your iniquity provoketh him that he sendeth down his wrath upon you a in the first provocation yea accord to his word in the last provocation as well a the first to the everlasting destruction of your soul therefore accord to his word unto the last death as well a the first . alma and now my brother see we know these thing and they be true let u repent and harden not our heart that we provoke not the lord our god to pull down his wrath upon u in these his second commandment which he have give unto u but let u enter into the rest of god which be prepared accord to his word . alma chapter alma and again my brother i would cite your mind forward to the time when the lord god give these commandment unto his child and i would that ye should remember that the lord god ordain priest after his holy order which be after the order of his son to teach these thing unto the people . alma and those priest be ordain after the order of his son in a manner that thereby the people might know in what manner to look forward to his son for redemption . alma and this be the manner after which they be ordain be call and prepare from the foundation of the world accord to the foreknowledge of god on account of their exceeding faith and good work in the first place be leave to choose good or evil therefore they have choose good and exercise exceedingly great faith be call with a holy call yea with that holy call which be prepare with and accord to a preparatory redemption for such . alma and thus they have be call to this holy call on account of their faith while others would reject the spirit of god on account of the hardness of their heart and blindness of their mind while if it have not be for this they might have have a great privilege a their brother . alma or in fine in the first place they be on the same stand with their brother thus this holy call be prepare from the foundation of the world for such a would not harden their heart be in and through the atonement of the only begotten son who be prepare alma and thus be call by this holy call and ordain unto the high priesthood of the holy order of god to teach his commandment unto the child of men that they also might enter into his rest alma this high priesthood be after the order of his son which order be from the foundation of the world or in other word be without begin of day or end of year be prepare from eternity to all eternity accord to his foreknowledge of all thing alma now they be ordain after this manner be call with a holy call and ordain with a holy ordinance and take upon them the high priesthood of the holy order which call and ordinance and high priesthood be without begin or end alma thus they become high priest forever after the order of the son the only begotten of the father who be without begin of day or end of year who be full of grace equity and truth . and thus it be . amen . alma now a i say concern the holy order or this high priesthood there be many who be ordain and become high priest of god and it be on account of their exceeding faith and repentance and their righteousness before god they choose to repent and work righteousness rather than to perish alma therefore they be call after this holy order and be sanctify and their garment be wash white through the blood of the lamb . alma now they after be sanctify by the holy ghost have their garment make white be pure and spotless before god could not look upon sin save it be with abhorrence and there be many exceedingly great many who be make pure and enter into the rest of the lord their god . alma and now my brother i would that ye should humble yourselves before god and bring forth fruit meet for repentance that ye may also enter into that rest . alma yea humble yourselves even a the people in the day of melchizedek who be also a high priest after this same order which i have speak who also take upon him the high priesthood forever . alma and it be this same melchizedek to whom abraham pay tithe yea even our father abraham pay tithe of one tenth part of all he possess . alma now these ordinance be give after this manner that thereby the people might look forward on the son of god it be a type of his order or it be his order and this that they might look forward to him for a remission of their sin that they might enter into the rest of the lord . alma now this melchizedek be a king over the land of salem and his people have wax strong in iniquity and abomination yea they have all go astray they be full of all manner of wickedness alma but melchizedek have exercise mighty faith and receive the office of the high priesthood accord to the holy order of god do preach repentance unto his people . and behold they do repent and melchizedek do establish peace in the land in his day therefore he be call the prince of peace for he be the king of salem and he do reign under his father . alma now there be many before him and also there be many afterwards but none be great therefore of him they have more particularly make mention . alma now i need not rehearse the matter what i have say may suffice . behold the scripture be before you if ye will wrest them it shall be to your own destruction . alma and now it come to pass that when alma have say these word unto them he stretch forth his hand unto them and cry with a mighty voice say now be the time to repent for the day of salvation draweth nigh alma yea and the voice of the lord by the mouth of angel doth declare it unto all nation yea doth declare it that they may have glad tidings of great joy yea and he doth sound these glad tidings among all his people yea even to them that be scatter abroad upon the face of the earth wherefore they have come unto u . alma and they be make know unto u in plain term that we may understand that we can not err and this because of our be wanderer in a strange land therefore we be thus highly favor for we have these glad tidings declare unto u in all part of our vineyard . alma for behold angel be declare it unto many at this time in our land and this be for the purpose of prepare the heart of the child of men to receive his word at the time of his come in his glory . alma and now we only wait to hear the joyful news declare unto u by the mouth of angel of his come for the time cometh we know not how soon . would to god that it might be in my day but let it be sooner or later in it i will rejoice . alma and it shall be make know unto just and holy men by the mouth of angel at the time of his come that the word of our father may be fulfil accord to that which they have speak concern him which be accord to the spirit of prophecy which be in them . alma and now my brother i wish from the inmost part of my heart yea with great anxiety even unto pain that ye would hearken unto my word and cast off your sin and not procrastinate the day of your repentance alma but that ye would humble yourselves before the lord and call on his holy name and watch and pray continually that ye may not be tempt above that which ye can bear and thus be lead by the holy spirit become humble meek submissive patient full of love and all long suffering alma have faith on the lord have a hope that ye shall receive eternal life have the love of god always in your heart that ye may be lift up at the last day and enter into his rest . alma and may the lord grant unto you repentance that ye may not bring down his wrath upon you that ye may not be bind down by the chain of hell that ye may not suffer the second death . alma and alma spake many more word unto the people which be not write in this book . alma chapter alma and it come to pass after he have make an end of speak unto the people many of them do believe on his word and begin to repent and to search the scripture . alma but the more part of them be desirous that they might destroy alma and amulek for they be angry with alma because of the plainness of his word unto zeezrom and they also say that amulek have lie unto them and have revile against their law and also against their lawyer and judge . alma and they be also angry with alma and amulek and because they have testify so plainly against their wickedness they seek to put them away privily . alma but it come to pass that they do not but they take them and bind them with strong cord and take them before the chief judge of the land . alma and the people go forth and witness against them testify that they have revile against the law and their lawyer and judge of the land and also of all the people that be in the land and also testify that there be but one god and that he should send his son among the people but he should not save them and many such thing do the people testify against alma and amulek . now this be do before the chief judge of the land . alma and it come to pass that zeezrom be astonish at the word which have be speak and he also know concern the blindness of the mind which he have cause among the people by his lying word and his soul begin to be harrow up under a consciousness of his own guilt yea he begin to be encircle about by the pain of hell . alma and it come to pass that he begin to cry unto the people say behold i be guilty and these men be spotless before god . and he begin to plead for them from that time forth but they revile him say art thou also possess with the devil ? and they spit upon him and cast him out from among them and also all those who believe in the word which have be speak by alma and amulek and they cast them out and send men to cast stone at them . alma and they bring their wife and child together and whosoever believe or have be teach to believe in the word of god they cause that they should be cast into the fire and they also bring forth their record which contain the holy scripture and cast them into the fire also that they might be burn and destroy by fire . alma and it come to pass that they take alma and amulek and carry them forth to the place of martyrdom that they might witness the destruction of those who be consume by fire . alma and when amulek saw the pain of the woman and child who be consume in the fire he also be pain and he say unto alma how can we witness this awful scene ? therefore let u stretch forth our hand and exercise the power of god which be in u and save them from the flame . alma but alma say unto him the spirit constraineth me that i must not stretch forth mine hand for behold the lord receiveth them up unto himself in glory and he doth suffer that they may do this thing or that the people may do this thing unto them accord to the hardness of their heart that the judgment which he shall exercise upon them in his wrath may be just and the blood of the innocent shall stand a a witness against them yea and cry mightily against them at the last day . alma now amulek say unto alma behold perhaps they will burn u also . alma and alma say be it accord to the will of the lord . but behold our work be not finish therefore they burn u not . alma now it come to pass that when the body of those who have be cast into the fire be consume and also the record which be cast in with them the chief judge of the land come and stand before alma and amulek a they be bind and he smite them with his hand upon their cheek and say unto them after what ye have see will ye preach again unto this people that they shall be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone ? alma behold ye see that ye have not power to save those who have be cast into the fire neither have god save them because they be of thy faith . and the judge smite them again upon their cheek and ask what say ye for yourselves ? alma now this judge be after the order and faith of nehor who slew gideon . alma and it come to pass that alma and amulek answer him nothing and he smite them again and deliver them to the officer to be cast into prison . alma and when they have be cast into prison three day there come many lawyer and judge and priest and teacher who be of the profession of nehor and they come in unto the prison to see them and they question them about many word but they answer them nothing . alma and it come to pass that the judge stand before them and say why do ye not answer the word of this people ? know ye not that i have power to deliver you up unto the flame ? and he command them to speak but they answer nothing . alma and it come to pass that they depart and go their way but come again on the morrow and the judge also smite them again on their cheek . and many come forth also and smite them say will ye stand again and judge this people and condemn our law ? if ye have such great power why do ye not deliver yourselves ? alma and many such thing do they say unto them gnash their teeth upon them and spit upon them and say how shall we look when we be damn ? alma and many such thing yea all manner of such thing do they say unto them and thus they do mock them for many day . and they do withhold food from them that they might hunger and water that they might thirst and they also do take from them their clothes that they be naked and thus they be bind with strong cord and confine in prison . alma and it come to pass after they have thus suffer for many day and it be on the twelfth day in the tenth month in the tenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi that the chief judge over the land of ammonihah and many of their teacher and their lawyer go in unto the prison where alma and amulek be bind with cord . alma and the chief judge stand before them and smite them again and say unto them if ye have the power of god deliver yourselves from these band and then we will believe that the lord will destroy this people accord to your word . alma and it come to pass that they all go forth and smite them say the same word even until the last and when the last have speak unto them the power of god be upon alma and amulek and they rise and stand upon their foot . alma and alma cry say how long shall we suffer these great affliction o lord ? o lord give u strength accord to our faith which be in christ even unto deliverance . and they break the cord with which they be bind and when the people saw this they begin to flee for the fear of destruction have come upon them . alma and it come to pass that so great be their fear that they fell to the earth and do not obtain the out door of the prison and the earth shake mightily and the wall of the prison be rent in twain so that they fell to the earth and the chief judge and the lawyer and priest and teacher who smite upon alma and amulek be slay by the fall thereof . alma and alma and amulek come forth out of the prison and they be not hurt for the lord have grant unto them power accord to their faith which be in christ . and they straightway come forth out of the prison and they be loose from their band and the prison have fall to the earth and every soul within the wall thereof save it be alma and amulek be slay and they straightway come forth into the city . alma now the people have hear a great noise come run together by multitude to know the cause of it and when they saw alma and amulek come forth out of the prison and the wall thereof have fall to the earth they be strike with great fear and flee from the presence of alma and amulek even a a goat fleeth with her young from two lion and thus they do flee from the presence of alma and amulek . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that alma and amulek be command to depart out of that city and they depart and come out even into the land of sidom and behold there they find all the people who have depart out of the land of ammonihah who have be cast out and stone because they believe in the word of alma . alma and they relate unto them all that have happen unto their wife and child and also concern themselves and of their power of deliverance . alma and also zeezrom lay sick at sidom with a burning fever which be cause by the great tribulation of his mind on account of his wickedness for he suppose that alma and amulek be no more and he suppose that they have be slain because of his iniquity . and this great sin and his many other sin do harrow up his mind until it do become exceedingly sore have no deliverance therefore he begin to be scorch with a burning heat . alma now when he hear that alma and amulek be in the land of sidom his heart begin to take courage and he send a message immediately unto them desire them to come unto him . alma and it come to pass that they go immediately obey the message which he have send unto them and they go in unto the house unto zeezrom and they find him upon his bed sick be very low with a burning fever and his mind also be exceedingly sore because of his iniquity and when he saw them he stretch forth his hand and beseech them that they would heal him . alma and it come to pass that alma say unto him take him by the hand believest thou in the power of christ unto salvation ? alma and he answer and say yea i believe all the word that thou hast taught . alma and alma say if thou believest in the redemption of christ thou canst be heal . alma and he say yea i believe accord to thy word . alma and then alma cry unto the lord say o lord our god have mercy on this man and heal him accord to his faith which be in christ . alma and when alma have say these word zeezrom leap upon his foot and begin to walk and this be do to the great astonishment of all the people and the knowledge of this go forth throughout all the land of sidom . alma and alma baptize zeezrom unto the lord and he begin from that time forth to preach unto the people . alma and alma establish a church in the land of sidom and consecrated priest and teacher in the land to baptize unto the lord whosoever be desirous to be baptize . alma and it come to pass that they be many for they do flock in from all the region round about sidom and be baptize . alma but a to the people that be in the land of ammonihah they yet remain a hard hearted and a stiffnecked people and they repent not of their sin ascribe all the power of alma and amulek to the devil for they be of the profession of nehor and do not believe in the repentance of their sin . alma and it come to pass that alma and amulek amulek have forsake all his gold and silver and his precious thing which be in the land of ammonihah for the word of god he be reject by those who be once his friend and also by his father and his kindred alma therefore after alma have establish the church at sidom see a great check yea see that the people be check a to the pride of their heart and begin to humble themselves before god and begin to assemble themselves together at their sanctuary to worship god before the altar watching and pray continually that they might be deliver from satan and from death and from destruction alma now a i say alma have see all these thing therefore he take amulek and come over to the land of zarahemla and take him to his own house and do administer unto him in his tribulation and strengthen him in the lord . alma and thus end the tenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and it come to pass in the eleventh year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi on the fifth day of the second month there have be much peace in the land of zarahemla there have be no war nor contention for a certain number of year even until the fifth day of the second month in the eleventh year there be a cry of war heard throughout the land . alma for behold the army of the lamanites have come in upon the wilderness side into the border of the land even into the city of ammonihah and begin to slay the people and destroy the city . alma and now it come to pass before the nephites could raise a sufficient army to drive them out of the land they have destroy the people who be in the city of ammonihah and also some around the border of noah and take others captive into the wilderness . alma now it come to pass that the nephites be desirous to obtain those who have be carry away captive into the wilderness . alma therefore he that have be appoint chief captain over the army of the nephites and his name be zoram and he have two son lehi and aha now zoram and his two son know that alma be high priest over the church and have heard that he have the spirit of prophecy therefore they go unto him and desire of him to know whither the lord would that they should go into the wilderness in search of their brother who have be take captive by the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that alma inquire of the lord concern the matter . and alma return and say unto them behold the lamanites will cross the river sidon in the south wilderness away up beyond the border of the land of manti . and behold there shall ye meet them on the east of the river sidon and there the lord will deliver unto thee thy brother who have be take captive by the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that zoram and his son cross over the river sidon with their army and march away beyond the border of manti into the south wilderness which be on the east side of the river sidon . alma and they come upon the army of the lamanites and the lamanites be scatter and drive into the wilderness and they take their brother who have be take captive by the lamanites and there be not one soul of them have be lose that be take captive . and they be bring by their brother to possess their own land . alma and thus end the eleventh year of the judge the lamanites have be drive out of the land and the people of ammonihah be destroy yea every living soul of the ammonihahites be destroy and also their great city which they say god could not destroy because of it greatness . alma but behold in one day it be leave desolate and the carcass be mangle by dog and wild beast of the wilderness . alma nevertheless after many day their dead body be heap up upon the face of the earth and they be cover with a shallow covering . and now so great be the scent thereof that the people do not go in to possess the land of ammonihah for many year . and it be call desolation of nehors for they be of the profession of nehor who be slain and their land remain desolate . alma and the lamanites do not come again to war against the nephites until the fourteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . and thus for three year do the people of nephi have continual peace in all the land . alma and alma and amulek go forth preach repentance to the people in their temple and in their sanctuary and also in their synagogue which be build after the manner of the jew . alma and as many a would hear their word unto them they do impart the word of god without any respect of person continually . alma and thus do alma and amulek go forth and also many more who have be choose for the work to preach the word throughout all the land . and the establishment of the church become general throughout the land in all the region round about among all the people of the nephites . alma and there be no inequality among them the lord do pour out his spirit on all the face of the land to prepare the mind of the child of men or to prepare their heart to receive the word which should be teach among them at the time of his come alma that they might not be harden against the word that they might not be unbelieving and go on to destruction but that they might receive the word with joy and a a branch be graft into the true vine that they might enter into the rest of the lord their god . alma now those priest who do go forth among the people do preach against all lying and deceivings and envyings and strife and malice and revilings and steal rob plunder murder commit adultery and all manner of lasciviousness cry that these thing ought not so to be alma hold forth thing which must shortly come yea hold forth the come of the son of god his suffering and death and also the resurrection of the dead . alma and many of the people do inquire concern the place where the son of god should come and they be teach that he would appear unto them after his resurrection and this the people do hear with great joy and gladness . alma and now after the church have be establish throughout all the land have get the victory over the devil and the word of god be preach in it purity in all the land and the lord pour out his blessing upon the people thus end the fourteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that a alma be journey from the land of gideon southward away to the land of manti behold to his astonishment he meet with the son of mosiah journeying towards the land of zarahemla . alma now these son of mosiah be with alma at the time the angel first appear unto him therefore alma do rejoice exceedingly to see his brother and what add more to his joy they be still his brother in the lord yea and they have wax strong in the knowledge of the truth for they be men of a sound understanding and they have search the scripture diligently that they might know the word of god . alma but this be not all they have give themselves to much prayer and fast therefore they have the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation and when they teach they teach with power and authority of god . alma and they have be teach the word of god for the space of fourteen year among the lamanites have have much success in bring many to the knowledge of the truth yea by the power of their word many be bring before the altar of god to call on his name and confess their sin before him . alma now these be the circumstance which attend them in their journeying for they have many affliction they do suffer much both in body and in mind such a hunger thirst and fatigue and also much labor in the spirit . alma now these be their journeying have take leave of their father mosiah in the first year of the judge have refuse the kingdom which their father be desirous to confer upon them and also this be the mind of the people alma nevertheless they depart out of the land of zarahemla and take their sword and their spear and their bow and their arrow and their sling and this they do that they might provide food for themselves while in the wilderness . alma and thus they depart into the wilderness with their number which they have select to go up to the land of nephi to preach the word of god unto the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that they journey many day in the wilderness and they fast much and prayed much that the lord would grant unto them a portion of his spirit to go with them and abide with them that they might be an instrument in the hand of god to bring if it be possible their brother the lamanites to the knowledge of the truth to the knowledge of the baseness of the tradition of their father which be not correct . alma and it come to pass that the lord do visit them with his spirit and say unto them be comfort . and they be comfort . alma and the lord say unto them also go forth among the lamanites thy brother and establish my word yet ye shall be patient in long suffering and affliction that ye may show forth good example unto them in me and i will make an instrument of thee in my hand unto the salvation of many soul . alma and it come to pass that the heart of the son of mosiah and also those who be with them take courage to go forth unto the lamanites to declare unto them the word of god . alma and it come to pass when they have arrive in the border of the land of the lamanites that they separate themselves and depart one from another trusting in the lord that they should meet again at the close of their harvest for they suppose that great be the work which they have undertake . alma and assuredly it be great for they have undertake to preach the word of god to a wild and a harden and a ferocious people a people who delight in murder the nephites and rob and plunder them and their heart be set upon rich or upon gold and silver and precious stone yet they seek to obtain these thing by murder and plunder that they might not labor for them with their own hand . alma thus they be a very indolent people many of whom do worship idol and the curse of god have fall upon them because of the tradition of their father notwithstanding the promise of the lord be extend unto them on the condition of repentance . alma therefore this be the cause for which the son of mosiah have undertake the work that perhaps they might bring them unto repentance that perhaps they might bring them to know of the plan of redemption . alma therefore they separate themselves one from another and go forth among them every man alone accord to the word and power of god which be give unto him . alma now ammon be the chief among them or rather he do administer unto them and he depart from them after have bless them accord to their several station have impart the word of god unto them or administer unto them before his departure and thus they take their several journey throughout the land . alma and ammon go to the land of ishmael the land be call after the son of ishmael who also become lamanites . alma and a ammon enter the land of ishmael the lamanites take him and bind him a be their custom to bind all the nephites who fell into their hand and carry them before the king and thus it be leave to the pleasure of the king to slay them or to retain them in captivity or to cast them into prison or to cast them out of his land accord to his will and pleasure . alma and thus ammon be carry before the king who be over the land of ishmael and his name be lamoni and he be a descendant of ishmael . alma and the king inquired of ammon if it be his desire to dwell in the land among the lamanites or among his people . alma and ammon say unto him yea i desire to dwell among this people for a time yea and perhaps until the day i die . alma and it come to pass that king lamoni be much pleased with ammon and cause that his band should be loose and he would that ammon should take one of his daughter to wife . alma but ammon say unto him nay but i will be thy servant . therefore ammon become a servant to king lamoni . and it come to pass that he be set among other servant to watch the flock of lamoni accord to the custom of the lamanites . alma and after he have be in the service of the king three day a he be with the lamanitish servant go forth with their flock to the place of water which be call the water of sebus and all the lamanites drive their flock hither that they may have water alma therefore a ammon and the servant of the king be drive forth their flock to this place of water behold a certain number of the lamanites who have be with their flock to water stood and scatter the flock of ammon and the servant of the king and they scatter them insomuch that they flee many way . alma now the servant of the king begin to murmur say now the king will slay u a he have our brother because their flock be scatter by the wickedness of these men . and they begin to weep exceedingly say behold our flock be scatter already . alma now they weep because of the fear of be slay . now when ammon saw this his heart be swell within him with joy for say he i will show forth my power unto these my fellow servant or the power which be in me in restore these flock unto the king that i may win the heart of these my fellow servant that i may lead them to believe in my word . alma and now these be the thought of ammon when he saw the affliction of those whom he term to be his brother . alma and it come to pass that he flatter them by his word say my brother be of good cheer and let u go in search of the flock and we will gather them together and bring them back unto the place of water and thus we will preserve the flock unto the king and he will not slay u . alma and it come to pass that they go in search of the flock and they do follow ammon and they rush forth with much swiftness and do head the flock of the king and do gather them together again to the place of water . alma and those men again stand to scatter their flock but ammon say unto his brother encircle the flock round about that they flee not and i go and contend with these men who do scatter our flock . alma therefore they do a ammon command them and he go forth and stand to contend with those who stand by the water of sebus and they be in number not a few . alma therefore they do not fear ammon for they suppose that one of their men could slay him accord to their pleasure for they know not that the lord have promise mosiah that he would deliver his son out of their hand neither do they know anything concern the lord therefore they delight in the destruction of their brother and for this cause they stand to scatter the flock of the king . alma but ammon stand forth and begin to cast stone at them with his sling yea with mighty power he do sling stone amongst them and thus he slew a certain number of them insomuch that they begin to be astonish at his power nevertheless they be angry because of the slain of their brother and they be determine that he should fall therefore see that they could not hit him with their stone they come forth with club to slay him . alma but behold every man that lift his club to smite ammon he smite off their arm with his sword for he do withstand their blow by smite their arm with the edge of his sword insomuch that they begin to be astonish and begin to flee before him yea and they be not few in number and he cause them to flee by the strength of his arm . alma now six of them have fall by the sling but he slew none save it be their leader with his sword and he smite off a many of their arm a be lift against him and they be not a few . alma and when he have drive them afar off he return and they water their flock and return them to the pasture of the king and then go in unto the king bear the arm which have be smite off by the sword of ammon of those who seek to slay him and they be carry in unto the king for a testimony of the thing which they have do . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that king lamoni cause that his servant should stand forth and testify to all the thing which they have see concern the matter . alma and when they have all testify to the thing which they have see and he have learn of the faithfulness of ammon in preserve his flock and also of his great power in contend against those who seek to slay him he be astonish exceedingly and say surely this be more than a man . behold be not this the great spirit who doth send such great punishment upon this people because of their murder ? alma and they answer the king and say whether he be the great spirit or a man we know not but this much we do know that he can not be slay by the enemy of the king neither can they scatter the king 's flock when he be with u because of his expertness and great strength therefore we know that he be a friend to the king . and now o king we do not believe that a man have such great power for we know he can not be slay . alma and now when the king heard these word he say unto them now i know that it be the great spirit and he have come down at this time to preserve your life that i might not slay you a i do your brother . now this be the great spirit of whom our father have speak . alma now this be the tradition of lamoni which he have receive from his father that there be a great spirit . notwithstanding they believe in a great spirit they suppose that whatsoever they do be right nevertheless lamoni begin to fear exceedingly with fear lest he have do wrong in slay his servant alma for he have slay many of them because their brother have scatter their flock at the place of water and thus because they have have their flock scatter they be slay . alma now it be the practice of these lamanites to stand by the water of sebus to scatter the flock of the people that thereby they might drive away many that be scatter unto their own land it be a practice of plunder among them . alma and it come to pass that king lamoni inquire of his servant say where be this man that have such great power ? alma and they say unto him behold he be feed thy horse . now the king have command his servant previous to the time of the watering of their flock that they should prepare his horse and chariot and conduct him forth to the land of nephi for there have be a great feast appoint at the land of nephi by the father of lamoni who be king over all the land . alma now when king lamoni hear that ammon be prepare his horse and his chariot he be more astonished because of the faithfulness of ammon say surely there have not be any servant among all my servant that have be so faithful a this man for even he doth remember all my commandment to execute them . alma now i surely know that this be the great spirit and i would desire him that he come in unto me but i durst not . alma and it come to pass that when ammon have make ready the horse and the chariot for the king and his servant he go in unto the king and he saw that the countenance of the king be change therefore he be about to return out of his presence . alma and one of the king 's servant say unto him rabbanah which be be interpret powerful or great king consider their king to be powerful and thus he say unto him rabbanah the king desireth thee to stay . alma therefore ammon turn himself unto the king and say unto him what wilt thou that i should do for thee o king ? and the king answer him not for the space of an hour accord to their time for he know not what he should say unto him . alma and it come to pass that ammon say unto him again what desirest thou of me ? but the king answer him not . alma and it come to pass that ammon be fill with the spirit of god therefore he perceive the thought of the king . and he say unto him be it because thou hast heard that i defend thy servant and thy flock and slew seven of their brother with the sling and with the sword and smite off the arm of others in order to defend thy flock and thy servant behold be it this that causeth thy marvelings ? alma i say unto you what be it that thy marvelings be so great ? behold i be a man and be thy servant therefore whatsoever thou desirest which be right that will i do . alma now when the king have hear these word he marvel again for he behold that ammon could discern his thought but notwithstanding this king lamoni do open his mouth and say unto him who art thou ? art thou that great spirit who know all thing ? alma ammon answer and say unto him i be not . alma and the king say how knowest thou the thought of my heart ? thou mayest speak boldly and tell me concern these thing and also tell me by what power ye slew and smite off the arm of my brother that scatter my flock alma and now if thou wilt tell me concern these thing whatsoever thou desirest i will give unto thee and if it be need i would guard thee with my army but i know that thou art more powerful than all they nevertheless whatsoever thou desirest of me i will grant it unto thee . alma now ammon be wise yet harmless he say unto lamoni wilt thou hearken unto my word if i tell thee by what power i do these thing ? and this be the thing that i desire of thee . alma and the king answer him and say yea i will believe all thy word . and thus he be catch with guile . alma and ammon begin to speak unto him with boldness and say unto him believest thou that there be a god ? alma and he answer and say unto him i do not know what that meaneth . alma and then ammon say believest thou that there be a great spirit ? alma and he say yea . alma and ammon say this be god . and ammon say unto him again believest thou that this great spirit who be god create all thing which be in heaven and in the earth ? alma and he say yea i believe that he create all thing which be in the earth but i do not know the heaven . alma and ammon say unto him the heaven be a place where god dwells and all his holy angel . alma and king lamoni say be it above the earth ? alma and ammon say yea and he looketh down upon all the child of men and he know all the thought and intent of the heart for by his hand be they all create from the beginning . alma and king lamoni say i believe all these thing which thou hast spoken . art thou send from god ? alma ammon say unto him i be a man and man in the beginning be create after the image of god and i be call by his holy spirit to teach these thing unto this people that they may be bring to a knowledge of that which be just and true alma and a portion of that spirit dwelleth in me which giveth me knowledge and also power accord to my faith and desire which be in god . alma now when ammon have say these word he begin at the creation of the world and also the creation of adam and tell him all the thing concern the fall of man and rehearsed and lay before him the record and the holy scripture of the people which have be speak by the prophet even down to the time that their father lehi leave jerusalem . alma and he also rehearse unto them for it be unto the king and to his servant all the journeying of their father in the wilderness and all their suffering with hunger and thirst and their travail and so forth . alma and he also rehearse unto them concern the rebellion of laman and lemuel and the son of ishmael yea all their rebellion do he relate unto them and he expound unto them all the record and scripture from the time that lehi leave jerusalem down to the present time . alma but this be not all for he expound unto them the plan of redemption which be prepare from the foundation of the world and he also make know unto them concern the come of christ and all the work of the lord do he make know unto them . alma and it come to pass that after he have say all these thing and expound them to the king that the king believe all his word . alma and he begin to cry unto the lord say o lord have mercy accord to thy abundant mercy which thou hast have upon the people of nephi have upon me and my people . alma and now when he have say this he fell unto the earth a if he be dead . alma and it come to pass that his servant take him and carry him in unto his wife and lay him upon a bed and he lay a if he be dead for the space of two day and two night and his wife and his son and his daughter mourn over him after the manner of the lamanites greatly lament his loss . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that after two day and two night they be about to take his body and lay it in a sepulchre which they have make for the purpose of bury their dead . alma now the queen have heard of the fame of ammon therefore she send and desire that he should come in unto her . alma and it come to pass that ammon do a he be command and go in unto the queen and desire to know what she would that he should do . alma and she say unto him the servant of my husband have make it know unto me that thou art a prophet of a holy god and that thou hast power to do many mighty work in his name alma therefore if this be the case i would that ye should go in and see my husband for he have be lay upon his bed for the space of two day and two night and some say that he be not dead but others say that he be dead and that he stinketh and that he ought to be place in the sepulchre but a for myself to me he doth not stink . alma now this be what ammon desire for he know that king lamoni be under the power of god he know that the dark veil of unbelief be be cast away from his mind and the light which do light up his mind which be the light of the glory of god which be a marvelous light of his goodness yea this light have infuse such joy into his soul the cloud of darkness have be dispel and that the light of everlasting life be light up in his soul yea he know that this have overcome his natural frame and he be carry away in god alma therefore what the queen desire of him be his only desire . therefore he go in to see the king accord a the queen have desire him and he saw the king and he know that he be not dead . alma and he say unto the queen he be not dead but he sleepeth in god and on the morrow he shall rise again therefore bury him not . alma and ammon say unto her believest thou this ? and she say unto him i have have no witness save thy word and the word of our servant nevertheless i believe that it shall be accord a thou hast say . alma and ammon say unto her blessed art thou because of thy exceed faith i say unto thee woman there have not be such great faith among all the people of the nephites . alma and it come to pass that she watch over the bed of her husband from that time even until that time on the morrow which ammon have appoint that he should rise . alma and it come to pass that he arise accord to the word of ammon and a he arise he stretch forth his hand unto the woman and say bless be the name of god and bless art thou . alma for as sure a thou liv behold i have see my redeemer and he shall come forth and be bear of a woman and he shall redeem all mankind who believe on his name . now when he have say these word his heart be swell within him and he sink again with joy and the queen also sink down be overpower by the spirit . alma now ammon see the spirit of the lord pour out accord to his prayer upon the lamanites his brother who have be the cause of so much mourning among the nephites or among all the people of god because of their iniquity and their tradition he fell upon his knee and begin to pour out his soul in prayer and thanksgiving to god for what he have do for his brother and he be also overpower with joy and thus they all three have sink to the earth . alma now when the servant of the king have see that they have fall they also begin to cry unto god for the fear of the lord have come upon them also for it be they who have stand before the king and testify unto him concern the great power of ammon . alma and it come to pass that they do call on the name of the lord in their might even until they have all fall to the earth save it be one of the lamanitish woman whose name be abish she have be convert unto the lord for many year on account of a remarkable vision of her father alma thus have be convert to the lord and never have make it know therefore when she saw that all the servant of lamoni have fall to the earth and also her mistress the queen and the king and ammon lay prostrate upon the earth she know that it be the power of god and suppose that this opportunity by make know unto the people what have happen among them that by behold this scene it would cause them to believe in the power of god therefore she run forth from house to house make it known unto the people . alma and they begin to assemble themselves together unto the house of the king . and there come a multitude and to their astonishment they behold the king and the queen and their servant prostrate upon the earth and they all lay there a though they be dead and they also saw ammon and behold he be a nephite . alma and now the people begin to murmur among themselves some say that it be a great evil that have come upon them or upon the king and his house because he have suffer that the nephite should remain in the land . alma but others rebuke them say the king hath bring this evil upon his house because he slew his servant who have have their flock scatter at the water of sebus . alma and they be also rebuke by those men who have stand at the water of sebus and scatter the flock which belong to the king for they be angry with ammon because of the number which he have slain of their brother at the water of sebus while defend the flock of the king . alma now one of them whose brother have be slay with the sword of ammon be exceedingly angry with ammon draw his sword and go forth that he might let it fall upon ammon to slay him and a he lift the sword to smite him behold he fell dead . alma now we see that ammon could not be slay for the lord have say unto mosiah his father i will spare him and it shall be unto him accord to thy faith therefore mosiah trust him unto the lord . alma and it come to pass that when the multitude beheld that the man have fall dead who lift the sword to slay ammon fear come upon them all and they durst not put forth their hand to touch him or any of those who have fall and they begin to marvel again among themselves what could be the cause of this great power or what all these thing could mean . alma and it come to pass that there be many among them who say that ammon be the great spirit and others say he be send by the great spirit alma but others rebuke them all say that he be a monster who have be send from the nephites to torment them . alma and there be some who say that ammon be send by the great spirit to afflict them because of their iniquity and that it be the great spirit that have always attend the nephites who have ever deliver them out of their hand and they say that it be this great spirit who have destroy so many of their brother the lamanites . alma and thus the contention begin to be exceedingly sharp among them . and while they be thus contend the woman servant who have cause the multitude to be gather together come and when she saw the contention which be among the multitude she be exceedingly sorrowful even unto tear . alma and it come to pass that she go and take the queen by the hand that perhaps she might raise her from the ground and as soon a she touch her hand she arise and stand upon her foot and cry with a loud voice say o bless jesus who have save me from an awful hell ! o bless god have mercy on this people ! alma and when she have say this she clasp her hand be fill with joy speak many word which be not understood and when she have do this she take the king lamoni by the hand and behold he arise and stand upon his foot . alma and he immediately see the contention among his people go forth and begin to rebuke them and to teach them the word which he have hear from the mouth of ammon and as many a heard his word believe and be convert unto the lord . alma but there be many among them who would not hear his word therefore they go their way . alma and it come to pass that when ammon arise he also administer unto them and also do all the servant of lamoni and they do all declare unto the people the selfsame thing that their heart have be change that they have no more desire to do evil . alma and behold many do declare unto the people that they have see angel and have converse with them and thus they have tell them thing of god and of his righteousness . alma and it come to pass that there be many that do believe in their word and as many a do believe be baptize and they become a righteous people and they do establish a church among them . alma and thus the work of the lord do commence among the lamanites thus the lord do begin to pour out his spirit upon them and we see that his arm be extend to all people who will repent and believe on his name . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that when they have establish a church in that land that king lamoni desire that ammon should go with him to the land of nephi that he might show him unto his father . alma and the voice of the lord come to ammon say thou shalt not go up to the land of nephi for behold the king will seek thy life but thou shalt go to the land of middoni for behold thy brother aaron and also muloki and ammah be in prison . alma now it come to pass that when ammon have hear this he say unto lamoni behold my brother and brother be in prison at middoni and i go that i may deliver them . alma now lamoni say unto ammon i know in the strength of the lord thou canst do all thing . but behold i will go with thee to the land of middoni for the king of the land of middoni whose name be antiomno be a friend unto me therefore i go to the land of middoni that i may flatter the king of the land and he will cast thy brother out of prison . now lamoni say unto him who tell thee that thy brother be in prison ? alma and ammon say unto him no one hath tell me save it be god and he say unto me go and deliver thy brother for they be in prison in the land of middoni . alma now when lamoni have hear this he cause that his servant should make ready his horse and his chariot . alma and he say unto ammon come i will go with thee down to the land of middoni and there i will plead with the king that he will cast thy brother out of prison . alma and it come to pass that a ammon and lamoni be journey thither they meet the father of lamoni who be king over all the land . alma and behold the father of lamoni say unto him why do ye not come to the feast on that great day when i make a feast unto my son and unto my people ? alma and he also say whither art thou go with this nephite who be one of the child of a liar ? alma and it come to pass that lamoni rehearse unto him whither he be go for he fear to offend him . alma and he also tell him all the cause of his tarrying in his own kingdom that he do not go unto his father to the feast which he have prepare . alma and now when lamoni have rehearse unto him all these thing behold to his astonishment his father be angry with him and say lamoni thou art go to deliver these nephites who be son of a liar . behold he rob our father and now his child be also come amongst u that they may by their cunning and their lying deceive u that they again may rob u of our property . alma now the father of lamoni command him that he should slay ammon with the sword . and he also command him that he should not go to the land of middoni but that he should return with him to the land of ishmael . alma but lamoni say unto him i will not slay ammon neither will i return to the land of ishmael but i go to the land of middoni that i may release the brother of ammon for i know that they be just men and holy prophet of the true god . alma now when his father have hear these word he be angry with him and he draw his sword that he might smite him to the earth . alma but ammon stand forth and say unto him behold thou shalt not slay thy son nevertheless it be well that he should fall than thee for behold he have repent of his sin but if thou shouldst fall at this time in thine anger thy soul could not be save . alma and again it be expedient that thou shouldst forbear for if thou shouldst slay thy son he be an innocent man his blood would cry from the ground to the lord his god for vengeance to come upon thee and perhaps thou wouldst lose thy soul . alma now when ammon have say these word unto him he answer him say i know that if i should slay my son that i should shed innocent blood for it be thou that hast seek to destroy him . alma and he stretch forth his hand to slay ammon . but ammon withstand his blow and also smite his arm that he could not use it . alma now when the king saw that ammon could slay him he begin to plead with ammon that he would spare his life . alma but ammon raise his sword and say unto him behold i will smite thee except thou wilt grant unto me that my brother may be cast out of prison . alma now the king fear he should lose his life say if thou wilt spare me i will grant unto thee whatsoever thou wilt ask even to half of the kingdom . alma now when ammon saw that he have work upon the old king accord to his desire he say unto him if thou wilt grant that my brother may be cast out of prison and also that lamoni may retain his kingdom and that ye be not displease with him but grant that he may do accord to his own desire in whatsoever thing he thinketh then will i spare thee otherwise i will smite thee to the earth . alma now when ammon have say these word the king begin to rejoice because of his life . alma and when he saw that ammon have no desire to destroy him and when he also saw the great love he have for his son lamoni he be astonish exceedingly and say because this be all that thou hast desire that i would release thy brother and suffer that my son lamoni should retain his kingdom behold i will grant unto you that my son may retain his kingdom from this time and forever and i will govern him no more alma and i will also grant unto thee that thy brother may be cast out of prison and thou and thy brother may come unto me in my kingdom for i shall greatly desire to see thee . for the king be greatly astonish at the word which he have speak and also at the word which have be speak by his son lamoni therefore he be desirous to learn them . alma and it come to pass that ammon and lamoni proceed on their journey towards the land of middoni . and lamoni find favor in the eye of the king of the land therefore the brother of ammon be bring forth out of prison . alma and when ammon do meet them he be exceedingly sorrowful for behold they be naked and their skin be wear exceedingly because of be bind with strong cord . and they also have suffer hunger thirst and all kind of affliction nevertheless they be patient in all their suffering . alma and a it happen it be their lot to have fall into the hand of a more hardened and a more stiffnecked people therefore they would not hearken unto their word and they have cast them out and have smite them and have drive them from house to house and from place to place even until they have arrive in the land of middoni and there they be take and cast into prison and bound with strong cord and keep in prison for many day and be deliver by lamoni and ammon . alma chapter alma now when ammon and his brother separate themselves in the border of the land of the lamanites behold aaron take his journey towards the land which be call by the lamanites jerusalem call it after the land of their father ' nativity and it be away join the border of mormon . alma now the lamanites and the amalekites and the people of amulon have build a great city which be call jerusalem . alma now the lamanites of themselves be sufficiently harden but the amalekites and the amulonites be still harder therefore they do cause the lamanites that they should harden their heart that they should wax strong in wickedness and their abomination . alma and it come to pass that aaron come to the city of jerusalem and first begin to preach to the amalekites . and he begin to preach to them in their synagogue for they have build synagogue after the order of the nehors for many of the amalekites and the amulonites be after the order of the nehors . alma therefore a aaron enter into one of their synagogue to preach unto the people and a he be speak unto them behold there arise an amalekite and begin to contend with him say what be that thou hast testify ? hast thou see an angel ? why do not angels appear unto u ? behold be not this people as good a thy people ? alma thou also sayest except we repent we shall perish . how knowest thou the thought and intent of our heart ? how knowest thou that we have cause to repent ? how knowest thou that we be not a righteous people ? behold we have build sanctuary and we do assemble ourselves together to worship god . we do believe that god will save all men . alma now aaron say unto him believest thou that the son of god shall come to redeem mankind from their sin ? alma and the man say unto him we do not believe that thou knowest any such thing . we do not believe in these foolish tradition . we do not believe that thou knowest of thing to come neither do we believe that thy father and also that our father do know concern the thing which they spake of that which be to come . alma now aaron begin to open the scripture unto them concern the come of christ and also concern the resurrection of the dead and that there could be no redemption for mankind save it be through the death and suffering of christ and the atonement of his blood . alma and it come to pass a he begin to expound these thing unto them they be angry with him and begin to mock him and they would not hear the word which he spake . alma therefore when he saw that they would not hear his word he depart out of their synagogue and come over to a village which be call ani anti and there he find muloki preach the word unto them and also ammah and his brother . and they contend with many about the word . alma and it come to pass that they saw that the people would harden their heart therefore they depart and come over into the land of middoni . and they do preach the word unto many and few believe on the word which they teach . alma nevertheless aaron and a certain number of his brother be take and cast into prison and the remainder of them flee out of the land of middoni unto the region round about . alma and those who be cast into prison suffer many thing and they be deliver by the hand of lamoni and ammon and they be feed and clothe . alma and they go forth again to declare the word and thus they be deliver for the first time out of prison and thus they have suffer . alma and they go forth whithersoever they be lead by the spirit of the lord preach the word of god in every synagogue of the amalekites or in every assembly of the lamanites where they could be admit . alma and it come to pass that the lord begin to bless them insomuch that they bring many to the knowledge of the truth yea they do convince many of their sin and of the tradition of their father which be not correct . alma and it come to pass that ammon and lamoni return from the land of middoni to the land of ishmael which be the land of their inheritance . alma and king lamoni would not suffer that ammon should serve him or be his servant . alma but he cause that there should be synagogue build in the land of ishmael and he cause that his people or the people who be under his reign should assemble themselves together . alma and he do rejoice over them and he do teach them many thing . and he do also declare unto them that they be a people who be under him and that they be a free people that they be free from the oppression of the king his father for that his father have grant unto him that he might reign over the people who be in the land of ishmael and in all the land round about . alma and he also declare unto them that they might have the liberty of worship the lord their god accord to their desire in whatsoever place they be in if it be in the land which be under the reign of king lamoni . alma and ammon do preach unto the people of king lamoni and it come to pass that he do teach them all thing concern thing pertain to righteousness . and he do exhort them daily with all diligence and they give heed unto his word and they be zealous for keep the commandment of god . alma chapter alma now a ammon be thus teach the people of lamoni continually we will return to the account of aaron and his brother for after he depart from the land of middoni he be lead by the spirit to the land of nephi even to the house of the king which be over all the land save it be the land of ishmael and he be the father of lamoni . alma and it come to pass that he go in unto him into the king 's palace with his brother and bow himself before the king and say unto him behold o king we be the brother of ammon whom thou hast deliver out of prison . alma and now o king if thou wilt spare our life we will be thy servant . and the king say unto them arise for i will grant unto you your life and i will not suffer that ye shall be my servant but i will insist that ye shall administer unto me for i have be somewhat troubled in mind because of the generosity and the greatness of the word of thy brother ammon and i desire to know the cause why he have not come up out of middoni with thee . alma and aaron say unto the king behold the spirit of the lord have call him another way he have go to the land of ishmael to teach the people of lamoni . alma now the king say unto them what be this that ye have say concern the spirit of the lord ? behold this be the thing which doth trouble me . alma and also what be this that ammon say if ye will repent ye shall be save and if ye will not repent ye shall be cast off at the last day ? alma and aaron answer him and say unto him believest thou that there be a god ? and the king say i know that the amalekites say that there be a god and i have grant unto them that they should build sanctuary that they may assemble themselves together to worship him . and if now thou sayest there be a god behold i will believe . alma and now when aaron heard this his heart begin to rejoice and he say behold assuredly a thou liv o king there be a god . alma and the king say be god that great spirit that bring our father out of the land of jerusalem ? alma and aaron say unto him yea he be that great spirit and he create all thing both in heaven and in earth . believest thou this ? alma and he say yea i believe that the great spirit create all thing and i desire that ye should tell me concern all these thing and i will believe thy word . alma and it come to pass that when aaron saw that the king would believe his word he begin from the creation of adam read the scripture unto the king how god create man after his own image and that god give him commandment and that because of transgression man have fall . alma and aaron do expound unto him the scripture from the creation of adam lay the fall of man before him and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption which be prepare from the foundation of the world through christ for all whosoever would believe on his name . alma and since man have fall he could not merit anything of himself but the suffering and death of christ atone for their sin through faith and repentance and so forth and that he breaketh the band of death that the grave shall have no victory and that the sting of death should be swallow up in the hope of glory and aaron do expound all these thing unto the king . alma and it come to pass that after aaron have expound these thing unto him the king say what shall i do that i may have this eternal life of which thou hast speak ? yea what shall i do that i may be bear of god have this wicked spirit root out of my breast and receive his spirit that i may be fill with joy that i may not be cast off at the last day ? behold say he i will give up all that i possess yea i will forsake my kingdom that i may receive this great joy . alma but aaron say unto him if thou desirest this thing if thou wilt bow down before god yea if thou wilt repent of all thy sin and will bow down before god and call on his name in faith believing that ye shall receive then shalt thou receive the hope which thou desirest . alma and it come to pass that when aaron have say these word the king do bow down before the lord upon his knee yea even he do prostrate himself upon the earth and cry mightily say alma o god aaron hath tell me that there be a god and if there be a god and if thou art god wilt thou make thyself know unto me and i will give away all my sin to know thee and that i may be raise from the dead and be save at the last day . and now when the king have say these word he be strike a if he be dead . alma and it come to pass that his servant ran and tell the queen all that have happen unto the king . and she come in unto the king and when she saw him lay a if he be dead and also aaron and his brother standing a though they have be the cause of his fall she be angry with them and command that her servant or the servant of the king should take them and slay them . alma now the servant have see the cause of the king 's fall therefore they durst not lay their hand on aaron and his brother and they plead with the queen say why commandest thou that we should slay these men when behold one of them be mighty than u all ? therefore we shall fall before them . alma now when the queen saw the fear of the servant she also begin to fear exceedingly l there should some evil come upon her . and she command her servant that they should go and call the people that they might slay aaron and his brother . alma now when aaron saw the determination of the queen he also know the hardness of the heart of the people fear l that a multitude should assemble themselves together and there should be a great contention and a disturbance among them therefore he put forth his hand and raise the king from the earth and say unto him stand . and he stand upon his foot receive his strength . alma now this be do in the presence of the queen and many of the servant . and when they saw it they greatly marvel and begin to fear . and the king stand forth and begin to minister unto them . and he do minister unto them insomuch that his whole household be convert unto the lord . alma now there be a multitude gather together because of the commandment of the queen and there begin to be great murmuring among them because of aaron and his brother . alma but the king stand forth among them and administer unto them . and they be pacify towards aaron and those who be with him . alma and it come to pass that when the king saw that the people be pacify he cause that aaron and his brother should stand forth in the midst of the multitude and that they should preach the word unto them . alma and it come to pass that the king send a proclamation throughout all the land amongst all his people who be in all his land who be in all the region round about which be border even to the sea on the east and on the west and which be divide from the land of zarahemla by a narrow strip of wilderness which run from the sea east even to the sea west and round about on the border of the seashore and the border of the wilderness which be on the north by the land of zarahemla through the border of manti by the head of the river sidon run from the east towards the west and thus be the lamanites and the nephites divide . alma now the more idle part of the lamanites live in the wilderness and dwelt in tent and they be spread through the wilderness on the west in the land of nephi yea and also on the west of the land of zarahemla in the border by the seashore and on the west in the land of nephi in the place of their father ' first inheritance and thus border along by the seashore . alma and also there be many lamanites on the east by the seashore whither the nephites have drive them . and thus the nephites be nearly surround by the lamanites nevertheless the nephites have take possession of all the northern part of the land border on the wilderness at the head of the river sidon from the east to the west round about on the wilderness side on the north even until they come to the land which they call bountiful . alma and it border upon the land which they call desolation it be so far northward that it come into the land which have be people and be destroy of whose bone we have speak which be discover by the people of zarahemla it be the place of their first landing . alma and they come from there up into the south wilderness . thus the land on the northward be call desolation and the land on the southward be call bountiful it be the wilderness which be fill with all manner of wild animal of every kind a part of which have come from the land northward for food . alma and now it be only the distance of a day and a half 's journey for a nephite on the line bountiful and the land desolation from the east to the west sea and thus the land of nephi and the land of zarahemla be nearly surround by water there be a small neck of land between the land northward and the land southward . alma and it come to pass that the nephites have inhabit the land bountiful even from the east unto the west sea and thus the nephites in their wisdom with their guard and their army have hem in the lamanites on the south that thereby they should have no more possession on the north that they might not overrun the land northward . alma therefore the lamanites could have no more possession only in the land of nephi and the wilderness round about . now this be wisdom in the nephites a the lamanites be an enemy to them they would not suffer their affliction on every hand and also that they might have a country whither they might flee accord to their desire . alma and now i after have say this return again to the account of ammon and aaron omner and himni and their brother . alma chapter alma behold now it come to pass that the king of the lamanites send a proclamation among all his people that they should not lay their hand on ammon or aaron or omner or himni nor either of their brother who should go forth preach the word of god in whatsoever place they should be in any part of their land . alma yea he send a decree among them that they should not lay their hand on them to bind them or to cast them into prison neither should they spit upon them nor smite them nor cast them out of their synagogue nor scourge them neither should they cast stone at them but that they should have free access to their house and also their temple and their sanctuary . alma and thus they might go forth and preach the word accord to their desire for the king have be convert unto the lord and all his household therefore he send his proclamation throughout the land unto his people that the word of god might have no obstruction but that it might go forth throughout all the land that his people might be convince concern the wicked tradition of their father and that they might be convince that they be all brother and that they ought not to murder nor to plunder nor to steal nor to commit adultery nor to commit any manner of wickedness . alma and now it come to pass that when the king have send forth this proclamation that aaron and his brother go forth from city to city and from one house of worship to another establish church and consecrate priest and teacher throughout the land among the lamanites to preach and to teach the word of god among them and thus they begin to have great success . alma and thousand be bring to the knowledge of the lord yea thousand be bring to believe in the tradition of the nephites and they be teach the record and prophecy which be hand down even to the present time . alma and as sure a the lord liveth so sure as many a believed or as many a be bring to the knowledge of the truth through the preaching of ammon and his brother accord to the spirit of revelation and of prophecy and the power of god work miracle in them yea i say unto you a the lord liveth a many of the lamanites a believe in their preaching and be convert unto the lord never do fall away . alma for they become a righteous people they do lay down the weapon of their rebellion that they do not fight against god any more neither against any of their brother . alma now these be they who be convert unto the lord alma the people of the lamanites who be in the land of ishmael alma and also of the people of the lamanites who be in the land of middoni alma and also of the people of the lamanites who be in the city of nephi alma and also of the people of the lamanites who be in the land of shilom and who be in the land of shemlon and in the city of lemuel and in the city of shimnilom . alma and these be the name of the city of the lamanites which be convert unto the lord and these be they that lay down the weapon of their rebellion yea all their weapon of war and they be all lamanites . alma and the amalekites be not convert save only one neither be any of the amulonites but they do harden their heart and also the heart of the lamanites in that part of the land wheresoever they dwell yea and all their village and all their city . alma therefore we have name all the city of the lamanites in which they do repent and come to the knowledge of the truth and be convert . alma and now it come to pass that the king and those who be convert be desirous that they might have a name that thereby they might be distinguish from their brother therefore the king consult with aaron and many of their priest concern the name that they should take upon them that they might be distinguish . alma and it come to pass that they call their name anti nephi lehies and they be call by this name and be no more called lamanites . alma and they begin to be a very industrious people yea and they be friendly with the nephites therefore they do open a correspondence with them and the curse of god do no more follow them . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that the amalekites and the amulonites and the lamanites who be in the land of amulon and also in the land of helam and who be in the land of jerusalem and in fine in all the land round about who have not be convert and have not take upon them the name of anti nephi lehi be stir up by the amalekites and by the amulonites to anger against their brother . alma and their hatred become exceedingly sore against them even insomuch that they begin to rebel against their king insomuch that they would not that he should be their king therefore they take up arm against the people of anti nephi lehi . alma now the king confer the kingdom upon his son and he call his name anti nephi lehi . alma and the king die in that selfsame year that the lamanites begin to make preparation for war against the people of god . alma now when ammon and his brother and all those who have come up with him saw the preparation of the lamanites to destroy their brother they come forth to the land of midian and there ammon meet all his brother and from thence they come to the land of ishmael that they might hold a council with lamoni and also with his brother anti nephi lehi what they should do to defend themselves against the lamanites . alma now there be not one soul among all the people who have be convert unto the lord that would take up arm against their brother nay they would not even make any preparation for war yea and also their king command them that they should not . alma now these be the word which he say unto the people concern the matter i thank my god my beloved people that our great god have in goodness send these our brother the nephites unto u to preach unto u and to convince u of the tradition of our wicked father . alma and behold i thank my great god that he have give u a portion of his spirit to soften our heart that we have open a correspondence with these brother the nephites . alma and behold i also thank my god that by open this correspondence we have be convince of our sin and of the many murder which we have commit . alma and i also thank my god yea my great god that he hath grant unto u that we might repent of these thing and also that he hath forgiven u of those our many sin and murder which we have commit and take away the guilt from our heart through the merit of his son . alma and now behold my brother since it have be all that we could do a we be the most lose of all mankind to repent of all our sin and the many murder which we have commit and to get god to take them away from our heart for it be all we could do to repent sufficiently before god that he would take away our stain alma now my best beloved brother since god hath take away our stain and our sword have become bright then let u stain our sword no more with the blood of our brother . alma behold i say unto you nay let u retain our sword that they be not stain with the blood of our brother for perhaps if we should stain our sword again they can no more be wash bright through the blood of the son of our great god which shall be shed for the atonement of our sin . alma and the great god have have mercy on u and make these thing know unto u that we might not perish yea and he have make these thing know unto u beforehand because he loveth our soul as well a he loveth our child therefore in his mercy he doth visit u by his angel that the plan of salvation might be make know unto u as well a unto future generation . alma oh how merciful be our god ! and now behold since it have be as much a we could do to get our stain take away from u and our sword be make bright let u hide them away that they may be keep bright a a testimony to our god at the last day or at the day that we shall be bring to stand before him to be judge that we have not stain our sword in the blood of our brother since he impart his word unto u and have make u clean thereby . alma and now my brother if our brother seek to destroy u behold we will hide away our sword yea even we will bury them deep in the earth that they may be keep bright a a testimony that we have never use them at the last day and if our brother destroy u behold we shall go to our god and shall be save . alma and now it come to pass that when the king have make an end of these saying and all the people be assemble together they take their sword and all the weapon which be use for the shedding of man 's blood and they do bury them up deep in the earth . alma and this they do it be in their view a testimony to god and also to men that they never would use weapon again for the shedding of man 's blood and this they do vouch and covenant with god that rather than shed the blood of their brother they would give up their own life and rather than take away from a brother they would give unto him and rather than spend their day in idleness they would labor abundantly with their hand . alma and thus we see that when these lamanites be bring to believe and to know the truth they be firm and would suffer even unto death rather than commit sin and thus we see that they bury their weapon of peace or they bury the weapon of war for peace . alma and it come to pass that their brother the lamanites make preparation for war and come up to the land of nephi for the purpose of destroy the king and to place another in his stead and also of destroy the people of anti nephi lehi out of the land . alma now when the people saw that they be come against them they go out to meet them and prostrate themselves before them to the earth and begin to call on the name of the lord and thus they be in this attitude when the lamanites begin to fall upon them and begin to slay them with the sword . alma and thus without meet any resistance they do slay a thousand and five of them and we know that they be bless for they have go to dwell with their god . alma now when the lamanites saw that their brother would not flee from the sword neither would they turn aside to the right hand or to the left but that they would lie down and perish and praised god even in the very act of perish under the sword alma now when the lamanites saw this they do forbear from slay them and there be many whose heart have swell in them for those of their brother who have fall under the sword for they repent of the thing which they have do . alma and it come to pass that they throw down their weapon of war and they would not take them again for they be sting for the murder which they have commit and they come down even a their brother rely upon the mercy of those whose arm be lift to slay them . alma and it come to pass that the people of god be join that day by more than the number who have be slay and those who have be slay be righteous people therefore we have no reason to doubt but what they be save . alma and there be not a wicked man slain among them but there be more than a thousand brought to the knowledge of the truth thus we see that the lord worketh in many way to the salvation of his people . alma now the great number of those of the lamanites who slew so many of their brother be amalekites and amulonites the great number of whom be after the order of the nehors . alma now among those who join the people of the lord there be none who be amalekites or amulonites or who be of the order of nehor but they be actual descendant of laman and lemuel . alma and thus we can plainly discern that after a people have be once enlighten by the spirit of god and have have great knowledge of thing pertain to righteousness and then have fall away into sin and transgression they become more hardened and thus their state become bad than though they have never know these thing . alma chapter alma and behold now it come to pass that those lamanites be more angry because they have slay their brother therefore they swear vengeance upon the nephites and they do no more attempt to slay the people of anti nephi lehi at that time . alma but they take their army and go over into the border of the land of zarahemla and fell upon the people who be in the land of ammonihah and destroy them . alma and after that they have many battle with the nephites in the which they be drive and slay . alma and among the lamanites who be slay be almost all the seed of amulon and his brother who be the priest of noah and they be slay by the hand of the nephites alma and the remainder have flee into the east wilderness and have usurp the power and authority over the lamanites cause that many of the lamanites should perish by fire because of their belief alma for many of them after have suffer much loss and so many affliction begin to be stir up in remembrance of the word which aaron and his brother have preach to them in their land therefore they begin to disbelieve the tradition of their father and to believe in the lord and that he give great power unto the nephites and thus there be many of them convert in the wilderness . alma and it come to pass that those ruler who be the remnant of the child of amulon cause that they should be put to death yea all those that believe in these thing . alma now this martyrdom cause that many of their brother should be stir up to anger and there begin to be contention in the wilderness and the lamanites begin to hunt the seed of amulon and his brother and begin to slay them and they flee into the east wilderness . alma and behold they be hunt at this day by the lamanites . thus the word of abinadi be bring to pass which he say concern the seed of the priest who cause that he should suffer death by fire . alma for he say unto them what ye shall do unto me shall be a type of thing to come . alma and now abinadi be the first that suffer death by fire because of his belief in god now this be what he mean that many should suffer death by fire accord a he have suffer . alma and he say unto the priest of noah that their seed should cause many to be put to death in the like manner a he be and that they should be scatter abroad and slay even a a sheep have no shepherd be drive and slay by wild beast and now behold these word be verify for they be drive by the lamanites and they be hunt and they be smite . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites saw that they could not overpower the nephites they return again to their own land and many of them come over to dwell in the land of ishmael and the land of nephi and do join themselves to the people of god who be the people of anti nephi lehi . alma and they do also bury their weapon of war accord a their brother have and they begin to be a righteous people and they do walk in the way of the lord and do observe to keep his commandment and his statute . alma yea and they do keep the law of moses for it be expedient that they should keep the law of moses a yet for it be not all fulfil . but notwithstanding the law of moses they do look forward to the come of christ consider that the law of moses be a type of his come and believe that they must keep those outward performance until the time that he should be reveal unto them . alma now they do not suppose that salvation come by the law of moses but the law of moses do serve to strengthen their faith in christ and thus they do retain a hope through faith unto eternal salvation rely upon the spirit of prophecy which spake of those thing to come . alma and now behold ammon and aaron and omner and himni and their brother do rejoice exceedingly for the success which they have have among the lamanites see that the lord have grant unto them accord to their prayer and that he have also verify his word unto them in every particular . alma chapter alma and now these be the word of ammon to his brother which say thus my brother and my brother behold i say unto you how great reason have we to rejoice for could we have suppose when we start from the land of zarahemla that god would have grant unto u such great blessing ? alma and now i ask what great blessing have he bestow upon u ? can ye tell ? alma behold i answer for you for our brother the lamanites be in darkness yea even in the dark abyss but behold how many of them be bring to behold the marvelous light of god ! and this be the blessing which hath be bestow upon u that we have be make instrument in the hand of god to bring about this great work . alma behold thousand of them do rejoice and have be bring into the fold of god . alma behold the field be ripe and bless be ye for ye do thrust in the sickle and do reap with your might yea all the day long do ye labor and behold the number of your sheaf ! and they shall be gather into the garner that they be not waste . alma yea they shall not be beat down by the storm at the last day yea neither shall they be harrow up by the whirlwind but when the storm cometh they shall be gather together in their place that the storm can not penetrate to them yea neither shall they be drive with fierce wind whithersoever the enemy listeth to carry them . alma but behold they be in the hand of the lord of the harvest and they be his and he will raise them up at the last day . alma bless be the name of our god let u sing to his praise yea let u give thanks to his holy name for he doth work righteousness forever . alma for if we have not come up out of the land of zarahemla these our dearly beloved brother who have so dearly beloved u would still have be rack with hatred against u yea and they would also have be stranger to god . alma and it come to pass that when ammon have say these word his brother aaron rebuke him say ammon i fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting . alma but ammon say unto him i do not boast in my own strength nor in my own wisdom but behold my joy be full yea my heart be brim with joy and i will rejoice in my god . alma yea i know that i be nothing a to my strength i be weak therefore i will not boast of myself but i will boast of my god for in his strength i can do all thing yea behold many mighty miracle we have work in this land for which we will praise his name forever . alma behold how many thousand of our brother have he loose from the pain of hell and they be bring to sing redeem love and this because of the power of his word which be in u therefore have we not great reason to rejoice ? alma yea we have reason to praise him forever for he be the most high god and have loose our brother from the chain of hell . alma yea they be encircle about with everlasting darkness and destruction but behold he have bring them into his everlasting light yea into everlasting salvation and they be encircle about with the matchless bounty of his love yea and we have be instrument in his hand of do this great and marvelous work . alma therefore let u glory yea we will glory in the lord yea we will rejoice for our joy be full yea we will praise our god forever . behold who can glory too much in the lord ? yea who can say too much of his great power and of his mercy and of his long suffering towards the child of men ? behold i say unto you i can not say the small part which i feel . alma who could have suppose that our god would have be so merciful a to have snatch u from our awful sinful and polluted state ? alma behold we go forth even in wrath with mighty threatenings to destroy his church . alma oh then why do he not consign u to an awful destruction yea why do he not let the sword of his justice fall upon u and doom u to eternal despair ? alma oh my soul almost a it be fleeth at the thought . behold he do not exercise his justice upon u but in his great mercy hath bring u over that everlasting gulf of death and misery even to the salvation of our soul . alma and now behold my brother what natural man be there that knoweth these thing ? i say unto you there be none that knoweth these thing save it be the penitent . alma yea he that repenteth and exerciseth faith and bringeth forth good work and prayeth continually without cease unto such it be give to know the mystery of god yea unto such it shall be give to reveal thing which never have be reveal yea and it shall be give unto such to bring thousand of soul to repentance even a it have be give unto u to bring these our brother to repentance . alma now do ye remember my brother that we say unto our brother in the land of zarahemla we go up to the land of nephi to preach unto our brother the lamanites and they laugh u to scorn ? alma for they say unto u do ye suppose that ye can bring the lamanites to the knowledge of the truth ? do ye suppose that ye can convince the lamanites of the incorrectness of the tradition of their father a stiffnecked a people a they be whose heart delight in the shedding of blood whose day have be spend in the gross iniquity whose way have be the way of a transgressor from the beginning ? now my brother ye remember that this be their language . alma and moreover they do say let u take up arm against them that we destroy them and their iniquity out of the land l they overrun u and destroy u . alma but behold my beloved brother we come into the wilderness not with the intent to destroy our brother but with the intent that perhaps we might save some few of their soul . alma now when our heart be depressed and we be about to turn back behold the lord comfort u and say go amongst thy brother the lamanites and bear with patience thine affliction and i will give unto you success . alma and now behold we have come and be forth amongst them and we have be patient in our suffering and we have suffer every privation yea we have travel from house to house rely upon the mercy of the world not upon the mercy of the world alone but upon the mercy of god . alma and we have enter into their house and teach them and we have teach them in their street yea and we have teach them upon their hill and we have also enter into their temple and their synagogue and teach them and we have be cast out and mocked and spit upon and smite upon our cheek and we have be stone and take and bind with strong cord and cast into prison and through the power and wisdom of god we have be deliver again . alma and we have suffer all manner of affliction and all this that perhaps we might be the mean of save some soul and we suppose that our joy would be full if perhaps we could be the mean of save some . alma now behold we can look forth and see the fruit of our labor and be they few ? i say unto you nay they be many yea and we can witness of their sincerity because of their love towards their brother and also towards u . alma for behold they have rather sacrifice their life than even to take the life of their enemy and they have bury their weapon of war deep in the earth because of their love towards their brother . alma and now behold i say unto you have there be so great love in all the land ? behold i say unto you nay there have not even among the nephites . alma for behold they would take up arm against their brother they would not suffer themselves to be slay . but behold how many of these have lay down their life and we know that they have go to their god because of their love and of their hatred to sin . alma now have we not reason to rejoice ? yea i say unto you there never be men that have so great reason to rejoice a we since the world begin yea and my joy be carry away even unto boasting in my god for he have all power all wisdom and all understanding he comprehendeth all thing and he be a merciful be even unto salvation to those who will repent and believe on his name . alma now if this be boast even so will i boast for this be my life and my light my joy and my salvation and my redemption from everlasting wo . yea bless be the name of my god who have be mindful of this people who be a branch of the tree of israel and have be lose from it body in a strange land yea i say bless be the name of my god who have be mindful of u wanderer in a strange land . alma now my brother we see that god be mindful of every people whatsoever land they may be in yea he numbereth his people and his bowel of mercy be over all the earth . now this be my joy and my great thanksgiving yea and i will give thanks unto my god forever . amen . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that when those lamanites who have go to war against the nephites have find after their many struggle to destroy them that it be in vain to seek their destruction they return again to the land of nephi . alma and it come to pass that the amalekites because of their loss be exceedingly angry . and when they saw that they could not seek revenge from the nephites they begin to stir up the people in anger against their brother the people of anti nephi lehi therefore they begin again to destroy them . alma now this people again refuse to take their arm and they suffer themselves to be slay accord to the desire of their enemy . alma now when ammon and his brother saw this work of destruction among those whom they so dearly beloved and among those who have so dearly beloved them for they be treat a though they be angel send from god to save them from everlasting destruction therefore when ammon and his brother saw this great work of destruction they be move with compassion and they say unto the king alma let u gather together this people of the lord and let u go down to the land of zarahemla to our brother the nephites and flee out of the hand of our enemy that we be not destroy . alma but the king say unto them behold the nephites will destroy u because of the many murder and sin we have commit against them . alma and ammon say i will go and inquire of the lord and if he say unto u go down unto our brother will ye go ? alma and the king say unto him yea if the lord saith unto u go we will go down unto our brother and we will be their slave until we repair unto them the many murder and sin which we have commit against them . alma but ammon say unto him it be against the law of our brother which be establish by my father that there should be any slave among them therefore let u go down and rely upon the mercy of our brother . alma but the king say unto him inquire of the lord and if he saith unto u go we will go otherwise we will perish in the land . alma and it come to pass that ammon go and inquire of the lord and the lord say unto him alma get this people out of this land that they perish not for satan have great hold on the heart of the amalekites who do stir up the lamanites to anger against their brother to slay them therefore get thee out of this land and bless be this people in this generation for i will preserve them . alma and now it come to pass that ammon go and tell the king all the word which the lord have say unto him . alma and they gather together all their people yea all the people of the lord and do gather together all their flock and herd and depart out of the land and come into the wilderness which divide the land of nephi from the land of zarahemla and come over near the border of the land . alma and it come to pass that ammon say unto them behold i and my brother will go forth into the land of zarahemla and ye shall remain here until we return and we will try the heart of our brother whether they will that ye shall come into their land . alma and it come to pass that as ammon be go forth into the land that he and his brother meet alma over in the place of which have be speak and behold this be a joyful meeting . alma now the joy of ammon be so great even that he be full yea he be swallow up in the joy of his god even to the exhausting of his strength and he fell again to the earth . alma now be not this exceed joy ? behold this be joy which none receiveth save it be the truly penitent and humble seeker of happiness . alma now the joy of alma in meet his brother be truly great and also the joy of aaron of omner and himni but behold their joy be not that to exceed their strength . alma and now it come to pass that alma conduct his brother back to the land of zarahemla even to his own house . and they go and tell the chief judge all the thing that have happen unto them in the land of nephi among their brother the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that the chief judge send a proclamation throughout all the land desire the voice of the people concern the admit their brother who be the people of anti nephi lehi . alma and it come to pass that the voice of the people come say behold we will give up the land of jershon which be on the east by the sea which join the land bountiful which be on the south of the land bountiful and this land jershon be the land which we will give unto our brother for an inheritance . alma and behold we will set our army between the land jershon and the land nephi that we may protect our brother in the land jershon and this we do for our brother on account of their fear to take up arm against their brother lest they should commit sin and this their great fear come because of their sore repentance which they have on account of their many murder and their awful wickedness . alma and now behold this will we do unto our brother that they may inherit the land jershon and we will guard them from their enemy with our army on condition that they will give u a portion of their substance to assist u that we may maintain our army . alma now it come to pass that when ammon have hear this he return to the people of anti nephi lehi and also alma with him into the wilderness where they have pitch their tent and make know unto them all these thing . and alma also relate unto them his conversion with ammon and aaron and his brother . alma and it come to pass that it do cause great joy among them . and they go down into the land of jershon and take possession of the land of jershon and they be call by the nephites the people of ammon therefore they be distinguish by that name ever after . alma and they be among the people of nephi and also number among the people who be of the church of god . and they be also distinguish for their zeal towards god and also towards men for they be perfectly honest and upright in all thing and they be firm in the faith of christ even unto the end . alma and they do look upon shed the blood of their brother with the great abhorrence and they never could be prevail upon to take up arm against their brother and they never do look upon death with any degree of terror for their hope and view of christ and the resurrection therefore death be swallow up to them by the victory of christ over it . alma therefore they would suffer death in the most aggravating and distress manner which could be inflict by their brother before they would take the sword or cimeter to smite them . alma and thus they be a zealous and beloved people a highly favored people of the lord . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that after the people of ammon be establish in the land of jershon and a church also establish in the land of jershon and the army of the nephites be set round about the land of jershon yea in all the border round about the land of zarahemla behold the army of the lamanites have follow their brother into the wilderness . alma and thus there be a tremendous battle yea even such an one a never have be know among all the people in the land from the time lehi leave jerusalem yea and ten of thousand of the lamanites be slain and scattered abroad . alma yea and also there be a tremendous slaughter among the people of nephi nevertheless the lamanites be drive and scatter and the people of nephi return again to their land . alma and now this be a time that there be a great mourning and lamentation heard throughout all the land among all the people of nephi alma yea the cry of widow mourn for their husband and also of father mourn for their son and the daughter for the brother yea the brother for the father and thus the cry of mourning be hear among all of them mourn for their kindred who have be slay . alma and now surely this be a sorrowful day yea a time of solemnity and a time of much fasting and prayer . alma and thus endeth the fifteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi alma and this be the account of ammon and his brother their journeying in the land of nephi their suffering in the land their sorrow and their affliction and their incomprehensible joy and the reception and safety of the brother in the land of jershon . and now may the lord the redeemer of all men bless their soul forever . alma and this be the account of the war and contention among the nephites and also the war between the nephites and the lamanites and the fifteenth year of the reign of the judge be end . alma and from the first year to the fifteenth have bring to pass the destruction of many thousand life yea it have bring to pass an awful scene of bloodshed . alma and the body of many thousand be lay low in the earth while the body of many thousand be molder in heap upon the face of the earth yea and many thousand be mourn for the loss of their kindred because they have reason to fear accord to the promise of the lord that they be consign to a state of endless wo . alma while many thousand of others truly mourn for the loss of their kindred yet they rejoice and exult in the hope and even know accord to the promise of the lord that they be raise to dwell at the right hand of god in a state of never end happiness . alma and thus we see how great the inequality of man be because of sin and transgression and the power of the devil which come by the cunning plan which he hath devise to ensnare the heart of men . alma and thus we see the great call of diligence of men to labor in the vineyard of the lord and thus we see the great reason of sorrow and also of rejoice sorrow because of death and destruction among men and joy because of the light of christ unto life . alma chapter alma o that i be an angel and could have the wish of mine heart that i might go forth and speak with the trump of god with a voice to shake the earth and cry repentance unto every people ! alma yea i would declare unto every soul a with the voice of thunder repentance and the plan of redemption that they should repent and come unto our god that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth . alma but behold i be a man and do sin in my wish for i ought to be content with the thing which the lord hath allot unto me . alma i ought not to harrow up in my desire the firm decree of a just god for i know that he granteth unto men accord to their desire whether it be unto death or unto life yea i know that he allotteth unto men yea decreeth unto them decree which be unalterable accord to their will whether they be unto salvation or unto destruction . alma yea and i know that good and evil have come before all men he that knoweth not good from evil be blameless but he that knoweth good and evil to him it be give accord to his desire whether he desireth good or evil life or death joy or remorse of conscience . alma now see that i know these thing why should i desire more than to perform the work to which i have be call ? alma why should i desire that i be an angel that i could speak unto all the end of the earth ? alma for behold the lord doth grant unto all nation of their own nation and tongue to teach his word yea in wisdom all that he seeth fit that they should have therefore we see that the lord doth counsel in wisdom accord to that which be just and true . alma i know that which the lord hath command me and i glory in it . i do not glory of myself but i glory in that which the lord hath command me yea and this be my glory that perhaps i may be an instrument in the hand of god to bring some soul to repentance and this be my joy . alma and behold when i see many of my brother truly penitent and come to the lord their god then be my soul fill with joy then do i remember what the lord have do for me yea even that he hath heard my prayer yea then do i remember his merciful arm which he extend towards me . alma yea and i also remember the captivity of my father for i surely do know that the lord do deliver them out of bondage and by this do establish his church yea the lord god the god of abraham the god of isaac and the god of jacob do deliver them out of bondage . alma yea i have always remember the captivity of my father and that same god who deliver them out of the hand of the egyptian do deliver them out of bondage . alma yea and that same god do establish his church among them yea and that same god hath call me by a holy call to preach the word unto this people and hath give me much success in the which my joy be full . alma but i do not joy in my own success alone but my joy be more full because of the success of my brother who have be up to the land of nephi . alma behold they have labor exceedingly and have bring forth much fruit and how great shall be their reward ! alma now when i think of the success of these my brother my soul be carry away even to the separation of it from the body a it be so great be my joy . alma and now may god grant unto these my brother that they may sit down in the kingdom of god yea and also all those who be the fruit of their labor that they may go no more out but that they may praise him forever . and may god grant that it may be do accord to my word even a i have speak . amen . alma chapter alma behold now it come to pass that after the people of ammon be establish in the land of jershon yea and also after the lamanites be drive out of the land and their dead be bury by the people of the land alma now their dead be not number because of the greatness of their number neither be the dead of the nephites number but it come to pass after they have bury their dead and also after the day of fasting and mourning and prayer and it be in the sixteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi there begin to be continual peace throughout all the land . alma yea and the people do observe to keep the commandment of the lord and they be strict in observe the ordinance of god accord to the law of moses for they be teach to keep the law of moses until it should be fulfil . alma and thus the people do have no disturbance in all the sixteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and it come to pass that in the commencement of the seventeenth year of the reign of the judge there be continual peace . alma but it come to pass in the latter end of the seventeenth year there come a man into the land of zarahemla and he be anti christ for he begin to preach unto the people against the prophecy which have be speak by the prophet concern the come of christ . alma now there be no law against a man 's belief for it be strictly contrary to the command of god that there should be a law which should bring men on to unequal ground . alma for thus saith the scripture choose ye this day whom ye will serve . alma now if a man desire to serve god it be his privilege or rather if he believe in god it be his privilege to serve him but if he do not believe in him there be no law to punish him . alma but if he murder he be punish unto death and if he rob he be also punish and if he steal he be also punish and if he commit adultery he be also punish yea for all this wickedness they be punish . alma for there be a law that men should be judge accord to their crime . nevertheless there be no law against a man 's belief therefore a man be punish only for the crime which he have do therefore all men be on equal ground . alma and this anti christ whose name be korihor and the law could have no hold upon him begin to preach unto the people that there should be no christ . and after this manner do he preach say alma o ye that be bind down under a foolish and a vain hope why do ye yoke yourselves with such foolish thing ? why do ye look for a christ ? for no man can know of anything which be to come . alma behold these thing which ye call prophecy which ye say be hand down by holy prophet behold they be foolish tradition of your father . alma how do ye know of their surety ? behold ye can not know of thing which ye do not see therefore ye can not know that there shall be a christ . alma ye look forward and say that ye see a remission of your sin . but behold it be the effect of a frenzied mind and this derangement of your mind come because of the tradition of your father which lead you away into a belief of thing which be not so . alma and many more such thing do he say unto them tell them that there could be no atonement make for the sin of men but every man fare in this life accord to the management of the creature therefore every man prosper accord to his genius and that every man conquer accord to his strength and whatsoever a man do be no crime . alma and thus he do preach unto them lead away the heart of many cause them to lift up their head in their wickedness yea lead away many woman and also men to commit whoredom tell them that when a man be dead that be the end thereof . alma now this man go over to the land of jershon also to preach these thing among the people of ammon who be once the people of the lamanites . alma but behold they be more wise than many of the nephites for they take him and bind him and carry him before ammon who be a high priest over that people . alma and it come to pass that he cause that he should be carry out of the land . and he come over into the land of gideon and begin to preach unto them also and here he do not have much success for he be take and bind and carry before the high priest and also the chief judge over the land . alma and it come to pass that the high priest say unto him why do ye go about pervert the way of the lord ? why do ye teach this people that there shall be no christ to interrupt their rejoicing ? why do ye speak against all the prophecy of the holy prophet ? alma now the high priest 's name be giddonah . and korihor say unto him because i do not teach the foolish tradition of your father and because i do not teach this people to bind themselves down under the foolish ordinance and performance which be lay down by ancient priest to usurp power and authority over them to keep them in ignorance that they may not lift up their head but be bring down accord to thy word . alma ye say that this people be a free people . behold i say they be in bondage . ye say that those ancient prophecy be true . behold i say that ye do not know that they be true . alma ye say that this people be a guilty and a fall people because of the transgression of a parent . behold i say that a child be not guilty because of it parent . alma and ye also say that christ shall come . but behold i say that ye do not know that there shall be a christ . and ye say also that he shall be slay for the sin of the world alma and thus ye lead away this people after the foolish tradition of your father and accord to your own desire and ye keep them down even a it be in bondage that ye may glut yourselves with the labor of their hand that they durst not look up with boldness and that they durst not enjoy their right and privilege . alma yea they durst not make use of that which be their own l they should offend their priest who do yoke them accord to their desire and have bring them to believe by their tradition and their dream and their whim and their vision and their pretended mystery that they should if they do not do accord to their word offend some unknown be who they say be god a be who never have be see or know who never be nor ever will be . alma now when the high priest and the chief judge saw the hardness of his heart yea when they saw that he would revile even against god they would not make any reply to his word but they cause that he should be bind and they deliver him up into the hand of the officer and send him to the land of zarahemla that he might be bring before alma and the chief judge who be governor over all the land . alma and it come to pass that when he be bring before alma and the chief judge he do go on in the same manner a he do in the land of gideon yea he go on to blaspheme . alma and he do rise up in great swell word before alma and do revile against the priest and teacher accuse them of lead away the people after the silly tradition of their father for the sake of glut on the labor of the people . alma now alma say unto him thou knowest that we do not glut ourselves upon the labor of this people for behold i have labor even from the commencement of the reign of the judge until now with mine own hand for my support notwithstanding my many travel round about the land to declare the word of god unto my people . alma and notwithstanding the many labor which i have perform in the church i have never receive so much a even one senine for my labor neither have any of my brother save it be in the judgment seat and then we have receive only accord to law for our time . alma and now if we do not receive anything for our labor in the church what doth it profit u to labor in the church save it be to declare the truth that we may have rejoicing in the joy of our brother ? alma then why sayest thou that we preach unto this people to get gain when thou of thyself knowest that we receive no gain ? and now believest thou that we deceive this people that cause such joy in their heart ? alma and korihor answer him yea . alma and then alma say unto him believest thou that there be a god ? alma and he answer nay . alma now alma say unto him will ye deny again that there be a god and also deny the christ ? for behold i say unto you i know there be a god and also that christ shall come . alma and now what evidence have ye that there be no god or that christ cometh not ? i say unto you that ye have none save it be your word only . alma but behold i have all thing a a testimony that these thing be true and ye also have all thing a a testimony unto you that they be true and will ye deny them ? believest thou that these thing be true ? alma behold i know that thou believest but thou art possess with a lie spirit and ye have put off the spirit of god that it may have no place in you but the devil have power over you and he doth carry you about work device that he may destroy the child of god . alma and now korihor say unto alma if thou wilt show me a sign that i may be convince that there be a god yea show unto me that he hath power and then will i be convince of the truth of thy word . alma but alma say unto him thou hast have sign enough will ye tempt your god ? will ye say show unto me a sign when ye have the testimony of all these thy brother and also all the holy prophet ? the scripture be lay before thee yea and all thing denote there be a god yea even the earth and all thing that be upon the face of it yea and it motion yea and also all the planet which move in their regular form do witness that there be a supreme creator . alma and yet do ye go about lead away the heart of this people testify unto them there be no god ? and yet will ye deny against all these witness ? and he say yea i will deny except ye shall show me a sign . alma and now it come to pass that alma say unto him behold i be grieve because of the hardness of your heart yea that ye will still resist the spirit of the truth that thy soul may be destroy . alma but behold it be well that thy soul should be lose than that thou shouldst be the mean of bring many soul down to destruction by thy lying and by thy flattering word therefore if thou shalt deny again behold god shall smite thee that thou shalt become dumb that thou shalt never open thy mouth any more that thou shalt not deceive this people any more . alma now korihor say unto him i do not deny the existence of a god but i do not believe that there be a god and i say also that ye do not know that there be a god and except ye show me a sign i will not believe . alma now alma say unto him this will i give unto thee for a sign that thou shalt be strike dumb accord to my word and i say that in the name of god ye shall be strike dumb that ye shall no more have utterance . alma now when alma have say these word korihor be strike dumb that he could not have utterance accord to the word of alma . alma and now when the chief judge saw this he put forth his hand and write unto korihor say art thou convince of the power of god ? in whom do ye desire that alma should show forth his sign ? would ye that he should afflict others to show unto thee a sign ? behold he have show unto you a sign and now will ye dispute more ? alma and korihor put forth his hand and write say i know that i be dumb for i can not speak and i know that nothing save it be the power of god could bring this upon me yea and i always know that there be a god . alma but behold the devil hath deceive me for he appear unto me in the form of an angel and say unto me go and reclaim this people for they have all go astray after an unknown god . and he say unto me there be no god yea and he teach me that which i should say . and i have teach his word and i teach them because they be please unto the carnal mind and i teach them even until i have much success insomuch that i verily believe that they be true and for this cause i withstand the truth even until i have bring this great curse upon me . alma now when he have say this he beseech that alma should pray unto god that the curse might be take from him . alma but alma say unto him if this curse should be take from thee thou wouldst again lead away the heart of this people therefore it shall be unto thee even a the lord will . alma and it come to pass that the curse be not take off of korihor but he be cast out and go about from house to house beg for his food . alma now the knowledge of what have happen unto korihor be immediately publish throughout all the land yea the proclamation be send forth by the chief judge to all the people in the land declare unto those who have believe in the word of korihor that they must speedily repent lest the same judgment would come unto them . alma and it come to pass that they be all convince of the wickedness of korihor therefore they be all convert again unto the lord and this put an end to the iniquity after the manner of korihor . and korihor do go about from house to house beg food for his support . alma and it come to pass that a he go forth among the people yea among a people who have separate themselves from the nephites and call themselves zoramites be lead by a man whose name be zoram and a he go forth amongst them behold he be run upon and tread down even until he be dead . alma and thus we see the end of him who perverteth the way of the lord and thus we see that the devil will not support his child at the last day but doth speedily drag them down to hell . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that after the end of korihor alma have receive tidings that the zoramites be pervert the way of the lord and that zoram who be their leader be lead the heart of the people to bow down to dumb idols his heart again begin to sicken because of the iniquity of the people . alma for it be the cause of great sorrow to alma to know of iniquity among his people therefore his heart be exceedingly sorrowful because of the separation of the zoramites from the nephites . alma now the zoramites have gather themselves together in a land which they call antionum which be east of the land of zarahemla which lay nearly border upon the seashore which be south of the land of jershon which also border upon the wilderness south which wilderness be full of the lamanites . alma now the nephites greatly fear that the zoramites would enter into a correspondence with the lamanites and that it would be the mean of great loss on the part of the nephites . alma and now a the preaching of the word have a great tendency to lead the people to do that which be just yea it have have more powerful effect upon the mind of the people than the sword or anything else which have happen unto them therefore alma think it be expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of god . alma therefore he take ammon and aaron and omner and himni he do leave in the church in zarahemla but the former three he take with him and also amulek and zeezrom who be at melek and he also take two of his son . alma now the eldest of his son he take not with him and his name be helaman but the name of those whom he take with him be shiblon and corianton and these be the name of those who go with him among the zoramites to preach unto them the word . alma now the zoramites be dissenter from the nephites therefore they have have the word of god preach unto them . alma but they have fall into great error for they would not observe to keep the commandment of god and his statute accord to the law of moses . alma neither would they observe the performance of the church to continue in prayer and supplication to god daily that they might not enter into temptation . alma yea in fine they do pervert the way of the lord in very many instance therefore for this cause alma and his brother go into the land to preach the word unto them . alma now when they have come into the land behold to their astonishment they find that the zoramites have build synagogue and that they do gather themselves together on one day of the week which day they do call the day of the lord and they do worship after a manner which alma and his brother have never behold alma for they have a place build up in the center of their synagogue a place for stand which be high above the head and the top thereof would only admit one person . alma therefore whosoever desire to worship must go forth and stand upon the top thereof and stretch forth his hand towards heaven and cry with a loud voice say alma holy holy god we believe that thou art god and we believe that thou art holy and that thou wast a spirit and that thou art a spirit and that thou wilt be a spirit forever . alma holy god we believe that thou hast separate u from our brother and we do not believe in the tradition of our brother which be hand down to them by the childishness of their father but we believe that thou hast elect u to be thy holy child and also thou hast make it know unto u that there shall be no christ . alma but thou art the same yesterday today and forever and thou hast elect u that we shall be save whilst all around u be elect to be cast by thy wrath down to hell for the which holiness o god we thank thee and we also thank thee that thou hast elect u that we may not be lead away after the foolish tradition of our brother which doth bind them down to a belief of christ which doth lead their heart to wander far from thee our god . alma and again we thank thee o god that we be a chosen and a holy people . amen . alma now it come to pass that after alma and his brother and his son have hear these prayer they be astonish beyond all measure . alma for behold every man do go forth and offer up these same prayer . alma now the place be call by them rameumptom which be interpret be the holy stand . alma now from this stand they do offer up every man the selfsame prayer unto god thank their god that they be choose of him and that he do not lead them away after the tradition of their brother and that their heart be not steal away to believe in thing to come which they know nothing about . alma now after the people have all offer up thanks after this manner they return to their home never speak of their god again until they have assemble themselves together again to the holy stand to offer up thanks after their manner . alma now when alma saw this his heart be grieve for he saw that they be a wicked and a perverse people yea he saw that their heart be set upon gold and upon silver and upon all manner of fine good . alma yea and he also saw that their heart be lift up unto great boasting in their pride . alma and he lift up his voice to heaven and cry say o how long o lord wilt thou suffer that thy servant shall dwell here below in the flesh to behold such gross wickedness among the child of men ? alma behold o god they cry unto thee and yet their heart be swallow up in their pride . behold o god they cry unto thee with their mouth while they be puff up even to greatness with the vain thing of the world . alma behold o my god their costly apparel and their ringlet and their bracelet and their ornament of gold and all their precious thing which they be ornament with and behold their heart be set upon them and yet they cry unto thee and say we thank thee o god for we be a chosen people unto thee while others shall perish . alma yea and they say that thou hast make it know unto them that there shall be no christ . alma o lord god how long wilt thou suffer that such wickedness and infidelity shall be among this people ? o lord wilt thou give me strength that i may bear with mine infirmity . for i be infirm and such wickedness among this people doth pain my soul . alma o lord my heart be exceedingly sorrowful wilt thou comfort my soul in christ . o lord wilt thou grant unto me that i may have strength that i may suffer with patience these affliction which shall come upon me because of the iniquity of this people . alma o lord wilt thou comfort my soul and give unto me success and also my fellow laborer who be with me yea ammon and aaron and omner and also amulek and zeezrom and also my two son yea even all these wilt thou comfort o lord . yea wilt thou comfort their soul in christ . alma wilt thou grant unto them that they may have strength that they may bear their affliction which shall come upon them because of the iniquity of this people . alma o lord wilt thou grant unto u that we may have success in bring them again unto thee in christ . alma behold o lord their soul be precious and many of them be our brother therefore give unto u o lord power and wisdom that we may bring these our brother again unto thee . alma now it come to pass that when alma have say these word that he clap his hand upon all them who be with him . and behold a he clap his hand upon them they be fill with the holy spirit . alma and after that they do separate themselves one from another take no thought for themselves what they should eat or what they should drink or what they should put on . alma and the lord provide for them that they should hunger not neither should they thirst yea and he also give them strength that they should suffer no manner of affliction save it be swallow up in the joy of christ . now this be accord to the prayer of alma and this because he pray in faith . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that they do go forth and begin to preach the word of god unto the people enter into their synagogue and into their house yea and even they do preach the word in their street . alma and it come to pass that after much labor among them they begin to have success among the poor class of people for behold they be cast out of the synagogue because of the coarseness of their apparel alma therefore they be not permit to enter into their synagogue to worship god be esteem a filthiness therefore they be poor yea they be esteem by their brother a dross therefore they be poor a to thing of the world and also they be poor in heart . alma now a alma be teach and speak unto the people upon the hill onidah there come a great multitude unto him who be those of whom we have be speak of whom be poor in heart because of their poverty a to the thing of the world . alma and they come unto alma and the one who be the foremost among them say unto him behold what shall these my brother do for they be despise of all men because of their poverty yea and more especially by our priest for they have cast u out of our synagogue which we have labor abundantly to build with our own hand and they have cast u out because of our exceed poverty and we have no place to worship our god and behold what shall we do ? alma and now when alma heard this he turn him about his face immediately towards him and he behold with great joy for he behold that their affliction have truly humble them and that they be in a preparation to hear the word . alma therefore he do say no more to the other multitude but he stretch forth his hand and cry unto those whom he behold who be truly penitent and say unto them alma i behold that ye be lowly in heart and if so bless be ye . alma behold thy brother hath say what shall we do ? for we be cast out of our synagogue that we can not worship our god . alma behold i say unto you do ye suppose that ye can not worship god save it be in your synagogue only ? alma moreover i would ask do ye suppose that ye must not worship god only once in a week ? alma i say unto you it be well that ye be cast out of your synagogue that ye may be humble and that ye may learn wisdom for it be necessary that ye should learn wisdom for it be because that ye be cast out that ye be despise of your brother because of your exceed poverty that ye be bring to a lowliness of heart for ye be necessarily bring to be humble . alma and now because ye be compel to be humble bless be ye for a man sometimes if he be compel to be humble seeketh repentance and now surely whosoever repenteth shall find mercy and he that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall be save . alma and now a i say unto you that because ye be compel to be humble ye be bless do ye not suppose that they be more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word ? alma yea he that truly humbleth himself and repenteth of his sin and endureth to the end the same shall be bless yea much more blessed than they who be compel to be humble because of their exceed poverty . alma therefore bless be they who humble themselves without be compel to be humble or rather in other word bless be he that believeth in the word of god and be baptize without stubbornness of heart yea without be bring to know the word or even compel to know before they will believe . alma yea there be many who do say if thou wilt show unto u a sign from heaven then we shall know of a surety then we shall believe . alma now i ask be this faith ? behold i say unto you nay for if a man knoweth a thing he hath no cause to believe for he knoweth it . alma and now how much more cursed be he that knoweth the will of god and doeth it not than he that only believeth or only hath cause to believe and falleth into transgression ? alma now of this thing ye must judge . behold i say unto you that it be on the one hand even a it be on the other and it shall be unto every man accord to his work . alma and now a i say concern faith faith be not to have a perfect knowledge of thing therefore if ye have faith ye hope for thing which be not see which be true . alma and now behold i say unto you and i would that ye should remember that god be merciful unto all who believe on his name therefore he desireth in the first place that ye should believe yea even on his word . alma and now he imparteth his word by angel unto men yea not only men but woman also . now this be not all little child do have word give unto them many time which confound the wise and the learn . alma and now my beloved brother a ye have desire to know of me what ye shall do because ye be afflict and cast out now i do not desire that ye should suppose that i mean to judge you only accord to that which be true alma for i do not mean that ye all of you have be compel to humble yourselves for i verily believe that there be some among you who would humble themselves let them be in whatsoever circumstance they might . alma now a i say concern faith that it be not a perfect knowledge even so it be with my word . ye can not know of their surety at first unto perfection any more than faith be a perfect knowledge . alma but behold if ye will awake and arouse your faculty even to an experiment upon my word and exercise a particle of faith yea even if ye can no more than desire to believe let this desire work in you even until ye believe in a manner that ye can give place for a portion of my word . alma now we will compare the word unto a seed . now if ye give place that a seed may be plant in your heart behold if it be a true seed or a good seed if ye do not cast it out by your unbelief that ye will resist the spirit of the lord behold it will begin to swell within your breast and when you feel these swell motion ye will begin to say within yourselves it must needs be that this be a good seed or that the word be good for it beginneth to enlarge my soul yea it beginneth to enlighten my understanding yea it beginneth to be delicious to me . alma now behold would not this increase your faith ? i say unto you yea nevertheless it hath not grow up to a perfect knowledge . alma but behold a the seed swelleth and sprouteth and beginneth to grow then you must need say that the seed be good for behold it swelleth and sprouteth and beginneth to grow . and now behold will not this strengthen your faith ? yea it will strengthen your faith for ye will say i know that this be a good seed for behold it sprouteth and beginneth to grow . alma and now behold be ye sure that this be a good seed ? i say unto you yea for every seed bringeth forth unto it own likeness . alma therefore if a seed groweth it be good but if it groweth not behold it be not good therefore it be cast away . alma and now behold because ye have try the experiment and plant the seed and it swelleth and sprouteth and beginneth to grow ye must need know that the seed be good . alma and now behold be your knowledge perfect ? yea your knowledge be perfect in that thing and your faith be dormant and this because ye know for ye know that the word hath swell your soul and ye also know that it hath sprout up that your understanding doth begin to be enlighten and your mind doth begin to expand . alma o then be not this real ? i say unto you yea because it be light and whatsoever be light be good because it be discernible therefore ye must know that it be good and now behold after ye have taste this light be your knowledge perfect ? alma behold i say unto you nay neither must ye lay aside your faith for ye have only exercise your faith to plant the seed that ye might try the experiment to know if the seed be good . alma and behold a the tree beginneth to grow ye will say let u nourish it with great care that it may get root that it may grow up and bring forth fruit unto u . and now behold if ye nourish it with much care it will get root and grow up and bring forth fruit . alma but if ye neglect the tree and take no thought for it nourishment behold it will not get any root and when the heat of the sun cometh and scorcheth it because it hath no root it wither away and ye pluck it up and cast it out . alma now this be not because the seed be not good neither be it because the fruit thereof would not be desirable but it be because your ground be barren and ye will not nourish the tree therefore ye can not have the fruit thereof . alma and thus if ye will not nourish the word look forward with an eye of faith to the fruit thereof ye can never pluck of the fruit of the tree of life . alma but if ye will nourish the word yea nourish the tree a it beginneth to grow by your faith with great diligence and with patience look forward to the fruit thereof it shall take root and behold it shall be a tree spring up unto everlasting life . alma and because of your diligence and your faith and your patience with the word in nourish it that it may take root in you behold by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof which be most precious which be sweet above all that be sweet and which be white above all that be white yea and pure above all that be pure and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye be fill that ye hunger not neither shall ye thirst . alma then my brother ye shall reap the reward of your faith and your diligence and patience and long suffering wait for the tree to bring forth fruit unto you . alma chapter alma now after alma have speak these word they send forth unto him desire to know whether they should believe in one god that they might obtain this fruit of which he have speak or how they should plant the seed or the word of which he have speak which he say must be plant in their heart or in what manner they should begin to exercise their faith . alma and alma say unto them behold ye have say that ye could not worship your god because ye be cast out of your synagogue . but behold i say unto you if ye suppose that ye can not worship god ye do greatly err and ye ought to search the scripture if ye suppose that they have teach you this ye do not understand them . alma do ye remember to have read what zenos the prophet of old have say concern prayer or worship ? alma for he say thou art merciful o god for thou hast heard my prayer even when i be in the wilderness yea thou wast merciful when i pray concern those who be mine enemy and thou didst turn them to me . alma yea o god and thou wast merciful unto me when i do cry unto thee in my field when i do cry unto thee in my prayer and thou didst hear me . alma and again o god when i do turn to my house thou didst hear me in my prayer . alma and when i do turn unto my closet o lord and pray unto thee thou didst hear me . alma yea thou art merciful unto thy child when they cry unto thee to be hear of thee and not of men and thou wilt hear them . alma yea o god thou hast be merciful unto me and hear my cry in the midst of thy congregation . alma yea and thou hast also hear me when i have be cast out and have be despise by mine enemy yea thou didst hear my cry and wast angry with mine enemy and thou didst visit them in thine anger with speedy destruction . alma and thou didst hear me because of mine affliction and my sincerity and it be because of thy son that thou hast be thus merciful unto me therefore i will cry unto thee in all mine affliction for in thee be my joy for thou hast turn thy judgment away from me because of thy son . alma and now alma say unto them do ye believe those scripture which have be write by them of old ? alma behold if ye do ye must believe what zeno say for behold he say thou hast turn away thy judgment because of thy son . alma now behold my brother i would ask if ye have read the scripture ? if ye have how can ye disbelieve on the son of god ? alma for it be not write that zenos alone spake of these thing but zenock also spake of these thing alma for behold he say thou art angry o lord with this people because they will not understand thy mercy which thou hast bestow upon them because of thy son . alma and now my brother ye see that a second prophet of old have testify of the son of god and because the people would not understand his word they stone him to death . alma but behold this be not all these be not the only one who have speak concern the son of god . alma behold he be speak of by moses yea and behold a type be raise up in the wilderness that whosoever would look upon it might live . and many do look and live . alma but few understand the meaning of those thing and this because of the hardness of their heart . but there be many who be so harden that they would not look therefore they perish . now the reason they would not look be because they do not believe that it would heal them . alma o my brother if ye could be heal by merely cast about your eye that ye might be heal would ye not behold quickly or would ye rather harden your heart in unbelief and be slothful that ye would not cast about your eye that ye might perish ? alma if so wo shall come upon you but if not so then cast about your eye and begin to believe in the son of god that he will come to redeem his people and that he shall suffer and die to atone for their sin and that he shall rise again from the dead which shall bring to pass the resurrection that all men shall stand before him to be judge at the last and judgment day accord to their work . alma and now my brother i desire that ye shall plant this word in your heart and a it beginneth to swell even so nourish it by your faith . and behold it will become a tree spring up in you unto everlasting life . and then may god grant unto you that your burden may be light through the joy of his son . and even all this can ye do if ye will . amen . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that after alma have speak these word unto them he sit down upon the ground and amulek arose and begin to teach them say alma my brother i think that it be impossible that ye should be ignorant of the thing which have be speak concern the come of christ who be teach by u to be the son of god yea i know that these thing be teach unto you bountifully before your dissension from among u . alma and a ye have desire of my beloved brother that he should make know unto you what ye should do because of your affliction and he hath spoken somewhat unto you to prepare your mind yea and he hath exhort you unto faith and to patience alma yea even that ye would have so much faith a even to plant the word in your heart that ye may try the experiment of it goodness . alma and we have behold that the great question which be in your mind be whether the word be in the son of god or whether there shall be no christ . alma and ye also behold that my brother have prove unto you in many instance that the word be in christ unto salvation . alma my brother have call upon the word of zeno that redemption cometh through the son of god and also upon the word of zenock and also he have appeal unto moses to prove that these thing be true . alma and now behold i will testify unto you of myself that these thing be true . behold i say unto you that i do know that christ shall come among the child of men to take upon him the transgression of his people and that he shall atone for the sin of the world for the lord god hath speak it . alma for it be expedient that an atonement should be make for accord to the great plan of the eternal god there must be an atonement make or else all mankind must unavoidably perish yea all be harden yea all be fall and be lose and must perish except it be through the atonement which it be expedient should be make . alma for it be expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice yea not a sacrifice of man neither of beast neither of any manner of fowl for it shall not be a human sacrifice but it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice . alma now there be not any man that can sacrifice his own blood which will atone for the sin of another . now if a man murdereth behold will our law which be just take the life of his brother ? i say unto you nay . alma but the law requireth the life of him who hath murder therefore there can be nothing which be short of an infinite atonement which will suffice for the sin of the world . alma therefore it be expedient that there should be a great and last sacrifice and then shall there be or it be expedient there should be a stop to the shedding of blood then shall the law of moses be fulfil yea it shall be all fulfil every jot and tittle and none shall have pass away . alma and behold this be the whole meaning of the law every whit point to that great and last sacrifice and that great and last sacrifice will be the son of god yea infinite and eternal . alma and thus he shall bring salvation to all those who shall believe on his name this be the intent of this last sacrifice to bring about the bowel of mercy which overpowereth justice and bringeth about mean unto men that they may have faith unto repentance . alma and thus mercy can satisfy the demand of justice and encircle them in the arm of safety while he that exercise no faith unto repentance be expose to the whole law of the demand of justice therefore only unto him that have faith unto repentance be bring about the great and eternal plan of redemption . alma therefore may god grant unto you my brother that ye may begin to exercise your faith unto repentance that ye begin to call upon his holy name that he would have mercy upon you alma yea cry unto him for mercy for he be mighty to save . alma yea humble yourselves and continue in prayer unto him . alma cry unto him when ye be in your field yea over all your flock . alma cry unto him in your house yea over all your household both morning mid day and evening . alma yea cry unto him against the power of your enemy . alma yea cry unto him against the devil who be an enemy to all righteousness . alma cry unto him over the crop of your field that ye may prosper in them . alma cry over the flock of your field that they may increase . alma but this be not all ye must pour out your soul in your closet and your secret place and in your wilderness . alma yea and when you do not cry unto the lord let your heart be full draw out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare and also for the welfare of those who be around you . alma and now behold my beloved brother i say unto you do not suppose that this be all for after ye have do all these thing if ye turn away the needy and the naked and visit not the sick and afflicted and impart of your substance if ye have to those who stand in need i say unto you if ye do not any of these thing behold your prayer be vain and availeth you nothing and ye be a hypocrite who do deny the faith . alma therefore if ye do not remember to be charitable ye be a dross which the refiner do cast out it be of no worth and be trodden under foot of men . alma and now my brother i would that after ye have receive so many witness see that the holy scriptures testify of these thing ye come forth and bring fruit unto repentance . alma yea i would that ye would come forth and harden not your heart any long for behold now be the time and the day of your salvation and therefore if ye will repent and harden not your heart immediately shall the great plan of redemption be bring about unto you . alma for behold this life be the time for men to prepare to meet god yea behold the day of this life be the day for men to perform their labor . alma and now a i say unto you before a ye have have so many witness therefore i beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end for after this day of life which be give u to prepare for eternity behold if we do not improve our time while in this life then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor perform . alma ye can not say when ye be bring to that awful crisis that i will repent that i will return to my god . nay ye can not say this for that same spirit which doth posse your body at the time that ye go out of this life that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world . alma for behold if ye have procrastinate the day of your repentance even until death behold ye have become subject to the spirit of the devil and he doth seal you his therefore the spirit of the lord hath withdrawn from you and hath no place in you and the devil hath all power over you and this be the final state of the wicked . alma and this i know because the lord hath say he dwelleth not in unholy temple but in the heart of the righteous doth he dwell yea and he have also say that the righteous shall sit down in his kingdom to go no more out but their garment should be make white through the blood of the lamb . alma and now my beloved brother i desire that ye should remember these thing and that ye should work out your salvation with fear before god and that ye should no more deny the come of christ alma that ye contend no more against the holy ghost but that ye receive it and take upon you the name of christ that ye humble yourselves even to the dust and worship god in whatsoever place ye may be in in spirit and in truth and that ye live in thanksgiving daily for the many mercy and blessing which he doth bestow upon you . alma yea and i also exhort you my brother that ye be watchful unto prayer continually that ye may not be lead away by the temptation of the devil that he may not overpower you that ye may not become his subject at the last day for behold he rewardeth you no good thing . alma and now my beloved brother i would exhort you to have patience and that ye bear with all manner of affliction that ye do not revile against those who do cast you out because of your exceed poverty l ye become sinner like unto them alma but that ye have patience and bear with those affliction with a firm hope that ye shall one day rest from all your affliction . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that after amulek have make an end of these word they withdraw themselves from the multitude and come over into the land of jershon . alma yea and the rest of the brother after they have preach the word unto the zoramites also come over into the land of jershon . alma and it come to pass that after the more popular part of the zoramites have consult together concern the word which have be preach unto them they be angry because of the word for it do destroy their craft therefore they would not hearken unto the word . alma and they send and gather together throughout all the land all the people and consult with them concern the word which have be speak . alma now their ruler and their priest and their teacher do not let the people know concern their desire therefore they find out privily the mind of all the people . alma and it come to pass that after they have find out the mind of all the people those who be in favor of the word which have be speak by alma and his brother be cast out of the land and they be many and they come over also into the land of jershon . alma and it come to pass that alma and his brother do minister unto them . alma now the people of the zoramites be angry with the people of ammon who be in jershon and the chief ruler of the zoramites be a very wicked man send over unto the people of ammon desire them that they should cast out of their land all those who come over from them into their land . alma and he breathe out many threatenings against them . and now the people of ammon do not fear their word therefore they do not cast them out but they do receive all the poor of the zoramites that come over unto them and they do nourish them and do clothe them and do give unto them land for their inheritance and they do administer unto them accord to their want . alma now this do stir up the zoramites to anger against the people of ammon and they begin to mix with the lamanites and to stir them up also to anger against them . alma and thus the zoramites and the lamanites begin to make preparation for war against the people of ammon and also against the nephites . alma and thus end the seventeenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and the people of ammon depart out of the land of jershon and come over into the land of melek and give place in the land of jershon for the army of the nephites that they might contend with the army of the lamanites and the army of the zoramites and thus commence a war betwixt the lamanites and the nephites in the eighteenth year of the reign of the judge and an account shall be give of their war hereafter . alma and alma and ammon and their brother and also the two son of alma return to the land of zarahemla after have be instrument in the hand of god of bring many of the zoramites to repentance and as many a be bring to repentance be drive out of their land but they have land for their inheritance in the land of jershon and they have take up arm to defend themselves and their wife and child and their land . alma now alma be grieve for the iniquity of his people yea for the war and the bloodshed and the contention which be among them and have be to declare the word or sent to declare the word among all the people in every city and see that the heart of the people begin to wax hard and that they begin to be offend because of the strictness of the word his heart be exceedingly sorrowful . alma therefore he cause that his son should be gather together that he might give unto them every one his charge separately concern the thing pertain unto righteousness . and we have an account of his commandment which he give unto them accord to his own record . alma chapter alma my son give ear to my word for i swear unto you that inasmuch a ye shall keep the commandment of god ye shall prosper in the land . alma i would that ye should do a i have do in remember the captivity of our father for they be in bondage and none could deliver them except it be the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob and he surely do deliver them in their affliction . alma and now o my son helaman behold thou art in thy youth and therefore i beseech of thee that thou wilt hear my word and learn of me for i do know that whosoever shall put their trust in god shall be support in their trial and their trouble and their affliction and shall be lift up at the last day . alma and i would not that ye think that i know of myself not of the temporal but of the spiritual not of the carnal mind but of god . alma now behold i say unto you if i have not be bear of god i should not have know these thing but god have by the mouth of his holy angel make these thing know unto me not of any worthiness of myself . alma for i go about with the son of mosiah seek to destroy the church of god but behold god send his holy angel to stop u by the way . alma and behold he spake unto u a it be the voice of thunder and the whole earth do tremble beneath our foot and we all fell to the earth for the fear of the lord come upon u . alma but behold the voice say unto me arise . and i arose and stand up and behold the angel . alma and he say unto me if thou wilt of thyself be destroy seek no more to destroy the church of god . alma and it come to pass that i fell to the earth and it be for the space of three day and three night that i could not open my mouth neither have i the use of my limb . alma and the angel spake more thing unto me which be hear by my brother but i do not hear them for when i hear the word if thou wilt be destroy of thyself seek no more to destroy the church of god i be strike with such great fear and amazement l perhaps i should be destroy that i fell to the earth and i do hear no more . alma but i be rack with eternal torment for my soul be harrow up to the great degree and rack with all my sin . alma yea i do remember all my sin and iniquity for which i be torment with the pain of hell yea i saw that i have rebel against my god and that i have not keep his holy commandment . alma yea and i have murder many of his child or rather lead them away unto destruction yea and in fine so great have be my iniquity that the very thought of come into the presence of my god do rack my soul with inexpressible horror . alma oh thought i that i could be banish and become extinct both soul and body that i might not be bring to stand in the presence of my god to be judge of my deed . alma and now for three day and for three night be i rack even with the pain of a damned soul . alma and it come to pass that a i be thus rack with torment while i be harrow up by the memory of my many sin behold i remember also to have hear my father prophesy unto the people concern the come of one jesus christ a son of god to atone for the sin of the world . alma now a my mind caught hold upon this thought i cry within my heart o jesus thou son of god have mercy on me who be in the gall of bitterness and be encircle about by the everlasting chain of death . alma and now behold when i think this i could remember my pain no more yea i be harrow up by the memory of my sin no more . alma and oh what joy and what marvelous light i do behold yea my soul be fill with joy as exceed a be my pain ! alma yea i say unto you my son that there could be nothing so exquisite and so bitter a be my pain . yea and again i say unto you my son that on the other hand there can be nothing so exquisite and sweet a be my joy . alma yea methought i saw even a our father lehi saw god sit upon his throne surround with numberless concourse of angel in the attitude of singing and praise their god yea and my soul do long to be there . alma but behold my limb do receive their strength again and i stand upon my foot and do manifest unto the people that i have be bear of god . alma yea and from that time even until now i have labor without cease that i might bring souls unto repentance that i might bring them to taste of the exceed joy of which i do taste that they might also be bear of god and be fill with the holy ghost . alma yea and now behold o my son the lord doth give me exceedingly great joy in the fruit of my labor alma for because of the word which he have impart unto me behold many have be bear of god and have taste a i have taste and have see eye to eye a i have see therefore they do know of these thing of which i have speak a i do know and the knowledge which i have be of god . alma and i have be support under trial and trouble of every kind yea and in all manner of affliction yea god have deliver me from prison and from bond and from death yea and i do put my trust in him and he will still deliver me . alma and i know that he will raise me up at the last day to dwell with him in glory yea and i will praise him forever for he have bring our father out of egypt and he have swallow up the egyptian in the red sea and he lead them by his power into the promised land yea and he have deliver them out of bondage and captivity from time to time . alma yea and he have also bring our father out of the land of jerusalem and he have also by his everlasting power deliver them out of bondage and captivity from time to time even down to the present day and i have always retain in remembrance their captivity yea and ye also ought to retain in remembrance a i have do their captivity . alma but behold my son this be not all for ye ought to know a i do know that inasmuch a ye shall keep the commandment of god ye shall prosper in the land and ye ought to know also that inasmuch a ye will not keep the commandment of god ye shall be cut off from his presence . now this be accord to his word . alma chapter alma and now my son helaman i command you that ye take the record which have be entrust with me alma and i also command you that ye keep a record of this people accord a i have do upon the plate of nephi and keep all these thing sacred which i have keep even a i have keep them for it be for a wise purpose that they be keep . alma and these plate of brass which contain these engraving which have the record of the holy scriptures upon them which have the genealogy of our forefather even from the begin alma behold it have be prophesy by our father that they should be keep and hand down from one generation to another and be keep and preserve by the hand of the lord until they should go forth unto every nation kindred tongue and people that they shall know of the mystery contain thereon . alma and now behold if they be kept they must retain their brightness yea and they will retain their brightness yea and also shall all the plate which do contain that which be holy writ . alma now ye may suppose that this be foolishness in me but behold i say unto you that by small and simple thing be great thing bring to pass and small mean in many instance doth confound the wise . alma and the lord god doth work by mean to bring about his great and eternal purpose and by very small mean the lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the salvation of many soul . alma and now it have hitherto be wisdom in god that these thing should be preserve for behold they have enlarge the memory of this people yea and convince many of the error of their way and bring them to the knowledge of their god unto the salvation of their soul . alma yea i say unto you be it not for these thing that these record do contain which be on these plate ammon and his brother could not have convince so many thousand of the lamanites of the incorrect tradition of their father yea these record and their word bring them unto repentance that be they bring them to the knowledge of the lord their god and to rejoice in jesus christ their redeemer . alma and who knoweth but what they will be the mean of bring many thousand of them yea and also many thousand of our stiffnecked brother the nephites who be now harden their heart in sin and iniquity to the knowledge of their redeemer ? alma now these mystery be not yet fully make know unto me therefore i shall forbear . alma and it may suffice if i only say they be preserve for a wise purpose which purpose be know unto god for he doth counsel in wisdom over all his work and his path be straight and his course be one eternal round . alma o remember remember my son helaman how strict be the commandment of god . and he say if ye will keep my commandment ye shall prosper in the land but if ye keep not his commandment ye shall be cut off from his presence . alma and now remember my son that god have entrust you with these thing which be sacred which he have keep sacred and also which he will keep and preserve for a wise purpose in him that he may show forth his power unto future generation . alma and now behold i tell you by the spirit of prophecy that if ye transgress the commandment of god behold these thing which be sacred shall be take away from you by the power of god and ye shall be deliver up unto satan that he may sift you a chaff before the wind . alma but if ye keep the commandment of god and do with these thing which be sacred accord to that which the lord doth command you for you must appeal unto the lord for all thing whatsoever ye must do with them behold no power of earth or hell can take them from you for god be powerful to the fulfilling of all his word . alma for he will fulfil all his promise which he shall make unto you for he have fulfil his promise which he have make unto our father . alma for he promise unto them that he would preserve these thing for a wise purpose in him that he might show forth his power unto future generation . alma and now behold one purpose hath he fulfil even to the restoration of many thousand of the lamanites to the knowledge of the truth and he hath show forth his power in them and he will also still show forth his power in them unto future generation therefore they shall be preserve . alma therefore i command you my son helaman that ye be diligent in fulfil all my word and that ye be diligent in keep the commandment of god a they be write . alma and now i will speak unto you concern those twenty four plate that ye keep them that the mystery and the work of darkness and their secret work or the secret work of those people who have be destroy may be make manifest unto this people yea all their murder and robbings and their plundering and all their wickedness and abomination may be make manifest unto this people yea and that ye preserve these interpreter . alma for behold the lord saw that his people begin to work in darkness yea work secret murder and abomination therefore the lord say if they do not repent they should be destroy from off the face of the earth . alma and the lord say i will prepare unto my servant gazelem a stone which shall shine forth in darkness unto light that i may discover unto my people who serve me that i may discover unto them the work of their brother yea their secret work their work of darkness and their wickedness and abomination . alma and now my son these interpreter be prepare that the word of god might be fulfil which he spake say alma i will bring forth out of darkness unto light all their secret work and their abomination and except they repent i will destroy them from off the face of the earth and i will bring to light all their secret and abomination unto every nation that shall hereafter posse the land . alma and now my son we see that they do not repent therefore they have be destroy and thus far the word of god have be fulfil yea their secret abomination have be bring out of darkness and make know unto u . alma and now my son i command you that ye retain all their oath and their covenant and their agreement in their secret abomination yea and all their sign and their wonder ye shall keep from this people that they know them not l peradventure they should fall into darkness also and be destroy . alma for behold there be a curse upon all this land that destruction shall come upon all those worker of darkness accord to the power of god when they be fully ripe therefore i desire that this people might not be destroy . alma therefore ye shall keep these secret plan of their oath and their covenant from this people and only their wickedness and their murder and their abomination shall ye make know unto them and ye shall teach them to abhor such wickedness and abomination and murder and ye shall also teach them that these people be destroy on account of their wickedness and abomination and their murder . alma for behold they murder all the prophet of the lord who come among them to declare unto them concern their iniquity and the blood of those whom they murder do cry unto the lord their god for vengeance upon those who be their murderer and thus the judgment of god do come upon these worker of darkness and secret combination . alma yea and curse be the land forever and ever unto those worker of darkness and secret combination even unto destruction except they repent before they be fully ripe . alma and now my son remember the word which i have speak unto you trust not those secret plan unto this people but teach them an everlasting hatred against sin and iniquity . alma preach unto them repentance and faith on the lord jesus christ teach them to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly in heart teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil with their faith on the lord jesus christ . alma teach them to never be weary of good work but to be meek and lowly in heart for such shall find rest to their soul . alma o remember my son and learn wisdom in thy youth yea learn in thy youth to keep the commandment of god . alma yea and cry unto god for all thy support yea let all thy doings be unto the lord and whithersoever thou go let it be in the lord yea let all thy thought be direct unto the lord yea let the affection of thy heart be place upon the lord forever . alma counsel with the lord in all thy doings and he will direct thee for good yea when thou li down at night lie down unto the lord that he may watch over you in your sleep and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto god and if ye do these thing ye shall be lift up at the last day . alma and now my son i have somewhat to say concern the thing which our father call a ball or director or our father call it liahona which be be interpret a compass and the lord prepare it . alma and behold there can not any man work after the manner of so curious a workmanship . and behold it be prepare to show unto our father the course which they should travel in the wilderness . alma and it do work for them accord to their faith in god therefore if they have faith to believe that god could cause that those spindle should point the way they should go behold it be do therefore they have this miracle and also many other miracle work by the power of god day by day . alma nevertheless because those miracle be work by small mean it do show unto them marvelous work . they be slothful and forget to exercise their faith and diligence and then those marvelous work cease and they do not progress in their journey alma therefore they tarry in the wilderness or do not travel a direct course and be afflict with hunger and thirst because of their transgression . alma and now my son i would that ye should understand that these thing be not without a shadow for a our father be slothful to give heed to this compass now these thing be temporal they do not prosper even so it be with thing which be spiritual . alma for behold it be a easy to give heed to the word of christ which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss a it be for our father to give heed to this compass which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land . alma and now i say be there not a type in this thing ? for just as surely a this director do bring our father by follow it course to the promise land shall the word of christ if we follow their course carry u beyond this vale of sorrow into a far good land of promise . alma o my son do not let u be slothful because of the easiness of the way for so be it with our father for so be it prepare for them that if they would look they might live even so it be with u . the way be prepared and if we will look we may live forever . alma and now my son see that ye take care of these sacred thing yea see that ye look to god and live . go unto this people and declare the word and be sober . my son farewell . alma chapter alma my son give ear to my word for i say unto you even a i say unto helaman that inasmuch a ye shall keep the commandment of god ye shall prosper in the land and inasmuch a ye will not keep the commandment of god ye shall be cut off from his presence . alma and now my son i trust that i shall have great joy in you because of your steadiness and your faithfulness unto god for a you have commence in your youth to look to the lord your god even so i hope that you will continue in keep his commandment for bless be he that endureth to the end . alma i say unto you my son that i have have great joy in thee already because of thy faithfulness and thy diligence and thy patience and thy long suffer among the people of the zoramites . alma for i know that thou wast in bond yea and i also know that thou wast stone for the word 's sake and thou didst bear all these thing with patience because the lord be with thee and now thou knowest that the lord do deliver thee . alma and now my son shiblon i would that ye should remember that as much a ye shall put your trust in god even so much ye shall be deliver out of your trial and your trouble and your affliction and ye shall be lift up at the last day . alma now my son i would not that ye should think that i know these thing of myself but it be the spirit of god which be in me which maketh these thing know unto me for if i have not be bear of god i should not have know these thing . alma but behold the lord in his great mercy send his angel to declare unto me that i must stop the work of destruction among his people yea and i have see an angel face to face and he spake with me and his voice be a thunder and it shake the whole earth . alma and it come to pass that i be three day and three night in the most bitter pain and anguish of soul and never until i do cry out unto the lord jesus christ for mercy do i receive a remission of my sin . but behold i do cry unto him and i do find peace to my soul . alma and now my son i have tell you this that ye may learn wisdom that ye may learn of me that there be no other way or mean whereby man can be save only in and through christ . behold he be the life and the light of the world . behold he be the word of truth and righteousness . alma and now a ye have begin to teach the word even so i would that ye should continue to teach and i would that ye would be diligent and temperate in all thing . alma see that ye be not lift up unto pride yea see that ye do not boast in your own wisdom nor of your much strength . alma use boldness but not overbearance and also see that ye bridle all your passion that ye may be fill with love see that ye refrain from idleness . alma do not pray a the zoramites do for ye have see that they pray to be hear of men and to be praise for their wisdom . alma do not say o god i thank thee that we be good than our brother but rather say o lord forgive my unworthiness and remember my brother in mercy yea acknowledge your unworthiness before god at all time . alma and may the lord bless your soul and receive you at the last day into his kingdom to sit down in peace . now go my son and teach the word unto this people . be sober . my son farewell . alma chapter alma and now my son i have somewhat more to say unto thee than what i say unto thy brother for behold have ye not observe the steadiness of thy brother his faithfulness and his diligence in keep the commandment of god ? behold have he not set a good example for thee ? alma for thou didst not give so much heed unto my word a do thy brother among the people of the zoramites . now this be what i have against thee thou didst go on unto boasting in thy strength and thy wisdom . alma and this be not all my son . thou didst do that which be grievous unto me for thou didst forsake the ministry and do go over into the land of siron among the border of the lamanites after the harlot isabel . alma yea she do steal away the heart of many but this be no excuse for thee my son . thou shouldst have tend to the ministry wherewith thou wast entrust . alma know ye not my son that these thing be an abomination in the sight of the lord yea most abominable above all sin save it be the shedding of innocent blood or deny the holy ghost ? alma for behold if ye deny the holy ghost when it once have have place in you and ye know that ye deny it behold this be a sin which be unpardonable yea and whosoever murdereth against the light and knowledge of god it be not easy for him to obtain forgiveness yea i say unto you my son that it be not easy for him to obtain a forgiveness . alma and now my son i would to god that ye have not be guilty of so great a crime . i would not dwell upon your crime to harrow up your soul if it be not for your good . alma but behold ye can not hide your crime from god and except ye repent they will stand a a testimony against you at the last day . alma now my son i would that ye should repent and forsake your sin and go no more after the lust of your eye but cross yourself in all these thing for except ye do this ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of god . oh remember and take it upon you and cross yourself in these thing . alma and i command you to take it upon you to counsel with your elder brother in your undertaking for behold thou art in thy youth and ye stand in need to be nourish by your brother . and give heed to their counsel . alma suffer not yourself to be lead away by any vain or foolish thing suffer not the devil to lead away your heart again after those wicked harlot . behold o my son how great iniquity ye bring upon the zoramites for when they saw your conduct they would not believe in my word . alma and now the spirit of the lord doth say unto me command thy child to do good l they lead away the heart of many people to destruction therefore i command you my son in the fear of god that ye refrain from your iniquity alma that ye turn to the lord with all your mind might and strength that ye lead away the heart of no more to do wickedly but rather return unto them and acknowledge your fault and that wrong which ye have do . alma seek not after rich nor the vain thing of this world for behold you can not carry them with you . alma and now my son i would say somewhat unto you concern the come of christ . behold i say unto you that it be he that surely shall come to take away the sin of the world yea he cometh to declare glad tidings of salvation unto his people . alma and now my son this be the ministry unto which ye be call to declare these glad tidings unto this people to prepare their mind or rather that salvation might come unto them that they may prepare the mind of their child to hear the word at the time of his come . alma and now i will ease your mind somewhat on this subject . behold you marvel why these thing should be know so long beforehand . behold i say unto you be not a soul at this time a precious unto god a a soul will be at the time of his come ? alma be it not a necessary that the plan of redemption should be make know unto this people as well a unto their child ? alma be it not a easy at this time for the lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto u a unto our child or a after the time of his come ? alma chapter alma now my son here be somewhat more i would say unto thee for i perceive that thy mind be worry concern the resurrection of the dead . alma behold i say unto you that there be no resurrection or i would say in other word that this mortal do not put on immortality this corruption do not put on incorruption until after the come of christ . alma behold he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead . but behold my son the resurrection be not yet . now i unfold unto you a mystery nevertheless there be many mystery which be keep that no one knoweth them save god himself . but i show unto you one thing which i have inquire diligently of god that i might know that be concern the resurrection . alma behold there be a time appoint that all shall come forth from the dead . now when this time cometh no one know but god knoweth the time which be appoint . alma now whether there shall be one time or a second time or a third time that men shall come forth from the dead it mattereth not for god knoweth all these thing and it sufficeth me to know that this be the case that there be a time appoint that all shall rise from the dead . alma now there must need be a space betwixt the time of death and the time of the resurrection . alma and now i would inquire what becometh of the soul of men from this time of death to the time appoint for the resurrection ? alma now whether there be more than one time appoint for men to rise it mattereth not for all do not die at once and this mattereth not all be a one day with god and time only be measure unto men . alma therefore there be a time appoint unto men that they shall rise from the dead and there be a space between the time of death and the resurrection . and now concern this space of time what becometh of the soul of men be the thing which i have inquire diligently of the lord to know and this be the thing of which i do know . alma and when the time cometh when all shall rise then shall they know that god knoweth all the time which be appoint unto man . alma now concern the state of the soul between death and the resurrection behold it have be make know unto me by an angel that the spirit of all men as soon a they be depart from this mortal body yea the spirit of all men whether they be good or evil be take home to that god who give them life . alma and then shall it come to pass that the spirit of those who be righteous be receive into a state of happiness which be call paradise a state of rest a state of peace where they shall rest from all their trouble and from all care and sorrow . alma and then shall it come to pass that the spirit of the wicked yea who be evil for behold they have no part nor portion of the spirit of the lord for behold they choose evil work rather than good therefore the spirit of the devil do enter into them and take possession of their house and these shall be cast out into out darkness there shall be weep and wail and gnashing of teeth and this because of their own iniquity be lead captive by the will of the devil . alma now this be the state of the soul of the wicked yea in darkness and a state of awful fearful look for the fiery indignation of the wrath of god upon them thus they remain in this state as well a the righteous in paradise until the time of their resurrection . alma now there be some that have understand that this state of happiness and this state of misery of the soul before the resurrection be a first resurrection . yea i admit it may be term a resurrection the raising of the spirit or the soul and their consignation to happiness or misery accord to the word which have be speak . alma and behold again it hath be speak that there be a first resurrection a resurrection of all those who have be or who be or who shall be down to the resurrection of christ from the dead . alma now we do not suppose that this first resurrection which be speak of in this manner can be the resurrection of the soul and their consignation to happiness or misery . ye can not suppose that this be what it meaneth . alma behold i say unto you nay but it meaneth the reuniting of the soul with the body of those from the day of adam down to the resurrection of christ . alma now whether the soul and the body of those of whom have be speak shall all be reunite at once the wicked as well a the righteous i do not say let it suffice that i say that they all come forth or in other word their resurrection cometh to pass before the resurrection of those who die after the resurrection of christ . alma now my son i do not say that their resurrection cometh at the resurrection of christ but behold i give it a my opinion that the soul and the body be reunite of the righteous at the resurrection of christ and his ascension into heaven . alma but whether it be at his resurrection or after i do not say but this much i say that there be a space between death and the resurrection of the body and a state of the soul in happiness or in misery until the time which be appoint of god that the dead shall come forth and be reunite both soul and body and be bring to stand before god and be judge accord to their work . alma yea this bringeth about the restoration of those thing of which have be speak by the mouth of the prophet . alma the soul shall be restore to the body and the body to the soul yea and every limb and joint shall be restore to it body yea even a hair of the head shall not be lose but all thing shall be restore to their proper and perfect frame . alma and now my son this be the restoration of which have be speak by the mouth of the prophet alma and then shall the righteous shine forth in the kingdom of god . alma but behold an awful death cometh upon the wicked for they die a to thing pertain to thing of righteousness for they be unclean and no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of god but they be cast out and consign to partake of the fruit of their labor or their work which have be evil and they drink the dreg of a bitter cup . alma chapter alma and now my son i have somewhat to say concern the restoration of which have be speak for behold some have wrest the scripture and have go far astray because of this thing . and i perceive that thy mind have be worry also concern this thing . but behold i will explain it unto thee . alma i say unto thee my son that the plan of restoration be requisite with the justice of god for it be requisite that all thing should be restore to their proper order . behold it be requisite and just accord to the power and resurrection of christ that the soul of man should be restore to it body and that every part of the body should be restore to itself . alma and it be requisite with the justice of god that men should be judge accord to their work and if their work be good in this life and the desire of their heart be good that they should also at the last day be restore unto that which be good . alma and if their work be evil they shall be restore unto them for evil . therefore all thing shall be restore to their proper order every thing to it natural frame mortality raise to immortality corruption to incorruption raise to endless happiness to inherit the kingdom of god or to endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil the one on one hand the other on the other alma the one raise to happiness accord to his desire of happiness or good accord to his desire of good and the other to evil accord to his desire of evil for a he have desire to do evil all the day long even so shall he have his reward of evil when the night cometh . alma and so it be on the other hand . if he hath repent of his sin and desire righteousness until the end of his day even so he shall be reward unto righteousness . alma these be they that be redeem of the lord yea these be they that be take out that be deliver from that endless night of darkness and thus they stand or fall for behold they be their own judge whether to do good or do evil . alma now the decree of god be unalterable therefore the way be prepared that whosoever will may walk therein and be save . alma and now behold my son do not risk one more offense against your god upon those point of doctrine which ye have hitherto risk to commit sin . alma do not suppose because it have be speak concern restoration that ye shall be restore from sin to happiness . behold i say unto you wickedness never be happiness . alma and now my son all men that be in a state of nature or i would say in a carnal state be in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity they be without god in the world and they have go contrary to the nature of god therefore they be in a state contrary to the nature of happiness . alma and now behold be the meaning of the word restoration to take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural state or to place it in a state opposite to it nature ? alma o my son this be not the case but the meaning of the word restoration be to bring back again evil for evil or carnal for carnal or devilish for devilish good for that which be good righteous for that which be righteous just for that which be just merciful for that which be merciful . alma therefore my son see that you be merciful unto your brother deal justly judge righteously and do good continually and if ye do all these thing then shall ye receive your reward yea ye shall have mercy restore unto you again ye shall have justice restore unto you again ye shall have a righteous judgment restore unto you again and ye shall have good reward unto you again . alma for that which ye do send out shall return unto you again and be restore therefore the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner and justifieth him not at all . alma chapter alma and now my son i perceive there be somewhat more which doth worry your mind which ye can not understand which be concern the justice of god in the punishment of the sinner for ye do try to suppose that it be injustice that the sinner should be consign to a state of misery . alma now behold my son i will explain this thing unto thee . for behold after the lord god send our first parent forth from the garden of eden to till the ground from whence they be take yea he draw out the man and he place at the east end of the garden of eden cherub and a flaming sword which turn every way to keep the tree of life alma now we see that the man have become a god know good and evil and l he should put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat and live forever the lord god place cherub and the flaming sword that he should not partake of the fruit alma and thus we see that there be a time grant unto man to repent yea a probationary time a time to repent and serve god . alma for behold if adam have put forth his hand immediately and partake of the tree of life he would have live forever accord to the word of god have no space for repentance yea and also the word of god would have be void and the great plan of salvation would have be frustrate . alma but behold it be appoint unto man to die therefore a they be cut off from the tree of life they should be cut off from the face of the earth and man become lose forever yea they become fall man . alma and now ye see by this that our first parent be cut off both temporally and spiritually from the presence of the lord and thus we see they become subject to follow after their own will . alma now behold it be not expedient that man should be reclaim from this temporal death for that would destroy the great plan of happiness . alma therefore a the soul could never die and the fall have bring upon all mankind a spiritual death as well a a temporal that be they be cut off from the presence of the lord it be expedient that mankind should be reclaim from this spiritual death . alma therefore a they have become carnal sensual and devilish by nature this probationary state become a state for them to prepare it become a preparatory state . alma and now remember my son if it be not for the plan of redemption lay it aside as soon a they be dead their soul be miserable be cut off from the presence of the lord . alma and now there be no mean to reclaim men from this fall state which man have bring upon himself because of his own disobedience alma therefore accord to justice the plan of redemption could not be bring about only on condition of repentance of men in this probationary state yea this preparatory state for except it be for these condition mercy could not take effect except it should destroy the work of justice . now the work of justice could not be destroy if so god would cease to be god . alma and thus we see that all mankind be fall and they be in the grasp of justice yea the justice of god which consign them forever to be cut off from his presence . alma and now the plan of mercy could not be bring about except an atonement should be make therefore god himself atoneth for the sin of the world to bring about the plan of mercy to appease the demand of justice that god might be a perfect just god and a merciful god also . alma now repentance could not come unto men except there be a punishment which also be eternal a the life of the soul should be affix opposite to the plan of happiness which be a eternal also a the life of the soul . alma now how could a man repent except he should sin ? how could he sin if there be no law ? how could there be a law save there be a punishment ? alma now there be a punishment affixed and a just law give which bring remorse of conscience unto man . alma now if there be no law give if a man murder he should die would he be afraid he would die if he should murder ? alma and also if there be no law give against sin men would not be afraid to sin . alma and if there be no law give if men sin what could justice do or mercy either for they would have no claim upon the creature ? alma but there be a law give and a punishment affixed and a repentance grant which repentance mercy claimeth otherwise justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law and the law inflicteth the punishment if not so the work of justice would be destroy and god would cease to be god . alma but god ceaseth not to be god and mercy claimeth the penitent and mercy cometh because of the atonement and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of god and thus they be restore into his presence to be judge accord to their work accord to the law and justice . alma for behold justice exerciseth all his demand and also mercy claimeth all which be her own and thus none but the truly penitent be save . alma what do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice ? i say unto you nay not one whit . if so god would cease to be god . alma and thus god bringeth about his great and eternal purpose which be prepare from the foundation of the world . and thus cometh about the salvation and the redemption of men and also their destruction and misery . alma therefore o my son whosoever will come may come and partake of the water of life freely and whosoever will not come the same be not compel to come but in the last day it shall be restore unto him accord to his deed . alma if he have desire to do evil and have not repent in his day behold evil shall be do unto him accord to the restoration of god . alma and now my son i desire that ye should let these thing trouble you no more and only let your sin trouble you with that trouble which shall bring you down unto repentance . alma o my son i desire that ye should deny the justice of god no more . do not endeavor to excuse yourself in the least point because of your sin by deny the justice of god but do you let the justice of god and his mercy and his long suffering have full sway in your heart and let it bring you down to the dust in humility . alma and now o my son ye be call of god to preach the word unto this people . and now my son go thy way declare the word with truth and soberness that thou mayest bring soul unto repentance that the great plan of mercy may have claim upon them . and may god grant unto you even accord to my word . amen . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that the son of alma do go forth among the people to declare the word unto them . and alma also himself could not rest and he also go forth . alma now we shall say no more concern their preaching except that they preach the word and the truth accord to the spirit of prophecy and revelation and they preach after the holy order of god by which they be call . alma and now i return to an account of the war between the nephites and the lamanites in the eighteenth year of the reign of the judge . alma for behold it come to pass that the zoramites become lamanites therefore in the commencement of the eighteenth year the people of the nephites saw that the lamanites be come upon them therefore they make preparation for war yea they gather together their army in the land of jershon . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites come with their thousand and they come into the land of antionum which be the land of the zoramites and a man by the name of zerahemnah be their leader . alma and now a the amalekites be of a more wicked and murderous disposition than the lamanites be in and of themselves therefore zerahemnah appoint chief captain over the lamanites and they be all amalekites and zoramites . alma now this he do that he might preserve their hatred towards the nephites that he might bring them into subjection to the accomplishment of his design . alma for behold his design be to stir up the lamanites to anger against the nephites this he do that he might usurp great power over them and also that he might gain power over the nephites by bring them into bondage . alma and now the design of the nephites be to support their land and their house and their wife and their child that they might preserve them from the hand of their enemy and also that they might preserve their right and their privilege yea and also their liberty that they might worship god accord to their desire . alma for they know that if they should fall into the hand of the lamanites that whosoever should worship god in spirit and in truth the true and the living god the lamanites would destroy . alma yea and they also know the extreme hatred of the lamanites towards their brother who be the people of anti nephi lehi who be call the people of ammon and they would not take up arm yea they have enter into a covenant and they would not break it therefore if they should fall into the hand of the lamanites they would be destroy . alma and the nephites would not suffer that they should be destroy therefore they give them land for their inheritance . alma and the people of ammon do give unto the nephites a large portion of their substance to support their army and thus the nephites be compel alone to withstand against the lamanites who be a compound of laman and lemuel and the son of ishmael and all those who have dissent from the nephites who be amalekites and zoramites and the descendant of the priest of noah . alma now those descendant be a numerous nearly a be the nephites and thus the nephites be oblige to contend with their brother even unto bloodshed . alma and it come to pass a the army of the lamanites have gather together in the land of antionum behold the army of the nephites be prepare to meet them in the land of jershon . alma now the leader of the nephites or the man who have be appoint to be the chief captain over the nephites now the chief captain take the command of all the army of the nephites and his name be moroni alma and moroni take all the command and the government of their war . and he be only twenty and five year old when he be appoint chief captain over the army of the nephites . alma and it come to pass that he meet the lamanites in the border of jershon and his people be arm with sword and with cimeters and all manner of weapon of war . alma and when the army of the lamanites saw that the people of nephi or that moroni have prepare his people with breastplate and with arm shield yea and also shield to defend their head and also they be dress with thick clothing alma now the army of zerahemnah be not prepared with any such thing they have only their sword and their cimeters their bow and their arrow their stone and their sling and they be naked save it be a skin which be gird about their loin yea all be naked save it be the zoramites and the amalekites alma but they be not arm with breastplate nor shield therefore they be exceedingly afraid of the army of the nephites because of their armor notwithstanding their number be so much great than the nephites . alma behold now it come to pass that they durst not come against the nephites in the border of jershon therefore they depart out of the land of antionum into the wilderness and take their journey round about in the wilderness away by the head of the river sidon that they might come into the land of manti and take possession of the land for they do not suppose that the army of moroni would know whither they have go . alma but it come to pass as soon a they have depart into the wilderness moroni send spy into the wilderness to watch their camp and moroni also know of the prophecy of alma sent certain men unto him desire him that he should inquire of the lord whither the army of the nephites should go to defend themselves against the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that the word of the lord come unto alma and alma inform the messenger of moroni that the army of the lamanites be march round about in the wilderness that they might come over into the land of manti that they might commence an attack upon the weak part of the people . and those messenger go and deliver the message unto moroni . alma now moroni leave a part of his army in the land of jershon l by any mean a part of the lamanites should come into that land and take possession of the city take the remain part of his army and march over into the land of manti . alma and he cause that all the people in that quarter of the land should gather themselves together to battle against the lamanites to defend their land and their country their right and their liberty therefore they be prepare against the time of the come of the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that moroni cause that his army should be secrete in the valley which be near the bank of the river sidon which be on the west of the river sidon in the wilderness . alma and moroni place spy round about that he might know when the camp of the lamanites should come . alma and now a moroni know the intention of the lamanites that it be their intention to destroy their brother or to subject them and bring them into bondage that they might establish a kingdom unto themselves over all the land alma and he also know that it be the only desire of the nephites to preserve their land and their liberty and their church therefore he think it no sin that he should defend them by stratagem therefore he find by his spy which course the lamanites be to take . alma therefore he divide his army and bring a part over into the valley and conceal them on the east and on the south of the hill riplah alma and the remainder he conceal in the west valley on the west of the river sidon and so down into the border of the land manti . alma and thus have place his army accord to his desire he be prepare to meet them . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites come up on the north of the hill where a part of the army of moroni be conceal . alma and a the lamanites have pass the hill riplah and come into the valley and begin to cross the river sidon the army which be conceal on the south of the hill which be lead by a man whose name be lehi and he lead his army forth and encircle the lamanites about on the east in their rear . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites when they saw the nephites come upon them in their rear turn them about and begin to contend with the army of lehi . alma and the work of death commence on both side but it be more dreadful on the part of the lamanites for their nakedness be expose to the heavy blow of the nephites with their sword and their cimeters which bring death almost at every stroke . alma while on the other hand there be now and then a man fell among the nephites by their sword and the loss of blood they be shield from the more vital part of the body or the more vital part of the body be shield from the stroke of the lamanites by their breastplate and their arm shield and their head plate and thus the nephites do carry on the work of death among the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites become frightened because of the great destruction among them even until they begin to flee towards the river sidon . alma and they be pursue by lehi and his men and they be drive by lehi into the water of sidon and they cross the water of sidon . and lehi retain his army upon the bank of the river sidon that they should not cross . alma and it come to pass that moroni and his army meet the lamanites in the valley on the other side of the river sidon and begin to fall upon them and to slay them . alma and the lamanites do flee again before them towards the land of manti and they be meet again by the army of moroni . alma now in this case the lamanites do fight exceedingly yea never have the lamanites be know to fight with such exceedingly great strength and courage no not even from the beginning . alma and they be inspire by the zoramites and the amalekites who be their chief captain and leader and by zerahemnah who be their chief captain or their chief leader and commander yea they do fight like dragon and many of the nephites be slay by their hand yea for they do smite in two many of their head plate and they do pierce many of their breastplate and they do smite off many of their arm and thus the lamanites do smite in their fierce anger . alma nevertheless the nephites be inspire by a good cause for they be not fight for monarchy nor power but they be fight for their home and their liberty their wife and their child and their all yea for their rite of worship and their church . alma and they be do that which they felt be the duty which they owe to their god for the lord have say unto them and also unto their father that inasmuch a ye be not guilty of the first offense neither the second ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slay by the hand of your enemy . alma and again the lord have say that ye shall defend your family even unto bloodshed . therefore for this cause be the nephites contend with the lamanites to defend themselves and their family and their land their country and their right and their religion . alma and it come to pass that when the men of moroni saw the fierceness and the anger of the lamanites they be about to shrink and flee from them . and moroni perceive their intent send forth and inspire their heart with these thought yea the thought of their land their liberty yea their freedom from bondage . alma and it come to pass that they turn upon the lamanites and they cry with one voice unto the lord their god for their liberty and their freedom from bondage . alma and they begin to stand against the lamanites with power and in that selfsame hour that they cry unto the lord for their freedom the lamanites begin to flee before them and they flee even to the water of sidon . alma now the lamanites be more numerous yea by more than double the number of the nephites nevertheless they be drive insomuch that they be gather together in one body in the valley upon the bank by the river sidon . alma therefore the army of moroni encircle them about yea even on both side of the river for behold on the east be the men of lehi . alma therefore when zerahemnah saw the men of lehi on the east of the river sidon and the army of moroni on the west of the river sidon that they be encircle about by the nephites they be strike with terror . alma now moroni when he saw their terror command his men that they should stop shed their blood . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that they do stop and withdraw a pace from them . and moroni say unto zerahemnah behold zerahemnah that we do not desire to be men of blood . ye know that ye be in our hand yet we do not desire to slay you . alma behold we have not come out to battle against you that we might shed your blood for power neither do we desire to bring any one to the yoke of bondage . but this be the very cause for which ye have come against u yea and ye be angry with u because of our religion . alma but now ye behold that the lord be with u and ye behold that he have deliver you into our hand . and now i would that ye should understand that this be do unto u because of our religion and our faith in christ . and now ye see that ye can not destroy this our faith . alma now ye see that this be the true faith of god yea ye see that god will support and keep and preserve u so long a we be faithful unto him and unto our faith and our religion and never will the lord suffer that we shall be destroy except we should fall into transgression and deny our faith . alma and now zerahemnah i command you in the name of that all powerful god who have strengthen our arm that we have gain power over you by our faith by our religion and by our rite of worship and by our church and by the sacred support which we owe to our wife and our child by that liberty which bind u to our land and our country yea and also by the maintenance of the sacred word of god to which we owe all our happiness and by all that be most dear unto u alma yea and this be not all i command you by all the desire which ye have for life that ye deliver up your weapon of war unto u and we will seek not your blood but we will spare your life if ye will go your way and come not again to war against u . alma and now if ye do not this behold ye be in our hand and i will command my men that they shall fall upon you and inflict the wound of death in your body that ye may become extinct and then we will see who shall have power over this people yea we will see who shall be bring into bondage . alma and now it come to pass that when zerahemnah have hear these saying he come forth and deliver up his sword and his cimeter and his bow into the hand of moroni and say unto him behold here be our weapon of war we will deliver them up unto you but we will not suffer ourselves to take an oath unto you which we know that we shall break and also our child but take our weapon of war and suffer that we may depart into the wilderness otherwise we will retain our sword and we will perish or conquer . alma behold we be not of your faith we do not believe that it be god that have deliver u into your hand but we believe that it be your cunning that have preserve you from our sword . behold it be your breastplate and your shield that have preserve you . alma and now when zerahemnah have make an end of speak these word moroni return the sword and the weapon of war which he have receive unto zerahemnah say behold we will end the conflict . alma now i can not recall the word which i have speak therefore a the lord liveth ye shall not depart except ye depart with an oath that ye will not return again against u to war . now a ye be in our hand we will spill your blood upon the ground or ye shall submit to the condition which i have propose . alma and now when moroni have say these word zerahemnah retain his sword and he be angry with moroni and he rush forward that he might slay moroni but a he raise his sword behold one of moroni 's soldier smite it even to the earth and it break by the hilt and he also smite zerahemnah that he take off his scalp and it fell to the earth . and zerahemnah withdrew from before them into the midst of his soldier . alma and it come to pass that the soldier who stand by who smite off the scalp of zerahemnah take up the scalp from off the ground by the hair and lay it upon the point of his sword and stretch it forth unto them say unto them with a loud voice alma even a this scalp have fall to the earth which be the scalp of your chief so shall ye fall to the earth except ye will deliver up your weapon of war and depart with a covenant of peace . alma now there be many when they hear these word and saw the scalp which be upon the sword that be strike with fear and many come forth and throw down their weapon of war at the foot of moroni and enter into a covenant of peace . and as many a enter into a covenant they suffer to depart into the wilderness . alma now it come to pass that zerahemnah be exceedingly wroth and he do stir up the remainder of his soldier to anger to contend more powerfully against the nephites . alma and now moroni be angry because of the stubbornness of the lamanites therefore he command his people that they should fall upon them and slay them . and it come to pass that they begin to slay them yea and the lamanites do contend with their sword and their might . alma but behold their naked skin and their bare head be expose to the sharp sword of the nephites yea behold they be pierce and smite yea and do fall exceedingly fast before the sword of the nephites and they begin to be sweep down even a the soldier of moroni have prophesy . alma now zerahemnah when he saw that they be all about to be destroy cried mightily unto moroni promising that he would covenant and also his people with them if they would spare the remainder of their life that they never would come to war again against them . alma and it come to pass that moroni cause that the work of death should cease again among the people . and he take the weapon of war from the lamanites and after they have enter into a covenant with him of peace they be suffer to depart into the wilderness . alma now the number of their dead be not numbered because of the greatness of the number yea the number of their dead be exceedingly great both on the nephites and on the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that they do cast their dead into the water of sidon and they have go forth and be bury in the depth of the sea . alma and the army of the nephites or of moroni return and come to their house and their land . alma and thus end the eighteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . and thus end the record of alma which be write upon the plate of nephi . alma chapter alma behold now it come to pass that the people of nephi be exceedingly rejoice because the lord have again deliver them out of the hand of their enemy therefore they give thanks unto the lord their god yea and they do fast much and pray much and they do worship god with exceedingly great joy . alma and it come to pass in the nineteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi that alma come unto his son helaman and say unto him believest thou the word which i spake unto thee concern those record which have be keep ? alma and helaman say unto him yea i believe . alma and alma say again believest thou in jesus christ who shall come ? alma and he say yea i believe all the word which thou hast spoken . alma and alma say unto him again will ye keep my commandment ? alma and he say yea i will keep thy commandment with all my heart . alma then alma say unto him bless art thou and the lord shall prosper thee in this land . alma but behold i have somewhat to prophesy unto thee but what i prophesy unto thee ye shall not make know yea what i prophesy unto thee shall not be make know even until the prophecy be fulfil therefore write the word which i shall say . alma and these be the word behold i perceive that this very people the nephites accord to the spirit of revelation which be in me in four hundred year from the time that jesus christ shall manifest himself unto them shall dwindle in unbelief . alma yea and then shall they see war and pestilence yea famine and bloodshed even until the people of nephi shall become extinct alma yea and this because they shall dwindle in unbelief and fall into the work of darkness and lasciviousness and all manner of iniquity yea i say unto you that because they shall sin against so great light and knowledge yea i say unto you that from that day even the fourth generation shall not all pass away before this great iniquity shall come . alma and when that great day cometh behold the time very soon cometh that those who be now or the seed of those who be now number among the people of nephi shall no more be number among the people of nephi . alma but whosoever remaineth and be not destroy in that great and dreadful day shall be number among the lamanites and shall become like unto them all save it be a few who shall be call the disciple of the lord and them shall the lamanites pursue even until they shall become extinct . and now because of iniquity this prophecy shall be fulfil . alma and now it come to pass that after alma have say these thing to helaman he bless him and also his other son and he also bless the earth for the righteous ' sake . alma and he say thus saith the lord god curse shall be the land yea this land unto every nation kindred tongue and people unto destruction which do wickedly when they be fully ripe and a i have say so shall it be for this be the cursing and the blessing of god upon the land for the lord can not look upon sin with the least degree of allowance . alma and now when alma have say these word he bless the church yea all those who should stand fast in the faith from that time henceforth . alma and when alma have do this he depart out of the land of zarahemla a if to go into the land of melek . and it come to pass that he be never hear of more a to his death or burial we know not of . alma behold this we know that he be a righteous man and the say go abroad in the church that he be take up by the spirit or bury by the hand of the lord even a moses . but behold the scripture saith the lord take moses unto himself and we suppose that he have also receive alma in the spirit unto himself therefore for this cause we know nothing concern his death and burial . alma and now it come to pass in the commencement of the nineteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi that helaman go forth among the people to declare the word unto them . alma for behold because of their war with the lamanites and the many little dissension and disturbance which have be among the people it become expedient that the word of god should be declare among them yea and that a regulation should be make throughout the church . alma therefore helaman and his brother go forth to establish the church again in all the land yea in every city throughout all the land which be possess by the people of nephi . and it come to pass that they do appoint priest and teacher throughout all the land over all the church . alma and now it come to pass that after helaman and his brother have appoint priest and teacher over the church that there arise a dissension among them and they would not give heed to the word of helaman and his brother alma but they grow proud be lift up in their heart because of their exceedingly great rich therefore they grow rich in their own eye and would not give heed to their word to walk uprightly before god . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that as many a would not hearken to the word of helaman and his brother be gather together against their brother . alma and now behold they be exceedingly wroth insomuch that they be determine to slay them . alma now the leader of those who be wroth against their brother be a large and a strong man and his name be amalickiah . alma and amalickiah be desirous to be a king and those people who be wroth be also desirous that he should be their king and they be the great part of them the low judge of the land and they be seek for power . alma and they have be lead by the flattery of amalickiah that if they would support him and establish him to be their king that he would make them ruler over the people . alma thus they be lead away by amalickiah to dissension notwithstanding the preaching of helaman and his brother yea notwithstanding their exceedingly great care over the church for they be high priest over the church . alma and there be many in the church who believe in the flattering word of amalickiah therefore they dissent even from the church and thus be the affair of the people of nephi exceedingly precarious and dangerous notwithstanding their great victory which they have have over the lamanites and their great rejoicing which they have have because of their deliverance by the hand of the lord . alma thus we see how quick the child of men do forget the lord their god yea how quick to do iniquity and to be lead away by the evil one . alma yea and we also see the great wickedness one very wicked man can cause to take place among the child of men . alma yea we see that amalickiah because he be a man of cunning device and a man of many flatter word that he lead away the heart of many people to do wickedly yea and to seek to destroy the church of god and to destroy the foundation of liberty which god have grant unto them or which bless god have send upon the face of the land for the righteous ' sake . alma and now it come to pass that when moroni who be the chief commander of the army of the nephites have hear of these dissension he be angry with amalickiah . alma and it come to pass that he rent his coat and he take a piece thereof and write upon it in memory of our god our religion and freedom and our peace our wife and our child and he fasten it upon the end of a pole . alma and he fasten on his head plate and his breastplate and his shield and gird on his armor about his loin and he take the pole which have on the end thereof his rent coat and he call it the title of liberty and he bow himself to the earth and he pray mightily unto his god for the blessing of liberty to rest upon his brother so long a there should a band of christian remain to possess the land alma for thus be all the true believer of christ who belong to the church of god call by those who do not belong to the church . alma and those who do belong to the church be faithful yea all those who be true believer in christ take upon them gladly the name of christ or christian a they be call because of their belief in christ who should come . alma and therefore at this time moroni pray that the cause of the christian and the freedom of the land might be favor . alma and it come to pass that when he have pour out his soul to god he name all the land which be south of the land desolation yea and in fine all the land both on the north and on the south a choose land and the land of liberty . alma and he say surely god shall not suffer that we who be despise because we take upon u the name of christ shall be tread down and destroy until we bring it upon u by our own transgression . alma and when moroni have say these word he go forth among the people wave the rent part of his garment in the air that all might see the writing which he have write upon the rent part and cry with a loud voice say alma behold whosoever will maintain this title upon the land let them come forth in the strength of the lord and enter into a covenant that they will maintain their right and their religion that the lord god may bless them . alma and it come to pass that when moroni have proclaim these word behold the people come run together with their armor gird about their loin rend their garment in token or a a covenant that they would not forsake the lord their god or in other word if they should transgress the commandment of god or fall into transgression and be ashamed to take upon them the name of christ the lord should rend them even a they have rent their garment . alma now this be the covenant which they make and they cast their garment at the foot of moroni say we covenant with our god that we shall be destroy even a our brother in the land northward if we shall fall into transgression yea he may cast u at the foot of our enemy even a we have cast our garment at thy foot to be trodden under foot if we shall fall into transgression . alma moroni say unto them behold we be a remnant of the seed of jacob yea we be a remnant of the seed of joseph whose coat be rent by his brother into many piece yea and now behold let u remember to keep the commandment of god or our garment shall be rent by our brother and we be cast into prison or be sell or be slay . alma yea let u preserve our liberty a a remnant of joseph yea let u remember the word of jacob before his death for behold he saw that a part of the remnant of the coat of joseph be preserve and have not decay . and he say even a this remnant of garment of my son hath be preserve so shall a remnant of the seed of my son be preserve by the hand of god and be take unto himself while the remainder of the seed of joseph shall perish even a the remnant of his garment . alma now behold this giveth my soul sorrow nevertheless my soul hath joy in my son because of that part of his seed which shall be take unto god . alma now behold this be the language of jacob . alma and now who knoweth but what the remnant of the seed of joseph which shall perish a his garment be those who have dissent from u ? yea and even it shall be ourselves if we do not stand fast in the faith of christ . alma and now it come to pass that when moroni have say these word he go forth and also send forth in all the part of the land where there be dissension and gather together all the people who be desirous to maintain their liberty to stand against amalickiah and those who have dissent who be call amalickiahites . alma and it come to pass that when amalickiah saw that the people of moroni be more numerous than the amalickiahites and he also saw that his people be doubtful concern the justice of the cause in which they have undertake therefore fear that he should not gain the point he take those of his people who would and depart into the land of nephi . alma now moroni think it be not expedient that the lamanites should have any more strength therefore he think to cut off the people of amalickiah or to take them and bring them back and put amalickiah to death yea for he know that he would stir up the lamanites to anger against them and cause them to come to battle against them and this he know that amalickiah would do that he might obtain his purpose . alma therefore moroni think it be expedient that he should take his army who have gather themselves together and arm themselves and enter into a covenant to keep the peace and it come to pass that he take his army and march out with his tent into the wilderness to cut off the course of amalickiah in the wilderness . alma and it come to pass that he do accord to his desire and march forth into the wilderness and head the army of amalickiah . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah flee with a small number of his men and the remainder be deliver up into the hand of moroni and be take back into the land of zarahemla . alma now moroni be a man who be appoint by the chief judge and the voice of the people therefore he have power accord to his will with the army of the nephites to establish and to exercise authority over them . alma and it come to pass that whomsoever of the amalickiahites that would not enter into a covenant to support the cause of freedom that they might maintain a free government he cause to be put to death and there be but few who deny the covenant of freedom . alma and it come to pass also that he cause the title of liberty to be hoist upon every tower which be in all the land which be possess by the nephites and thus moroni plant the standard of liberty among the nephites . alma and they begin to have peace again in the land and thus they do maintain peace in the land until nearly the end of the nineteenth year of the reign of the judge . alma and helaman and the high priest do also maintain order in the church yea even for the space of four year do they have much peace and rejoicing in the church . alma and it come to pass that there be many who die firmly believe that their soul be redeem by the lord jesus christ thus they go out of the world rejoicing . alma and there be some who die with fever which at some season of the year be very frequent in the land but not so much so with fever because of the excellent quality of the many plant and root which god have prepare to remove the cause of disease to which men be subject by the nature of the climate alma but there be many who die with old age and those who die in the faith of christ be happy in him a we must need suppose . alma chapter alma now we will return in our record to amalickiah and those who have flee with him into the wilderness for behold he have take those who go with him and go up in the land of nephi among the lamanites and do stir up the lamanites to anger against the people of nephi insomuch that the king of the lamanites send a proclamation throughout all his land among all his people that they should gather themselves together again to go to battle against the nephites . alma and it come to pass that when the proclamation have go forth among them they be exceedingly afraid yea they fear to displease the king and they also fear to go to battle against the nephites lest they should lose their life . and it come to pass that they would not or the more part of them would not obey the commandment of the king . alma and now it come to pass that the king be wroth because of their disobedience therefore he give amalickiah the command of that part of his army which be obedient unto his command and command him that he should go forth and compel them to arm . alma now behold this be the desire of amalickiah for he be a very subtle man to do evil therefore he lay the plan in his heart to dethrone the king of the lamanites . alma and now he have get the command of those part of the lamanites who be in favor of the king and he seek to gain favor of those who be not obedient therefore he go forward to the place which be call onidah for thither have all the lamanites flee for they discover the army come and suppose that they be come to destroy them therefore they flee to onidah to the place of arm . alma and they have appoint a man to be a king and a leader over them be fix in their mind with a determined resolution that they would not be subject to go against the nephites . alma and it come to pass that they have gather themselves together upon the top of the mount which be call antipas in preparation to battle . alma now it be not amalickiah 's intention to give them battle accord to the commandment of the king but behold it be his intention to gain favor with the army of the lamanites that he might place himself at their head and dethrone the king and take possession of the kingdom . alma and behold it come to pass that he cause his army to pitch their tent in the valley which be near the mount antipas . alma and it come to pass that when it be night he send a secret embassy into the mount antipas desire that the leader of those who be upon the mount whose name be lehonti that he should come down to the foot of the mount for he desire to speak with him . alma and it come to pass that when lehonti receive the message he durst not go down to the foot of the mount . and it come to pass that amalickiah send again the second time desire him to come down . and it come to pass that lehonti would not and he send again the third time . alma and it come to pass that when amalickiah find that he could not get lehonti to come down off from the mount he go up into the mount nearly to lehonti 's camp and he send again the fourth time his message unto lehonti desiring that he would come down and that he would bring his guard with him . alma and it come to pass that when lehonti have come down with his guard to amalickiah that amalickiah desire him to come down with his army in the night time and surround those men in their camp over whom the king have give him command and that he would deliver them up into lehonti 's hand if he would make him amalickiah a second leader over the whole army . alma and it come to pass that lehonti come down with his men and surround the men of amalickiah so that before they awake at the dawn of day they be surround by the army of lehonti . alma and it come to pass that when they saw that they be surround they plead with amalickiah that he would suffer them to fall in with their brother that they might not be destroy . now this be the very thing which amalickiah desire . alma and it come to pass that he deliver his men contrary to the command of the king . now this be the thing that amalickiah desire that he might accomplish his design in dethrone the king . alma now it be the custom among the lamanites if their chief leader be kill to appoint the second leader to be their chief leader . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah cause that one of his servant should administer poison by degree to lehonti that he die . alma now when lehonti be dead the lamanites appoint amalickiah to be their leader and their chief commander . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah march with his army for he have gain his desire to the land of nephi to the city of nephi which be the chief city . alma and the king come out to meet him with his guard for he suppose that amalickiah have fulfil his command and that amalickiah have gather together so great an army to go against the nephites to battle . alma but behold a the king come out to meet him amalickiah cause that his servant should go forth to meet the king . and they go and bow themselves before the king a if to reverence him because of his greatness . alma and it come to pass that the king put forth his hand to raise them a be the custom with the lamanites a a token of peace which custom they have take from the nephites . alma and it come to pass that when he have raise the first from the ground behold he stab the king to the heart and he fell to the earth . alma now the servant of the king flee and the servant of amalickiah raise a cry say alma behold the servant of the king have stab him to the heart and he have fall and they have flee behold come and see . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah command that his army should march forth and see what have happen to the king and when they have come to the spot and find the king lying in his gore amalickiah pretend to be wroth and say whosoever love the king let him go forth and pursue his servant that they may be slay . alma and it come to pass that all they who love the king when they hear these word come forth and pursue after the servant of the king . alma now when the servant of the king saw an army pursuing after them they be frighten again and flee into the wilderness and come over into the land of zarahemla and join the people of ammon . alma and the army which pursue after them return have pursue after them in vain and thus amalickiah by his fraud gain the heart of the people . alma and it come to pass on the morrow he enter the city nephi with his army and take possession of the city . alma and now it come to pass that the queen when she have hear that the king be slay for amalickiah have send an embassy to the queen inform her that the king have be slay by his servant that he have pursue them with his army but it be in vain and they have make their escape alma therefore when the queen have receive this message she send unto amalickiah desire him that he would spare the people of the city and she also desire him that he should come in unto her and she also desire him that he should bring witness with him to testify concern the death of the king . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah take the same servant that slew the king and all them who be with him and go in unto the queen unto the place where she sit and they all testify unto her that the king be slay by his own servant and they say also they have flee do not this testify against them ? and thus they satisfy the queen concern the death of the king . alma and it come to pass that amalickiah seek the favor of the queen and take her unto him to wife and thus by his fraud and by the assistance of his cunning servant he obtain the kingdom yea he be acknowledge king throughout all the land among all the people of the lamanites who be compose of the lamanites and the lemuelites and the ishmaelites and all the dissenter of the nephites from the reign of nephi down to the present time . alma now these dissenter have the same instruction and the same information of the nephites yea have be instruct in the same knowledge of the lord nevertheless it be strange to relate not long after their dissension they become more hardened and impenitent and more wild wicked and ferocious than the lamanites drink in with the tradition of the lamanites give way to indolence and all manner of lasciviousness yea entirely forget the lord their god . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that as soon a amalickiah have obtain the kingdom he begin to inspire the heart of the lamanites against the people of nephi yea he do appoint men to speak unto the lamanites from their tower against the nephites . alma and thus he do inspire their heart against the nephites insomuch that in the latter end of the nineteenth year of the reign of the judge he have accomplish his design thus far yea have be make king over the lamanites he seek also to reign over all the land yea and all the people who be in the land the nephites as well a the lamanites . alma therefore he have accomplish his design for he have harden the heart of the lamanites and blind their mind and stir them up to anger insomuch that he have gather together a numerous host to go to battle against the nephites . alma for he be determine because of the greatness of the number of his people to overpower the nephites and to bring them into bondage . alma and thus he do appoint chief captain of the zoramites they be the most acquainted with the strength of the nephites and their place of resort and the weak part of their city therefore he appoint them to be chief captain over his army . alma and it come to pass that they take their camp and move forth toward the land of zarahemla in the wilderness . alma now it come to pass that while amalickiah have thus be obtain power by fraud and deceit moroni on the other hand have be prepare the mind of the people to be faithful unto the lord their god . alma yea he have be strengthen the army of the nephites and erect small fort or place of resort throw up bank of earth round about to enclose his army and also build wall of stone to encircle them about round about their city and the border of their land yea all round about the land . alma and in their weak fortification he do place the great number of men and thus he do fortify and strengthen the land which be possess by the nephites . alma and thus he be prepare to support their liberty their land their wife and their child and their peace and that they might live unto the lord their god and that they might maintain that which be call by their enemy the cause of christian . alma and moroni be a strong and a mighty man he be a man of a perfect understanding yea a man that do not delight in bloodshed a man whose soul do joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country and his brother from bondage and slavery alma yea a man whose heart do swell with thanksgiving to his god for the many privilege and blessing which he bestow upon his people a man who do labor exceedingly for the welfare and safety of his people . alma yea and he be a man who be firm in the faith of christ and he have swear with an oath to defend his people his right and his country and his religion even to the loss of his blood . alma now the nephites be teach to defend themselves against their enemy even to the shedding of blood if it be necessary yea and they be also teach never to give an offense yea and never to raise the sword except it be against an enemy except it be to preserve their life . alma and this be their faith that by so do god would prosper them in the land or in other word if they be faithful in keep the commandment of god that he would prosper them in the land yea warn them to flee or to prepare for war accord to their danger alma and also that god would make it know unto them whither they should go to defend themselves against their enemy and by so do the lord would deliver them and this be the faith of moroni and his heart do glory in it not in the shedding of blood but in do good in preserve his people yea in keep the commandment of god yea and resist iniquity . alma yea verily verily i say unto you if all men have be and be and ever would be like unto moroni behold the very power of hell would have be shake forever yea the devil would never have power over the heart of the child of men . alma behold he be a man like unto ammon the son of mosiah yea and even the other son of mosiah yea and also alma and his son for they be all men of god . alma now behold helaman and his brother be no less serviceable unto the people than be moroni for they do preach the word of god and they do baptize unto repentance all men whosoever would hearken unto their word . alma and thus they go forth and the people do humble themselves because of their word insomuch that they be highly favor of the lord and thus they be free from war and contention among themselves yea even for the space of four year . alma but a i have say in the latter end of the nineteenth year yea notwithstanding their peace amongst themselves they be compel reluctantly to contend with their brother the lamanites . alma yea and in fine their war never do cease for the space of many year with the lamanites notwithstanding their much reluctance . alma now they be sorry to take up arm against the lamanites because they do not delight in the shedding of blood yea and this be not all they be sorry to be the mean of send so many of their brother out of this world into an eternal world unprepared to meet their god . alma nevertheless they could not suffer to lay down their life that their wife and their child should be massacre by the barbarous cruelty of those who be once their brother yea and have dissent from their church and have leave them and have go to destroy them by join the lamanites . alma yea they could not bear that their brother should rejoice over the blood of the nephites so long a there be any who should keep the commandment of god for the promise of the lord be if they should keep his commandment they should prosper in the land . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass in the eleventh month of the nineteenth year on the tenth day of the month the army of the lamanites be see approach towards the land of ammonihah . alma and behold the city have be rebuild and moroni have station an army by the border of the city and they have cast up dirt around about to shield them from the arrow and the stone of the lamanites for behold they fight with stone and with arrow . alma behold i say that the city of ammonihah have be rebuild . i say unto you yea that it be in part rebuilt and because the lamanites have destroy it once because of the iniquity of the people they suppose that it would again become an easy prey for them . alma but behold how great be their disappointment for behold the nephites have dig up a ridge of earth round about them which be so high that the lamanites could not cast their stone and their arrow at them that they might take effect neither could they come upon them save it be by their place of entrance . alma now at this time the chief captain of the lamanites be astonish exceedingly because of the wisdom of the nephites in prepare their place of security . alma now the leader of the lamanites have suppose because of the greatness of their number yea they suppose that they should be privilege to come upon them a they have hitherto do yea and they have also prepare themselves with shield and with breastplate and they have also prepare themselves with garment of skin yea very thick garment to cover their nakedness . alma and be thus prepare they suppose that they should easily overpower and subject their brother to the yoke of bondage or slay and massacre them accord to their pleasure . alma but behold to their uttermost astonishment they be prepare for them in a manner which never have be know among the child of lehi . now they be prepare for the lamanites to battle after the manner of the instruction of moroni . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites or the amalickiahites be exceedingly astonish at their manner of preparation for war . alma now if king amalickiah have come down out of the land of nephi at the head of his army perhaps he would have cause the lamanites to have attack the nephites at the city of ammonihah for behold he do care not for the blood of his people . alma but behold amalickiah do not come down himself to battle . and behold his chief captain durst not attack the nephites at the city of ammonihah for moroni have alter the management of affair among the nephites insomuch that the lamanites be disappoint in their place of retreat and they could not come upon them . alma therefore they retreat into the wilderness and take their camp and march towards the land of noah suppose that to be the next best place for them to come against the nephites . alma for they know not that moroni have fortify or have build fort of security for every city in all the land round about therefore they march forward to the land of noah with a firm determination yea their chief captain come forward and take an oath that they would destroy the people of that city . alma but behold to their astonishment the city of noah which have hitherto be a weak place have now by the mean of moroni become strong yea even to exceed the strength of the city ammonihah . alma and now behold this be wisdom in moroni for he have suppose that they would be frighten at the city ammonihah and a the city of noah have hitherto be the weak part of the land therefore they would march thither to battle and thus it be accord to his desire . alma and behold moroni have appoint lehi to be chief captain over the men of that city and it be that same lehi who fight with the lamanites in the valley on the east of the river sidon . alma and now behold it come to pass that when the lamanites have find that lehi command the city they be again disappoint for they fear lehi exceedingly nevertheless their chief captain have swear with an oath to attack the city therefore they bring up their army . alma now behold the lamanites could not get into their fort of security by any other way save by the entrance because of the highness of the bank which have be throw up and the depth of the ditch which have be dig round about save it be by the entrance . alma and thus be the nephites prepare to destroy all such a should attempt to climb up to enter the fort by any other way by cast over stone and arrow at them . alma thus they be prepare yea a body of their strong men with their sword and their sling to smite down all who should attempt to come into their place of security by the place of entrance and thus be they prepare to defend themselves against the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that the captain of the lamanites bring up their army before the place of entrance and begin to contend with the nephites to get into their place of security but behold they be drive back from time to time insomuch that they be slay with an immense slaughter . alma now when they find that they could not obtain power over the nephites by the pas they begin to dig down their bank of earth that they might obtain a pas to their army that they might have an equal chance to fight but behold in these attempt they be sweep off by the stone and arrow which be throw at them and instead of fill up their ditch by pull down the bank of earth they be fill up in a measure with their dead and wounded body . alma thus the nephites have all power over their enemy and thus the lamanites do attempt to destroy the nephites until their chief captain be all slain yea and more than a thousand of the lamanites be slay while on the other hand there be not a single soul of the nephites which be slain . alma there be about fifty who be wound who have be expose to the arrow of the lamanites through the pas but they be shield by their shield and their breastplate and their head plate insomuch that their wound be upon their leg many of which be very severe . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites saw that their chief captain be all slay they flee into the wilderness . and it come to pass that they return to the land of nephi to inform their king amalickiah who be a nephite by birth concern their great loss . alma and it come to pass that he be exceedingly angry with his people because he have not obtain his desire over the nephites he have not subject them to the yoke of bondage . alma yea he be exceedingly wroth and he do curse god and also moroni swear with an oath that he would drink his blood and this because moroni have keep the commandment of god in prepare for the safety of his people . alma and it come to pass that on the other hand the people of nephi do thank the lord their god because of his matchless power in deliver them from the hand of their enemy . alma and thus end the nineteenth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma yea and there be continual peace among them and exceedingly great prosperity in the church because of their heed and diligence which they give unto the word of god which be declare unto them by helaman and shiblon and corianton and ammon and his brother yea and by all those who have be ordain by the holy order of god be baptize unto repentance and send forth to preach among the people . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that moroni do not stop make preparation for war or to defend his people against the lamanites for he cause that his army should commence in the commencement of the twentieth year of the reign of the judge that they should commence in dig up heap of earth round about all the city throughout all the land which be possess by the nephites . alma and upon the top of these ridge of earth he cause that there should be timber yea work of timber build up to the height of a man round about the city . alma and he cause that upon those work of timber there should be a frame of picket build upon the timber round about and they be strong and high . alma and he cause tower to be erect that overlook those work of picket and he cause place of security to be build upon those tower that the stone and the arrow of the lamanites could not hurt them . alma and they be prepare that they could cast stone from the top thereof accord to their pleasure and their strength and slay him who should attempt to approach near the wall of the city . alma thus moroni do prepare stronghold against the come of their enemy round about every city in all the land . alma and it come to pass that moroni cause that his army should go forth into the east wilderness yea and they go forth and drive all the lamanites who be in the east wilderness into their own land which be south of the land of zarahemla . alma and the land of nephi do run in a straight course from the east sea to the west . alma and it come to pass that when moroni have drive all the lamanites out of the east wilderness which be north of the land of their own possession he cause that the inhabitant who be in the land of zarahemla and in the land round about should go forth into the east wilderness even to the border by the seashore and possess the land . alma and he also place army on the south in the border of their possession and cause them to erect fortification that they might secure their army and their people from the hand of their enemy . alma and thus he cut off all the stronghold of the lamanites in the east wilderness yea and also on the west fortify the line between the nephites and the lamanites between the land of zarahemla and the land of nephi from the west sea run by the head of the river sidon the nephites possess all the land northward yea even all the land which be northward of the land bountiful accord to their pleasure . alma thus moroni with his army which do increase daily because of the assurance of protection which his work do bring forth unto them do seek to cut off the strength and the power of the lamanites from off the land of their possession that they should have no power upon the land of their possession . alma and it come to pass that the nephites begin the foundation of a city and they call the name of the city moroni and it be by the east sea and it be on the south by the line of the possession of the lamanites . alma and they also begin a foundation for a city between the city of moroni and the city of aaron join the border of aaron and moroni and they call the name of the city or the land nephihah . alma and they also begin in that same year to build many city on the north one in a particular manner which they call lehi which be in the north by the border of the seashore . alma and thus end the twentieth year . alma and in these prosperous circumstance be the people of nephi in the commencement of the twenty and first year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and they do prosper exceedingly and they become exceedingly rich yea and they do multiply and wax strong in the land . alma and thus we see how merciful and just be all the dealing of the lord to the fulfilling of all his word unto the child of men yea we can behold that his word be verify even at this time which he spake unto lehi say alma bless art thou and thy child and they shall be bless inasmuch a they shall keep my commandment they shall prosper in the land . but remember inasmuch a they will not keep my commandment they shall be cut off from the presence of the lord . alma and we see that these promise have be verify to the people of nephi for it have be their quarrelings and their contention yea their murderings and their plundering their idolatry their whoredom and their abomination which be among themselves which bring upon them their war and their destruction . alma and those who be faithful in keep the commandment of the lord be deliver at all time whilst thousand of their wicked brother have be consign to bondage or to perish by the sword or to dwindle in unbelief and mingle with the lamanites . alma but behold there never be a happy time among the people of nephi since the day of nephi than in the day of moroni yea even at this time in the twenty and first year of the reign of the judge . alma and it come to pass that the twenty and second year of the reign of the judge also end in peace yea and also the twenty and third year . alma and it come to pass that in the commencement of the twenty and fourth year of the reign of the judge there would also have be peace among the people of nephi have it not be for a contention which take place among them concern the land of lehi and the land of morianton which join upon the border of lehi both of which be on the border by the seashore . alma for behold the people who possess the land of morianton do claim a part of the land of lehi therefore there begin to be a warm contention between them insomuch that the people of morianton take up arm against their brother and they be determine by the sword to slay them . alma but behold the people who possess the land of lehi flee to the camp of moroni and appeal unto him for assistance for behold they be not in the wrong . alma and it come to pass that when the people of morianton who be lead by a man whose name be morianton found that the people of lehi have flee to the camp of moroni they be exceedingly fearful l the army of moroni should come upon them and destroy them . alma therefore morianton put it into their heart that they should flee to the land which be northward which be cover with large body of water and take possession of the land which be northward . alma and behold they would have carry this plan into effect which would have be a cause to have be lament but behold morianton be a man of much passion therefore he be angry with one of his maid servant and he fell upon her and beat her much . alma and it come to pass that she flee and come over to the camp of moroni and tell moroni all thing concern the matter and also concern their intention to flee into the land northward . alma now behold the people who be in the land bountiful or rather moroni fear that they would hearken to the word of morianton and unite with his people and thus he would obtain possession of those part of the land which would lay a foundation for serious consequence among the people of nephi yea which consequence would lead to the overthrow of their liberty . alma therefore moroni send an army with their camp to head the people of morianton to stop their flight into the land northward . alma and it come to pass that they do not head them until they have come to the border of the land desolation and there they do head them by the narrow pas which lead by the sea into the land northward yea by the sea on the west and on the east . alma and it come to pass that the army which be send by moroni which be lead by a man whose name be teancum do meet the people of morianton and so stubborn be the people of morianton be inspire by his wickedness and his flattering word that a battle commence between them in the which teancum do slay morianton and defeat his army and take them prisoner and return to the camp of moroni . and thus end the twenty and fourth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and thus be the people of morianton bring back . and upon their covenanting to keep the peace they be restore to the land of morianton and a union take place between them and the people of lehi and they be also restore to their land . alma and it come to pass that in the same year that the people of nephi have peace restore unto them that nephihah the second chief judge die have fill the judgment seat with perfect uprightness before god . alma nevertheless he have refuse alma to take possession of those record and those thing which be esteem by alma and his father to be most sacred therefore alma have confer them upon his son helaman . alma behold it come to pass that the son of nephihah be appoint to fill the judgment seat in the stead of his father yea he be appoint chief judge and governor over the people with an oath and sacred ordinance to judge righteously and to keep the peace and the freedom of the people and to grant unto them their sacred privilege to worship the lord their god yea to support and maintain the cause of god all his day and to bring the wicked to justice accord to their crime . alma now behold his name be pahoran . and pahoran do fill the seat of his father and do commence his reign in the end of the twenty and fourth year over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass in the commencement of the twenty and fifth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi they have establish peace between the people of lehi and the people of morianton concern their land and have commence the twenty and fifth year in peace alma nevertheless they do not long maintain an entire peace in the land for there begin to be a contention among the people concern the chief judge pahoran for behold there be a part of the people who desire that a few particular point of the law should be alter . alma but behold pahoran would not alter nor suffer the law to be alter therefore he do not hearken to those who have send in their voice with their petition concern the altering of the law . alma therefore those who be desirous that the law should be alter be angry with him and desire that he should no longer be chief judge over the land therefore there arise a warm dispute concern the matter but not unto bloodshed . alma and it come to pass that those who be desirous that pahoran should be dethrone from the judgment seat be call king men for they be desirous that the law should be alter in a manner to overthrow the free government and to establish a king over the land . alma and those who be desirous that pahoran should remain chief judge over the land take upon them the name of freeman and thus be the division among them for the freeman have swear or covenant to maintain their right and the privilege of their religion by a free government . alma and it come to pass that this matter of their contention be settle by the voice of the people . and it come to pass that the voice of the people come in favor of the freeman and pahoran retain the judgment seat which cause much rejoicing among the brother of pahoran and also many of the people of liberty who also put the king men to silence that they durst not oppose but be oblige to maintain the cause of freedom . alma now those who be in favor of king be those of high birth and they seek to be king and they be support by those who seek power and authority over the people . alma but behold this be a critical time for such contention to be among the people of nephi for behold amalickiah have again stir up the heart of the people of the lamanites against the people of the nephites and he be gather together soldier from all part of his land and arm them and prepare for war with all diligence for he have swear to drink the blood of moroni . alma but behold we shall see that his promise which he make be rash nevertheless he do prepare himself and his army to come to battle against the nephites . alma now his army be not so great a they have hitherto be because of the many thousand who have be slay by the hand of the nephites but notwithstanding their great loss amalickiah have gather together a wonderfully great army insomuch that he fear not to come down to the land of zarahemla . alma yea even amalickiah do himself come down at the head of the lamanites . and it be in the twenty and fifth year of the reign of the judge and it be at the same time that they have begin to settle the affair of their contention concern the chief judge pahoran . alma and it come to pass that when the men who be call king men have hear that the lamanites be come down to battle against them they be glad in their heart and they refuse to take up arm for they be so wroth with the chief judge and also with the people of liberty that they would not take up arm to defend their country . alma and it come to pass that when moroni saw this and also saw that the lamanites be come into the border of the land he be exceedingly wroth because of the stubbornness of those people whom he have labor with so much diligence to preserve yea he be exceedingly wroth his soul be fill with anger against them . alma and it come to pass that he send a petition with the voice of the people unto the governor of the land desire that he should read it and give him moroni power to compel those dissenter to defend their country or to put them to death . alma for it be his first care to put an end to such contention and dissension among the people for behold this have be hitherto a cause of all their destruction . and it come to pass that it be grant accord to the voice of the people . alma and it come to pass that moroni command that his army should go against those king men to pull down their pride and their nobility and level them with the earth or they should take up arm and support the cause of liberty . alma and it come to pass that the army do march forth against them and they do pull down their pride and their nobility insomuch that a they do lift their weapon of war to fight against the men of moroni they be hew down and level to the earth . alma and it come to pass that there be four thousand of those dissenter who be hew down by the sword and those of their leader who be not slay in battle be take and cast into prison for there be no time for their trial at this period . alma and the remainder of those dissenter rather than be smite down to the earth by the sword yield to the standard of liberty and be compel to hoist the title of liberty upon their tower and in their city and to take up arm in defence of their country . alma and thus moroni put an end to those king men that there be not any know by the appellation of king men and thus he put an end to the stubbornness and the pride of those people who profess the blood of nobility but they be bring down to humble themselves like unto their brother and to fight valiantly for their freedom from bondage . alma behold it come to pass that while moroni be thus break down the war and contention among his own people and subject them to peace and civilization and make regulation to prepare for war against the lamanites behold the lamanites have come into the land of moroni which be in the border by the seashore . alma and it come to pass that the nephites be not sufficiently strong in the city of moroni therefore amalickiah do drive them slay many . and it come to pass that amalickiah take possession of the city yea possession of all their fortification . alma and those who flee out of the city of moroni come to the city of nephihah and also the people of the city of lehi gather themselves together and make preparation and be ready to receive the lamanites to battle . alma but it come to pass that amalickiah would not suffer the lamanites to go against the city of nephihah to battle but keep them down by the seashore leave men in every city to maintain and defend it . alma and thus he go on take possession of many city the city of nephihah and the city of lehi and the city of morianton and the city of omner and the city of gid and the city of mulek all of which be on the east border by the seashore . alma and thus have the lamanites obtain by the cunning of amalickiah so many city by their numberless host all of which be strongly fortify after the manner of the fortification of moroni all of which afford stronghold for the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that they march to the border of the land bountiful drive the nephites before them and slay many . alma but it come to pass that they be meet by teancum who have slay morianton and have head his people in his flight . alma and it come to pass that he head amalickiah also a he be march forth with his numerous army that he might take possession of the land bountiful and also the land northward . alma but behold he meet with a disappointment by be repulse by teancum and his men for they be great warrior for every man of teancum do exceed the lamanites in their strength and in their skill of war insomuch that they do gain advantage over the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that they do harass them insomuch that they do slay them even until it be dark . and it come to pass that teancum and his men do pitch their tent in the border of the land bountiful and amalickiah do pitch his tent in the border on the beach by the seashore and after this manner be they drive . alma and it come to pass that when the night have come teancum and his servant stole forth and go out by night and go into the camp of amalickiah and behold sleep have overpower them because of their much fatigue which be cause by the labor and heat of the day . alma and it come to pass that teancum steal privily into the tent of the king and put a javelin to his heart and he do cause the death of the king immediately that he do not awake his servant . alma and he return again privily to his own camp and behold his men be asleep and he awake them and tell them all the thing that he have do . alma and he cause that his army should stand in readiness lest the lamanites have awaken and should come upon them . alma and thus endeth the twenty and fifth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi and thus endeth the day of amalickiah . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass in the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi behold when the lamanites awake on the first morning of the first month behold they find amalickiah be dead in his own tent and they also saw that teancum be ready to give them battle on that day . alma and now when the lamanites saw this they be affright and they abandon their design in march into the land northward and retreat with all their army into the city of mulek and sought protection in their fortification . alma and it come to pass that the brother of amalickiah be appoint king over the people and his name be ammoron thus king ammoron the brother of king amalickiah be appoint to reign in his stead . alma and it come to pass that he do command that his people should maintain those city which they have take by the shedding of blood for they have not take any city save they have lose much blood . alma and now teancum saw that the lamanites be determine to maintain those city which they have take and those part of the land which they have obtain possession of and also see the enormity of their number teancum think it be not expedient that he should attempt to attack them in their fort . alma but he keep his men round about a if make preparation for war yea and truly he be prepare to defend himself against them by cast up wall round about and prepare place of resort . alma and it come to pass that he keep thus prepare for war until moroni have send a large number of men to strengthen his army . alma and moroni also send order unto him that he should retain all the prisoner who fell into his hand for a the lamanites have take many prisoner that he should retain all the prisoner of the lamanites a a ransom for those whom the lamanites have take . alma and he also send order unto him that he should fortify the land bountiful and secure the narrow pas which lead into the land northward lest the lamanites should obtain that point and should have power to harass them on every side . alma and moroni also send unto him desire him that he would be faithful in maintain that quarter of the land and that he would seek every opportunity to scourge the lamanites in that quarter as much a be in his power that perhaps he might take again by stratagem or some other way those city which have be take out of their hand and that he also would fortify and strengthen the city round about which have not fall into the hand of the lamanites . alma and he also say unto him i would come unto you but behold the lamanites be upon u in the border of the land by the west sea and behold i go against them therefore i can not come unto you . alma now the king ammoron have depart out of the land of zarahemla and have make know unto the queen concern the death of his brother and have gather together a large number of men and have march forth against the nephites on the border by the west sea . alma and thus he be endeavor to harass the nephites and to draw away a part of their force to that part of the land while he have command those whom he have leave to possess the city which he have take that they should also harass the nephites on the border by the east sea and should take possession of their land as much a it be in their power accord to the power of their army . alma and thus be the nephites in those dangerous circumstance in the end of the twenty and sixth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma but behold it come to pass in the twenty and seventh year of the reign of the judge that teancum by the command of moroni who have establish army to protect the south and the west border of the land and have begin his march towards the land bountiful that he might assist teancum with his men in retake the city which they have lose alma and it come to pass that teancum have receive order to make an attack upon the city of mulek and retake it if it be possible . alma and it come to pass that teancum make preparation to make an attack upon the city of mulek and march forth with his army against the lamanites but he saw that it be impossible that he could overpower them while they be in their fortification therefore he abandon his design and return again to the city bountiful to wait for the come of moroni that he might receive strength to his army . alma and it come to pass that moroni do arrive with his army at the land of bountiful in the latter end of the twenty and seventh year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and in the commencement of the twenty and eighth year moroni and teancum and many of the chief captain hold a council of war what they should do to cause the lamanites to come out against them to battle or that they might by some mean flatter them out of their stronghold that they might gain advantage over them and take again the city of mulek . alma and it come to pass they send embassy to the army of the lamanites which protect the city of mulek to their leader whose name be jacob desire him that he would come out with his army to meet them upon the plain between the two city . but behold jacob who be a zoramite would not come out with his army to meet them upon the plain . alma and it come to pass that moroni have no hope of meet them upon fair ground therefore he resolve upon a plan that he might decoy the lamanites out of their stronghold . alma therefore he cause that teancum should take a small number of men and march down near the seashore and moroni and his army by night march in the wilderness on the west of the city mulek and thus on the morrow when the guard of the lamanites have discover teancum they run and tell it unto jacob their leader . alma and it come to pass that the army of the lamanites do march forth against teancum supposing by their number to overpower teancum because of the smallness of his number . and a teancum saw the army of the lamanites come out against him he begin to retreat down by the seashore northward . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites saw that he begin to flee they take courage and pursue them with vigor . and while teancum be thus lead away the lamanites who be pursue them in vain behold moroni command that a part of his army who be with him should march forth into the city and take possession of it . alma and thus they do and slew all those who have be leave to protect the city yea all those who would not yield up their weapon of war . alma and thus moroni have obtain possession of the city mulek with a part of his army while he march with the remainder to meet the lamanites when they should return from the pursuit of teancum . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites do pursue teancum until they come near the city bountiful and then they be meet by lehi and a small army which have be leave to protect the city bountiful . alma and now behold when the chief captain of the lamanites have behold lehi with his army come against them they flee in much confusion l perhaps they should not obtain the city mulek before lehi should overtake them for they be weary because of their march and the men of lehi be fresh . alma now the lamanites do not know that moroni have be in their rear with his army and all they fear be lehi and his men . alma now lehi be not desirous to overtake them till they should meet moroni and his army . alma and it come to pass that before the lamanites have retreat far they be surround by the nephites by the men of moroni on one hand and the men of lehi on the other all of whom be fresh and full of strength but the lamanites be weary because of their long march . alma and moroni command his men that they should fall upon them until they have give up their weapon of war . alma and it come to pass that jacob be their leader be also a zoramite and have an unconquerable spirit he lead the lamanites forth to battle with exceed fury against moroni . alma moroni be in their course of march therefore jacob be determine to slay them and cut his way through to the city of mulek . but behold moroni and his men be more powerful therefore they do not give way before the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that they fight on both hand with exceed fury and there be many slain on both side yea and moroni be wound and jacob be kill . alma and lehi press upon their rear with such fury with his strong men that the lamanites in the rear deliver up their weapon of war and the remainder of them be much confuse know not whither to go or to strike . alma now moroni see their confusion he say unto them if ye will bring forth your weapon of war and deliver them up behold we will forbear shed your blood . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites have hear these word their chief captain all those who be not slay come forth and throw down their weapon of war at the foot of moroni and also command their men that they should do the same . alma but behold there be many that would not and those who would not deliver up their sword be take and bind and their weapon of war be take from them and they be compel to march with their brother forth into the land bountiful . alma and now the number of prisoner who be take exceeded more than the number of those who have be slay yea more than those who have be slay on both side . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that they do set guard over the prisoner of the lamanites and do compel them to go forth and bury their dead yea and also the dead of the nephites who be slay and moroni place men over them to guard them while they should perform their labor . alma and moroni go to the city of mulek with lehi and take command of the city and give it unto lehi . now behold this lehi be a man who have be with moroni in the more part of all his battle and he be a man like unto moroni and they rejoice in each other 's safety yea they be beloved by each other and also beloved by all the people of nephi . alma and it come to pass that after the lamanites have finish bury their dead and also the dead of the nephites they be march back into the land bountiful and teancum by the order of moroni cause that they should commence labor in dig a ditch round about the land or the city bountiful . alma and he cause that they should build a breastwork of timber upon the inner bank of the ditch and they cast up dirt out of the ditch against the breastwork of timber and thus they do cause the lamanites to labor until they have encircle the city of bountiful round about with a strong wall of timber and earth to an exceed height . alma and this city become an exceeding stronghold ever after and in this city they do guard the prisoner of the lamanites yea even within a wall which they have cause them to build with their own hand . now moroni be compel to cause the lamanites to labor because it be easy to guard them while at their labor and he desire all his force when he should make an attack upon the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that moroni have thus gain a victory over one of the great of the army of the lamanites and have obtain possession of the city of mulek which be one of the strong hold of the lamanites in the land of nephi and thus he have also build a stronghold to retain his prisoner . alma and it come to pass that he do no more attempt a battle with the lamanites in that year but he do employ his men in prepare for war yea and in make fortification to guard against the lamanites yea and also deliver their woman and their child from famine and affliction and provide food for their army . alma and now it come to pass that the army of the lamanites on the west sea south while in the absence of moroni on account of some intrigue amongst the nephites which cause dissension amongst them have gain some ground over the nephites yea insomuch that they have obtain possession of a number of their city in that part of the land . alma and thus because of iniquity amongst themselves yea because of dissension and intrigue among themselves they be place in the most dangerous circumstance . alma and now behold i have somewhat to say concern the people of ammon who in the beginning be lamanites but by ammon and his brother or rather by the power and word of god they have be convert unto the lord and they have be bring down into the land of zarahemla and have ever since be protect by the nephites . alma and because of their oath they have be keep from take up arm against their brother for they have take an oath that they never would shed blood more and accord to their oath they would have perish yea they would have suffer themselves to have fall into the hand of their brother have it not be for the pity and the exceed love which ammon and his brother have have for them . alma and for this cause they be bring down into the land of zarahemla and they ever have be protect by the nephites . alma but it come to pass that when they saw the danger and the many affliction and tribulation which the nephites bore for them they be move with compassion and be desirous to take up arm in the defence of their country . alma but behold a they be about to take their weapon of war they be overpower by the persuasion of helaman and his brother for they be about to break the oath which they have make . alma and helaman fear l by so do they should lose their soul therefore all those who have enter into this covenant be compel to behold their brother wade through their affliction in their dangerous circumstance at this time . alma but behold it come to pass they have many son who have not enter into a covenant that they would not take their weapon of war to defend themselves against their enemy therefore they do assemble themselves together at this time as many a be able to take up arm and they call themselves nephites . alma and they enter into a covenant to fight for the liberty of the nephites yea to protect the land unto the lay down of their life yea even they covenant that they never would give up their liberty but they would fight in all case to protect the nephites and themselves from bondage . alma now behold there be two thousand of those young men who enter into this covenant and take their weapon of war to defend their country . alma and now behold a they never have hitherto be a disadvantage to the nephites they become now at this period of time also a great support for they take their weapon of war and they would that helaman should be their leader . alma and they be all young men and they be exceedingly valiant for courage and also for strength and activity but behold this be not all they be men who be true at all time in whatsoever thing they be entrust . alma yea they be men of truth and soberness for they have be teach to keep the commandment of god and to walk uprightly before him . alma and now it come to pass that helaman do march at the head of his two thousand stripling soldier to the support of the people in the border of the land on the south by the west sea . alma and thus end the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass in the commencement of the twenty and ninth year of the judge that ammoron send unto moroni desiring that he would exchange prisoner . alma and it come to pass that moroni felt to rejoice exceedingly at this request for he desire the provision which be impart for the support of the lamanite prisoner for the support of his own people and he also desire his own people for the strengthening of his army . alma now the lamanites have take many woman and child and there be not a woman nor a child among all the prisoner of moroni or the prisoner whom moroni have take therefore moroni resolve upon a stratagem to obtain a many prisoner of the nephites from the lamanites a it be possible . alma therefore he write an epistle and send it by the servant of ammoron the same who have bring an epistle to moroni . now these be the word which he write unto ammoron say alma behold ammoron i have write unto you somewhat concern this war which ye have wag against my people or rather which thy brother hath wag against them and which ye be still determine to carry on after his death . alma behold i would tell you somewhat concern the justice of god and the sword of his almighty wrath which doth hang over you except ye repent and withdraw your army into your own land or the land of your possession which be the land of nephi . alma yea i would tell you these thing if ye be capable of hearken unto them yea i would tell you concern that awful hell that await to receive such murderer a thou and thy brother have be except ye repent and withdraw your murderous purpose and return with your army to your own land . alma but a ye have once reject these thing and have fight against the people of the lord even so i may expect you will do it again . alma and now behold we be prepared to receive you yea and except you withdraw your purpose behold ye will pull down the wrath of that god whom you have reject upon you even to your utter destruction . alma but a the lord liveth our army shall come upon you except ye withdraw and ye shall soon be visit with death for we will retain our city and our land yea and we will maintain our religion and the cause of our god . alma but behold it supposeth me that i talk to you concern these thing in vain or it supposeth me that thou art a child of hell therefore i will close my epistle by tell you that i will not exchange prisoner save it be on condition that ye will deliver up a man and his wife and his child for one prisoner if this be the case that ye will do it i will exchange . alma and behold if you do not this i will come against you with my army yea even i will arm my woman and my child and i will come against you and i will follow you even into your own land which be the land of our first inheritance yea and it shall be blood for blood yea life for life and i will give you battle even until you be destroy from off the face of the earth . alma behold i be in my anger and also my people ye have seek to murder u and we have only seek to defend ourselves . but behold if ye seek to destroy u more we will seek to destroy you yea and we will seek our land the land of our first inheritance . alma now i close my epistle . i be moroni i be a leader of the people of the nephites . alma now it come to pass that ammoron when he have receive this epistle be angry and he write another epistle unto moroni and these be the word which he write say alma i be ammoron the king of the lamanites i be the brother of amalickiah whom ye have murder . behold i will avenge his blood upon you yea and i will come upon you with my army for i fear not your threatenings . alma for behold your father do wrong their brother insomuch that they do rob them of their right to the government when it rightly belong unto them . alma and now behold if ye will lay down your arm and subject yourselves to be govern by those to whom the government doth rightly belong then will i cause that my people shall lay down their weapon and shall be at war no more . alma behold ye have breathe out many threatenings against me and my people but behold we fear not your threatenings . alma nevertheless i will grant to exchange prisoner accord to your request gladly that i may preserve my food for my men of war and we will wage a war which shall be eternal either to the subject the nephites to our authority or to their eternal extinction . alma and a concern that god whom ye say we have reject behold we know not such a be neither do ye but if it so be that there be such a thing we know not but that he hath make u as well a you . alma and if it so be that there be a devil and a hell behold will he not send you there to dwell with my brother whom ye have murder whom ye have hint that he hath go to such a place ? but behold these thing matter not . alma i be ammoron and a descendant of zoram whom your father press and bring out of jerusalem . alma and behold now i be a bold lamanite behold this war hath be wag to avenge their wrong and to maintain and to obtain their right to the government and i close my epistle to moroni . alma chapter alma now it come to pass that when moroni have receive this epistle he be more angry because he know that ammoron have a perfect knowledge of his fraud yea he know that ammoron know that it be not a just cause that have cause him to wage a war against the people of nephi . alma and he say behold i will not exchange prisoner with ammoron save he will withdraw his purpose a i have state in my epistle for i will not grant unto him that he shall have any more power than what he hath get . alma behold i know the place where the lamanites do guard my people whom they have take prisoner and a ammoron would not grant unto me mine epistle behold i will give unto him accord to my word yea i will seek death among them until they shall sue for peace . alma and now it come to pass that when moroni have say these word he cause that a search should be make among his men that perhaps he might find a man who be a descendant of laman among them . alma and it come to pass that they find one whose name be laman and he be one of the servant of the king who be murder by amalickiah . alma now moroni cause that laman and a small number of his men should go forth unto the guard who be over the nephites . alma now the nephites be guard in the city of gid therefore moroni appoint laman and cause that a small number of men should go with him . alma and when it be even laman go to the guard who be over the nephites and behold they saw him come and they hail him but he saith unto them fear not behold i be a lamanite . behold we have escape from the nephites and they sleep and behold we have take of their wine and brought with u . alma now when the lamanites hear these word they receive him with joy and they say unto him give u of your wine that we may drink we be glad that ye have thus take wine with you for we be weary . alma but laman say unto them let u keep of our wine till we go against the nephites to battle . but this say only make them more desirous to drink of the wine alma for say they we be weary therefore let u take of the wine and by and by we shall receive wine for our ration which will strengthen u to go against the nephites . alma and laman say unto them you may do accord to your desire . alma and it come to pass that they do take of the wine freely and it be pleasant to their taste therefore they take of it more freely and it be strong have be prepare in it strength . alma and it come to pass they do drink and be merry and by and by they be all drunken . alma and now when laman and his men saw that they be all drunken and be in a deep sleep they return to moroni and tell him all the thing that have happen . alma and now this be accord to the design of moroni . and moroni have prepare his men with weapon of war and he go to the city gid while the lamanites be in a deep sleep and drunken and cast in weapon of war unto the prisoner insomuch that they be all arm alma yea even to their woman and all those of their child as many a be able to use a weapon of war when moroni have arm all those prisoner and all those thing be do in a profound silence . alma but have they awaken the lamanites behold they be drunken and the nephites could have slay them . alma but behold this be not the desire of moroni he do not delight in murder or bloodshed but he delight in the saving of his people from destruction and for this cause he might not bring upon him injustice he would not fall upon the lamanites and destroy them in their drunkenness . alma but he have obtain his desire for he have arm those prisoner of the nephites who be within the wall of the city and have give them power to gain possession of those part which be within the wall . alma and then he cause the men who be with him to withdraw a pace from them and surround the army of the lamanites . alma now behold this be do in the night time so that when the lamanites awake in the morning they behold that they be surround by the nephites without and that their prisoner be arm within . alma and thus they saw that the nephites have power over them and in these circumstance they find that it be not expedient that they should fight with the nephites therefore their chief captain demand their weapon of war and they bring them forth and cast them at the foot of the nephites plead for mercy . alma now behold this be the desire of moroni . he take them prisoner of war and take possession of the city and cause that all the prisoner should be liberate who be nephites and they do join the army of moroni and be a great strength to his army . alma and it come to pass that he do cause the lamanites whom he have take prisoner that they should commence a labor in strengthen the fortification round about the city gid . alma and it come to pass that when he have fortify the city gid accord to his desire he cause that his prisoner should be take to the city bountiful and he also guard that city with an exceedingly strong force . alma and it come to pass that they do notwithstanding all the intrigue of the lamanites keep and protect all the prisoner whom they have take and also maintain all the ground and the advantage which they have retake . alma and it come to pass that the nephites begin again to be victorious and to reclaim their right and their privilege . alma many time do the lamanites attempt to encircle them about by night but in these attempt they do lose many prisoner . alma and many time do they attempt to administer of their wine to the nephites that they might destroy them with poison or with drunkenness . alma but behold the nephites be not slow to remember the lord their god in this their time of affliction . they could not be take in their snare yea they would not partake of their wine save they have first give to some of the lamanite prisoner . alma and they be thus cautious that no poison should be administer among them for if their wine would poison a lamanite it would also poison a nephite and thus they do try all their liquor . alma and now it come to pass that it be expedient for moroni to make preparation to attack the city morianton for behold the lamanites have by their labor fortify the city morianton until it have become an exceed stronghold . alma and they be continually bring new force into that city and also new supply of provision . alma and thus end the twenty and ninth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass in the commencement of the thirtieth year of the reign of the judge on the second day in the first month moroni receive an epistle from helaman state the affair of the people in that quarter of the land . alma and these be the word which he write say my dearly beloved brother moroni as well in the lord a in the tribulation of our warfare behold my beloved brother i have somewhat to tell you concern our warfare in this part of the land . alma behold two thousand of the son of those men whom ammon bring down out of the land of nephi now ye have know that these be descendant of laman who be the eldest son of our father lehi alma now i need not rehearse unto you concern their tradition or their unbelief for thou knowest concern all these thing alma therefore it sufficeth me that i tell you that two thousand of these young men have take their weapon of war and would that i should be their leader and we have come forth to defend our country . alma and now ye also know concern the covenant which their father make that they would not take up their weapon of war against their brother to shed blood . alma but in the twenty and sixth year when they saw our affliction and our tribulation for them they be about to break the covenant which they have make and take up their weapon of war in our defence . alma but i would not suffer them that they should break this covenant which they have make suppose that god would strengthen u insomuch that we should not suffer more because of the fulfil the oath which they have take . alma but behold here be one thing in which we may have great joy . for behold in the twenty and sixth year i helaman do march at the head of these two thousand young men to the city of judea to assist antipus whom ye have appoint a leader over the people of that part of the land . alma and i do join my two thousand son for they be worthy to be call son to the army of antipus in which strength antipus do rejoice exceedingly for behold his army have be reduce by the lamanites because their force have slay a vast number of our men for which cause we have to mourn . alma nevertheless we may console ourselves in this point that they have die in the cause of their country and of their god yea and they be happy . alma and the lamanites have also retain many prisoner all of whom be chief captain for none other have they spar alive . and we suppose that they be now at this time in the land of nephi it be so if they be not slain . alma and now these be the city of which the lamanites have obtain possession by the shedding of the blood of so many of our valiant men alma the land of manti or the city of manti and the city of zeezrom and the city of cumeni and the city of antiparah . alma and these be the city which they possess when i arrive at the city of judea and i find antipus and his men toil with their might to fortify the city . alma yea and they be depress in body as well a in spirit for they have fight valiantly by day and toil by night to maintain their city and thus they have suffer great affliction of every kind . alma and now they be determine to conquer in this place or die therefore you may well suppose that this little force which i brought with me yea those son of mine give them great hope and much joy . alma and now it come to pass that when the lamanites saw that antipus have receive a great strength to his army they be compel by the order of ammoron to not come against the city of judea or against u to battle . alma and thus be we favor of the lord for have they come upon u in this our weakness they might have perhaps destroy our little army but thus be we preserve . alma they be command by ammoron to maintain those city which they have take . and thus end the twenty and sixth year . and in the commencement of the twenty and seventh year we have prepare our city and ourselves for defence . alma now we be desirous that the lamanites should come upon u for we be not desirous to make an attack upon them in their stronghold . alma and it come to pass that we keep spy out round about to watch the movement of the lamanites that they might not pass u by night nor by day to make an attack upon our other city which be on the northward . alma for we know in those city they be not sufficiently strong to meet them therefore we be desirous if they should pass by u to fall upon them in their rear and thus bring them up in the rear at the same time they be meet in the front . we suppose that we could overpower them but behold we be disappoint in this our desire . alma they durst not pass by u with their whole army neither durst they with a part lest they should not be sufficiently strong and they should fall . alma neither durst they march down against the city of zarahemla neither durst they cross the head of sidon over to the city of nephihah . alma and thus with their force they be determine to maintain those city which they have take . alma and now it come to pass in the second month of this year there be bring unto u many provision from the father of those my two thousand son . alma and also there be send two thousand men unto u from the land of zarahemla . and thus we be prepare with ten thousand men and provision for them and also for their wife and their child . alma and the lamanites thus see our force increase daily and provision arrive for our support they begin to be fearful and begin to sally forth if it be possible to put an end to our receive provision and strength . alma now when we saw that the lamanites begin to grow uneasy on this wise we be desirous to bring a stratagem into effect upon them therefore antipus order that i should march forth with my little son to a neighboring city a if we be carry provision to a neighboring city . alma and we be to march near the city of antiparah a if we be go to the city beyond in the border by the seashore . alma and it come to pass that we do march forth a if with our provision to go to that city . alma and it come to pass that antipus do march forth with a part of his army leave the remainder to maintain the city . but he do not march forth until i have go forth with my little army and come near the city antiparah . alma and now in the city antiparah be station the strong army of the lamanites yea the most numerous . alma and it come to pass that when they have be inform by their spy they come forth with their army and march against u . alma and it come to pass that we do flee before them northward . and thus we do lead away the most powerful army of the lamanites alma yea even to a considerable distance insomuch that when they saw the army of antipus pursue them with their might they do not turn to the right nor to the left but pursue their march in a straight course after u and a we suppose it be their intent to slay u before antipus should overtake them and this that they might not be surround by our people . alma and now antipus behold our danger do speed the march of his army . but behold it be night therefore they do not overtake u neither do antipus overtake them therefore we do camp for the night . alma and it come to pass that before the dawn of the morning behold the lamanites be pursue u . now we be not sufficiently strong to contend with them yea i would not suffer that my little son should fall into their hand therefore we do continue our march and we take our march into the wilderness . alma now they durst not turn to the right nor to the leave l they should be surround neither would i turn to the right nor to the leave l they should overtake me and we could not stand against them but be slay and they would make their escape and thus we do flee all that day into the wilderness even until it be dark . alma and it come to pass that again when the light of the morning come we saw the lamanites upon u and we do flee before them . alma but it come to pass that they do not pursue u far before they halt and it be in the morning of the third day of the seventh month . alma and now whether they be overtake by antipus we know not but i say unto my men behold we know not but they have halt for the purpose that we should come against them that they might catch u in their snare alma therefore what say ye my son will ye go against them to battle ? alma and now i say unto you my beloved brother moroni that never have i see so great courage nay not amongst all the nephites . alma for a i have ever call them my son for they be all of them very young even so they say unto me father behold our god be with u and he will not suffer that we should fall then let u go forth we would not slay our brother if they would let u alone therefore let u go l they should overpower the army of antipus . alma now they never have fight yet they do not fear death and they do think more upon the liberty of their father than they do upon their life yea they have be teach by their mother that if they do not doubt god would deliver them . alma and they rehearse unto me the word of their mother say we do not doubt our mother know it . alma and it come to pass that i do return with my two thousand against these lamanites who have pursue u . and now behold the army of antipus have overtake them and a terrible battle have commence . alma the army of antipus be weary because of their long march in so short a space of time be about to fall into the hand of the lamanites and have i not return with my two thousand they would have obtain their purpose . alma for antipus have fall by the sword and many of his leader because of their weariness which be occasion by the speed of their march therefore the men of antipus be confuse because of the fall of their leader begin to give way before the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites take courage and begin to pursue them and thus be the lamanites pursue them with great vigor when helaman come upon their rear with his two thousand and begin to slay them exceedingly insomuch that the whole army of the lamanites halt and turn upon helaman . alma now when the people of antipus saw that the lamanites have turn them about they gather together their men and come again upon the rear of the lamanites . alma and now it come to pass that we the people of nephi the people of antipus and i with my two thousand do surround the lamanites and do slay them yea insomuch that they be compel to deliver up their weapon of war and also themselves a prisoner of war . alma and now it come to pass that when they have surrender themselves up unto u behold i number those young men who have fight with me fear l there be many of them slay . alma but behold to my great joy there have not one soul of them fall to the earth yea and they have fight a if with the strength of god yea never be men know to have fight with such miraculous strength and with such mighty power do they fall upon the lamanites that they do frighten them and for this cause do the lamanites deliver themselves up a prisoner of war . alma and a we have no place for our prisoner that we could guard them to keep them from the army of the lamanites therefore we send them to the land of zarahemla and a part of those men who be not slay of antipus with them and the remainder i take and join them to my stripling ammonite and take our march back to the city of judea . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that i receive an epistle from ammoron the king state that if i would deliver up those prisoner of war whom we have take that he would deliver up the city of antiparah unto u . alma but i send an epistle unto the king that we be sure our force be sufficient to take the city of antiparah by our force and by deliver up the prisoner for that city we should suppose ourselves unwise and that we would only deliver up our prisoner on exchange . alma and ammoron refuse mine epistle for he would not exchange prisoner therefore we begin to make preparation to go against the city of antiparah . alma but the people of antiparah do leave the city and flee to their other city which they have possession of to fortify them and thus the city of antiparah fell into our hand . alma and thus end the twenty and eighth year of the reign of the judge . alma and it come to pass that in the commencement of the twenty and ninth year we receive a supply of provision and also an addition to our army from the land of zarahemla and from the land round about to the number of six thousand men besides sixty of the son of the ammonite who have come to join their brother my little band of two thousand . and now behold we be strong yea and we have also plenty of provision bring unto u . alma and it come to pass that it be our desire to wage a battle with the army which be place to protect the city cumeni . alma and now behold i will show unto you that we soon accomplish our desire yea with our strong force or with a part of our strong force we do surround by night the city cumeni a little before they be to receive a supply of provision . alma and it come to pass that we do camp round about the city for many night but we do sleep upon our sword and keep guard that the lamanites could not come upon u by night and slay u which they attempt many time but a many time a they attempt this their blood be spill . alma at length their provision do arrive and they be about to enter the city by night . and we instead of be lamanites be nephites therefore we do take them and their provision . alma and notwithstanding the lamanites be cut off from their support after this manner they be still determine to maintain the city therefore it become expedient that we should take those provision and send them to judea and our prisoner to the land of zarahemla . alma and it come to pass that not many day have pass away before the lamanites begin to lose all hope of succor therefore they yield up the city unto our hand and thus we have accomplish our design in obtain the city cumeni . alma but it come to pass that our prisoner be so numerous that notwithstanding the enormity of our number we be oblige to employ all our force to keep them or to put them to death . alma for behold they would break out in great number and would fight with stone and with club or whatsoever thing they could get into their hand insomuch that we do slay upwards of two thousand of them after they have surrender themselves prisoner of war . alma therefore it become expedient for u that we should put an end to their life or guard them sword in hand down to the land of zarahemla and also our provision be not any more than sufficient for our own people notwithstanding that which we have take from the lamanites . alma and now in those critical circumstance it become a very serious matter to determine concern these prisoner of war nevertheless we do resolve to send them down to the land of zarahemla therefore we select a part of our men and give them charge over our prisoner to go down to the land of zarahemla . alma but it come to pass that on the morrow they do return . and now behold we do not inquire of them concern the prisoner for behold the lamanites be upon u and they return in season to save u from fall into their hand . for behold ammoron have send to their support a new supply of provision and also a numerous army of men . alma and it come to pass that those men whom we send with the prisoner do arrive in season to check them a they be about to overpower u . alma but behold my little band of two thousand and sixty fought most desperately yea they be firm before the lamanites and do administer death unto all those who oppose them . alma and a the remainder of our army be about to give way before the lamanites behold those two thousand and sixty be firm and undaunted . alma yea and they do obey and observe to perform every word of command with exactness yea and even accord to their faith it be do unto them and i do remember the word which they say unto me that their mother have teach them . alma and now behold it be these my son and those men who have be select to convey the prisoner to whom we owe this great victory for it be they who do beat the lamanites therefore they be drive back to the city of manti . alma and we retain our city cumeni and be not all destroy by the sword nevertheless we have suffer great loss . alma and it come to pass that after the lamanites have flee i immediately give order that my men who have be wound should be take from among the dead and cause that their wound should be dress . alma and it come to pass that there be two hundred out of my two thousand and sixty who have faint because of the loss of blood nevertheless accord to the goodness of god and to our great astonishment and also the joy of our whole army there be not one soul of them who do perish yea and neither be there one soul among them who have not receive many wound . alma and now their preservation be astonish to our whole army yea that they should be spar while there be a thousand of our brother who be slay . and we do justly ascribe it to the miraculous power of god because of their exceed faith in that which they have be teach to believe that there be a just god and whosoever do not doubt that they should be preserve by his marvelous power . alma now this be the faith of these of whom i have speak they be young and their mind be firm and they do put their trust in god continually . alma and now it come to pass that after we have thus take care of our wound men and have bury our dead and also the dead of the lamanites who be many behold we do inquire of gid concern the prisoner whom they have start to go down to the land of zarahemla with . alma now gid be the chief captain over the band who be appoint to guard them down to the land . alma and now these be the word which gid say unto me behold we do start to go down to the land of zarahemla with our prisoner . and it come to pass that we do meet the spy of our army who have be send out to watch the camp of the lamanites . alma and they cry unto u say behold the army of the lamanites be march towards the city of cumeni and behold they will fall upon them yea and will destroy our people . alma and it come to pass that our prisoner do hear their cry which cause them to take courage and they do rise up in rebellion against u . alma and it come to pass because of their rebellion we do cause that our sword should come upon them . and it come to pass that they do in a body run upon our sword in the which the great number of them be slay and the remainder of them break through and flee from u . alma and behold when they have flee and we could not overtake them we take our march with speed towards the city cumeni and behold we do arrive in time that we might assist our brother in preserve the city . alma and behold we be again deliver out of the hand of our enemy . and bless be the name of our god for behold it be he that have deliver u yea that have do this great thing for u . alma now it come to pass that when i helaman have hear these word of gid i be fill with exceed joy because of the goodness of god in preserve u that we might not all perish yea and i trust that the soul of them who have be slay have enter into the rest of their god . alma chapter alma and behold now it come to pass that our next object be to obtain the city of manti but behold there be no way that we could lead them out of the city by our small band . for behold they remember that which we have hitherto do therefore we could not decoy them away from their stronghold . alma and they be so much more numerous than be our army that we durst not go forth and attack them in their stronghold . alma yea and it become expedient that we should employ our men to the maintain those part of the land which we have regain of our possession therefore it become expedient that we should wait that we might receive more strength from the land of zarahemla and also a new supply of provision . alma and it come to pass that i thus do send an embassy to the governor of our land to acquaint him concern the affair of our people . and it come to pass that we do wait to receive provision and strength from the land of zarahemla . alma but behold this do profit u but little for the lamanites be also receive great strength from day to day and also many provision and thus be our circumstance at this period of time . alma and the lamanites be sallying forth against u from time to time resolve by stratagem to destroy u nevertheless we could not come to battle with them because of their retreat and their stronghold . alma and it come to pass that we do wait in these difficult circumstance for the space of many month even until we be about to perish for the want of food . alma but it come to pass that we do receive food which be guard to u by an army of two thousand men to our assistance and this be all the assistance which we do receive to defend ourselves and our country from fall into the hand of our enemy yea to contend with an enemy which be innumerable . alma and now the cause of these our embarrassment or the cause why they do not send more strength unto u we know not therefore we be grieve and also fill with fear lest by any mean the judgment of god should come upon our land to our overthrow and utter destruction . alma therefore we do pour out our soul in prayer to god that he would strengthen u and deliver u out of the hand of our enemy yea and also give u strength that we might retain our city and our land and our possession for the support of our people . alma yea and it come to pass that the lord our god do visit u with assurance that he would deliver u yea insomuch that he do speak peace to our soul and do grant unto u great faith and do cause u that we should hope for our deliverance in him . alma and we do take courage with our small force which we have receive and be fix with a determination to conquer our enemy and to maintain our land and our possession and our wife and our child and the cause of our liberty . alma and thus we do go forth with all our might against the lamanites who be in the city of manti and we do pitch our tent by the wilderness side which be near to the city . alma and it come to pass that on the morrow that when the lamanites saw that we be in the border by the wilderness which be near the city that they send out their spy round about u that they might discover the number and the strength of our army . alma and it come to pass that when they saw that we be not strong accord to our number and fear that we should cut them off from their support except they should come out to battle against u and kill u and also suppose that they could easily destroy u with their numerous host therefore they begin to make preparation to come out against u to battle . alma and when we saw that they be make preparation to come out against u behold i cause that gid with a small number of men should secrete himself in the wilderness and also that teomner and a small number of men should secrete themselves also in the wilderness . alma now gid and his men be on the right and the others on the left and when they have thus secrete themselves behold i remain with the remainder of my army in that same place where we have first pitch our tent against the time that the lamanites should come out to battle . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites do come out with their numerous army against u . and when they have come and be about to fall upon u with the sword i cause that my men those who be with me should retreat into the wilderness . alma and it come to pass that the lamanites do follow after u with great speed for they be exceedingly desirous to overtake u that they might slay u therefore they do follow u into the wilderness and we do pas by in the midst of gid and teomner insomuch that they be not discover by the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites have pass by or when the army have pass by gid and teomner do rise up from their secret place and do cut off the spy of the lamanites that they should not return to the city . alma and it come to pass that when they have cut them off they run to the city and fell upon the guard who be leave to guard the city insomuch that they do destroy them and do take possession of the city . alma now this be do because the lamanites do suffer their whole army save a few guard only to be lead away into the wilderness . alma and it come to pass that gid and teomner by this mean have obtain possession of their stronghold . and it come to pass that we take our course after have travel much in the wilderness towards the land of zarahemla . alma and when the lamanites saw that they be march towards the land of zarahemla they be exceedingly afraid l there be a plan lay to lead them on to destruction therefore they begin to retreat into the wilderness again yea even back by the same way which they have come . alma and behold it be night and they do pitch their tent for the chief captain of the lamanites have suppose that the nephites be weary because of their march and suppose that they have drive their whole army therefore they take no thought concern the city of manti . alma now it come to pass that when it be night i cause that my men should not sleep but that they should march forward by another way towards the land of manti . alma and because of this our march in the night time behold on the morrow we be beyond the lamanites insomuch that we do arrive before them at the city of manti . alma and thus it come to pass that by this stratagem we do take possession of the city of manti without the shedding of blood . alma and it come to pass that when the army of the lamanites do arrive near the city and saw that we be prepare to meet them they be astonish exceedingly and struck with great fear insomuch that they do flee into the wilderness . alma yea and it come to pass that the army of the lamanites do flee out of all this quarter of the land . but behold they have carry with them many woman and child out of the land . alma and those city which have be take by the lamanites all of them be at this period of time in our possession and our father and our woman and our child be return to their home all save it be those who have be take prisoner and carry off by the lamanites . alma but behold our army be small to maintain so great a number of city and so great possession . alma but behold we trust in our god who have give u victory over those land insomuch that we have obtain those city and those land which be our own . alma now we do not know the cause that the government do not grant u more strength neither do those men who come up unto u know why we have not receive great strength . alma behold we do not know but what ye be unsuccessful and ye have draw away the force into that quarter of the land if so we do not desire to murmur . alma and if it be not so behold we fear that there be some faction in the government that they do not send more men to our assistance for we know that they be more numerous than that which they have send . alma but behold it mattereth not we trust god will deliver u notwithstanding the weakness of our army yea and deliver u out of the hand of our enemy . alma behold this be the twenty and ninth year in the latter end and we be in the possession of our land and the lamanites have flee to the land of nephi . alma and those son of the people of ammon of whom i have so highly speak be with me in the city of manti and the lord have support them yea and keep them from fall by the sword insomuch that even one soul have not be slay . alma but behold they have receive many wound nevertheless they stand fast in that liberty wherewith god have make them free and they be strict to remember the lord their god from day to day yea they do observe to keep his statute and his judgment and his commandment continually and their faith be strong in the prophecy concern that which be to come . alma and now my beloved brother moroni may the lord our god who have redeem u and make u free keep you continually in his presence yea and may he favor this people even that ye may have success in obtain the possession of all that which the lamanites have take from u which be for our support . and now behold i close mine epistle . i be helaman the son of alma . alma chapter alma now it come to pass in the thirtieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi after moroni have receive and have read helaman 's epistle he be exceedingly rejoiced because of the welfare yea the exceed success which helaman have have in obtain those land which be lose . alma yea and he do make it know unto all his people in all the land round about in that part where he be that they might rejoice also . alma and it come to pass that he immediately send an epistle to pahoran desire that he should cause men to be gather together to strengthen helaman or the army of helaman insomuch that he might with ease maintain that part of the land which he have be so miraculously prosper in regain . alma and it come to pass when moroni have send this epistle to the land of zarahemla he begin again to lay a plan that he might obtain the remainder of those possession and city which the lamanites have take from them . alma and it come to pass that while moroni be thus make preparation to go against the lamanites to battle behold the people of nephihah who be gather together from the city of moroni and the city of lehi and the city of morianton be attack by the lamanites . alma yea even those who have be compel to flee from the land of manti and from the land round about have come over and join the lamanites in this part of the land . alma and thus be exceedingly numerous yea and receive strength from day to day by the command of ammoron they come forth against the people of nephihah and they do begin to slay them with an exceedingly great slaughter . alma and their army be so numerous that the remainder of the people of nephihah be oblige to flee before them and they come even and join the army of moroni . alma and now a moroni have suppose that there should be men send to the city nephihah to the assistance of the people to maintain that city and know that it be easy to keep the city from fall into the hand of the lamanites than to retake it from them he suppose that they would easily maintain that city . alma therefore he retain all his force to maintain those place which he have recover . alma and now when moroni saw that the city of nephihah be lose he be exceedingly sorrowful and begin to doubt because of the wickedness of the people whether they should not fall into the hand of their brother . alma now this be the case with all his chief captain . they doubt and marvel also because of the wickedness of the people and this because of the success of the lamanites over them . alma and it come to pass that moroni be angry with the government because of their indifference concern the freedom of their country . alma chapter alma and it come to pass that he write again to the governor of the land who be pahoran and these be the word which he write say behold i direct mine epistle to pahoran in the city of zarahemla who be the chief judge and the governor over the land and also to all those who have be choose by this people to govern and manage the affair of this war . alma for behold i have somewhat to say unto them by the way of condemnation for behold ye yourselves know that ye have be appoint to gather together men and arm them with sword and with cimeters and all manner of weapon of war of every kind and send forth against the lamanites in whatsoever part they should come into our land . alma and now behold i say unto you that myself and also my men and also helaman and his men have suffer exceedingly great suffering yea even hunger thirst and fatigue and all manner of affliction of every kind . alma but behold be this all we have suffer we would not murmur nor complain . alma but behold great have be the slaughter among our people yea thousand have fall by the sword while it might have otherwise be if ye have render unto our army sufficient strength and succor for them . yea great have be your neglect towards u . alma and now behold we desire to know the cause of this exceedingly great neglect yea we desire to know the cause of your thoughtless state . alma can you think to sit upon your throne in a state of thoughtless stupor while your enemy be spread the work of death around you ? yea while they be murder thousand of your brother alma yea even they who have look up to you for protection yea have place you in a situation that ye might have succor them yea ye might have send army unto them to have strengthen them and have save thousand of them from fall by the sword . alma but behold this be not all ye have withhold your provision from them insomuch that many have fight and bleed out their life because of their great desire which they have for the welfare of this people yea and this they have do when they be about to perish with hunger because of your exceedingly great neglect towards them . alma and now my beloved brother for ye ought to be beloved yea and ye ought to have stir yourselves more diligently for the welfare and the freedom of this people but behold ye have neglect them insomuch that the blood of thousand shall come upon your head for vengeance yea for know unto god be all their cry and all their suffering alma behold could ye suppose that ye could sit upon your throne and because of the exceed goodness of god ye could do nothing and he would deliver you ? behold if ye have suppose this ye have suppose in vain . alma do ye suppose that because so many of your brother have be kill it be because of their wickedness ? i say unto you if ye have suppose this ye have suppose in vain for i say unto you there be many who have fall by the sword and behold it be to your condemnation alma for the lord suffereth the righteous to be slay that his justice and judgment may come upon the wicked therefore ye need not suppose that the righteous be lose because they be slain but behold they do enter into the rest of the lord their god . alma and now behold i say unto you i fear exceedingly that the judgment of god will come upon this people because of their exceeding slothfulness yea even the slothfulness of our government and their exceedingly great neglect towards their brother yea towards those who have be slay . alma for be it not for the wickedness which first commence at our head we could have withstand our enemy that they could have gain no power over u . alma yea have it not be for the war which break out among ourselves yea be it not for these king men who cause so much bloodshed among ourselves yea at the time we be contend among ourselves if we have unite our strength a we hitherto have do yea have it not be for the desire of power and authority which those king men have over u have they be true to the cause of our freedom and united with u and go forth against our enemy instead of take up their sword against u which be the cause of so much bloodshed among ourselves yea if we have go forth against them in the strength of the lord we should have disperse our enemy for it would have be do accord to the fulfilling of his word . alma but behold now the lamanites be come upon u take possession of our land and they be murder our people with the sword yea our woman and our child and also carry them away captive cause them that they should suffer all manner of affliction and this because of the great wickedness of those who be seek for power and authority yea even those king men . alma but why should i say much concerning this matter ? for we know not but what ye yourselves be seek for authority . we know not but what ye be also traitor to your country . alma or be it that ye have neglect u because ye be in the heart of our country and ye be surround by security that ye do not cause food to be send unto u and also men to strengthen our army ? alma have ye forget the commandment of the lord your god ? yea have ye forget the captivity of our father ? have ye forget the many time we have be deliver out of the hand of our enemy ? alma or do ye suppose that the lord will still deliver u while we sit upon our throne and do not make use of the mean which the lord have provide for u ? alma yea will ye sit in idleness while ye be surround with thousand of those yea and ten of thousand who do also sit in idleness while there be thousand round about in the border of the land who be fall by the sword yea wound and bleed ? alma do ye suppose that god will look upon you a guiltless while ye sit still and behold these thing ? behold i say unto you nay . now i would that ye should remember that god have say that the inward vessel shall be cleanse first and then shall the out vessel be cleanse also . alma and now except ye do repent of that which ye have do and begin to be up and do and send forth food and men unto u and also unto helaman that he may support those part of our country which he have regain and that we may also recover the remainder of our possession in these part behold it will be expedient that we contend no more with the lamanites until we have first cleanse our inward vessel yea even the great head of our government . alma and except ye grant mine epistle and come out and show unto me a true spirit of freedom and strive to strengthen and fortify our army and grant unto them food for their support behold i will leave a part of my freeman to maintain this part of our land and i will leave the strength and the blessing of god upon them that none other power can operate against them alma and this because of their exceeding faith and their patience in their tribulation alma and i will come unto you and if there be any among you that have a desire for freedom yea if there be even a spark of freedom remain behold i will stir up insurrection among you even until those who have desire to usurp power and authority shall become extinct . alma yea behold i do not fear your power nor your authority but it be my god whom i fear and it be accord to his commandment that i do take my sword to defend the cause of my country and it be because of your iniquity that we have suffer so much loss . alma behold it be time yea the time be now at hand that except ye do bestir yourselves in the defence of your country and your little one the sword of justice doth hang over you yea and it shall fall upon you and visit you even to your utter destruction . alma behold i wait for assistance from you and except ye do administer unto our relief behold i come unto you even in the land of zarahemla and smite you with the sword insomuch that ye can have no more power to impede the progress of this people in the cause of our freedom . alma for behold the lord will not suffer that ye shall live and wax strong in your iniquity to destroy his righteous people . alma behold can you suppose that the lord will spare you and come out in judgment against the lamanites when it be the tradition of their father that have cause their hatred yea and it have be redouble by those who have dissent from u while your iniquity be for the cause of your love of glory and the vain thing of the world ? alma ye know that ye do transgress the law of god and ye do know that ye do trample them under your foot . behold the lord saith unto me if those whom ye have appoint your governor do not repent of their sin and iniquity ye shall go up to battle against them . alma and now behold i moroni be constrain accord to the covenant which i have make to keep the commandment of my god therefore i would that ye should adhere to the word of god and send speedily unto me of your provision and of your men and also to helaman . alma and behold if ye will not do this i come unto you speedily for behold god will not suffer that we should perish with hunger therefore he will give unto u of your food even if it must be by the sword . now see that ye fulfil the word of god . alma behold i be moroni your chief captain . i seek not for power but to pull it down . i seek not for honor of the world but for the glory of my god and the freedom and welfare of my country . and thus i close mine epistle . alma chapter alma behold now it come to pass that soon after moroni have send his epistle unto the chief governor he receive an epistle from pahoran the chief governor . and these be the word which he receive alma i pahoran who be the chief governor of this land do send these word unto moroni the chief captain over the army . behold i say unto you moroni that i do not joy in your great affliction yea it grieve my soul . alma but behold there be those who do joy in your affliction yea insomuch that they have rise up in rebellion against me and also those of my people who be freeman yea and those who have rise up be exceedingly numerous . alma and it be those who have seek to take away the judgment seat from me that have be the cause of this great iniquity for they have use great flattery and they have lead away the heart of many people which will be the cause of sore affliction among u they have withhold our provision and have daunt our freeman that they have not come unto you . alma and behold they have drive me out before them and i have flee to the land of gideon with a many men a it be possible that i could get . alma and behold i have send a proclamation throughout this part of the land and behold they be flock to u daily to their arm in the defence of their country and their freedom and to avenge our wrong . alma and they have come unto u insomuch that those who have rise up in rebellion against u be set at defiance yea insomuch that they do fear u and durst not come out against u to battle . alma they have get possession of the land or the city of zarahemla they have appoint a king over them and he hath write unto the king of the lamanites in the which he hath join an alliance with him in the which alliance he hath agree to maintain the city of zarahemla which maintenance he supposeth will enable the lamanites to conquer the remainder of the land and he shall be place king over this people when they shall be conquer under the lamanites . alma and now in your epistle you have censure me but it mattereth not i be not angry but do rejoice in the greatness of your heart . i pahoran do not seek for power save only to retain my judgment seat that i may preserve the right and the liberty of my people . my soul standeth fast in that liberty in the which god hath make u free . alma and now behold we will resist wickedness even unto bloodshed . we would not shed the blood of the lamanites if they would stay in their own land . alma we would not shed the blood of our brother if they would not rise up in rebellion and take the sword against u . alma we would subject ourselves to the yoke of bondage if it be requisite with the justice of god or if he should command u so to do . alma but behold he doth not command u that we shall subject ourselves to our enemy but that we should put our trust in him and he will deliver u . alma therefore my beloved brother moroni let u resist evil and whatsoever evil we can not resist with our word yea such a rebellion and dissension let u resist them with our sword that we may retain our freedom that we may rejoice in the great privilege of our church and in the cause of our redeemer and our god . alma therefore come unto me speedily with a few of your men and leave the remainder in the charge of lehi and teancum give unto them power to conduct the war in that part of the land accord to the spirit of god which be also the spirit of freedom which be in them . alma behold i have send a few provision unto them that they may not perish until ye can come unto me . alma gather together whatsoever force ye can upon your march hither and we will go speedily against those dissenter in the strength of our god accord to the faith which be in u . alma and we will take possession of the city of zarahemla that we may obtain more food to send forth unto lehi and teancum yea we will go forth against them in the strength of the lord and we will put an end to this great iniquity . alma and now moroni i do joy in receive your epistle for i be somewhat worried concern what we should do whether it should be just in u to go against our brother . alma but ye have say except they repent the lord hath command you that ye should go against them . alma see that ye strengthen lehi and teancum in the lord tell them to fear not for god will deliver them yea and also all those who stand fast in that liberty wherewith god hath make them free . and now i close mine epistle to my beloved brother moroni . alma chapter alma and now it come to pass that when moroni have receive this epistle his heart do take courage and be fill with exceedingly great joy because of the faithfulness of pahoran that he be not also a traitor to the freedom and cause of his country . alma but he do also mourn exceedingly because of the iniquity of those who have drive pahoran from the judgment seat yea in fine because of those who have rebel against their country and also their god . alma and it come to pass that moroni take a small number of men accord to the desire of pahoran and give lehi and teancum command over the remainder of his army and take his march towards the land of gideon . alma and he do raise the standard of liberty in whatsoever place he do enter and gain whatsoever force he could in all his march towards the land of gideon . alma and it come to pass that thousand do flock unto his standard and do take up their sword in the defence of their freedom that they might not come into bondage . alma and thus when moroni have gather together whatsoever men he could in all his march he come to the land of gideon and unite his force with those of pahoran they become exceedingly strong even strong than the men of pachus who be the king of those dissenter who have drive the freeman out of the land of zarahemla and have take possession of the land . alma and it come to pass that moroni and pahoran go down with their army into the land of zarahemla and go forth against the city and do meet the men of pachus insomuch that they do come to battle . alma and behold pachus be slay and his men be take prisoner and pahoran be restore to his judgment seat . alma and the men of pachus receive their trial accord to the law and also those king men who have be take and cast into prison and they be execute accord to the law yea those men of pachus and those king men whosoever would not take up arm in the defence of their country but would fight against it be put to death . alma and thus it become expedient that this law should be strictly observe for the safety of their country yea and whosoever be find deny their freedom be speedily execute accord to the law . alma and thus end the thirtieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi moroni and pahoran have restore peace to the land of zarahemla among their own people have inflict death upon all those who be not true to the cause of freedom . alma and it come to pass in the commencement of the thirty and first year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi moroni immediately cause that provision should be send and also an army of six thousand men should be send unto helaman to assist him in preserve that part of the land . alma and he also cause that an army of six thousand men with a sufficient quantity of food should be send to the army of lehi and teancum . and it come to pass that this be do to fortify the land against the lamanites . alma and it come to pass that moroni and pahoran leave a large body of men in the land of zarahemla take their march with a large body of men towards the land of nephihah be determine to overthrow the lamanites in that city . alma and it come to pass that a they be march towards the land they take a large body of men of the lamanites and slew many of them and take their provision and their weapon of war . alma and it come to pass after they have take them they cause them to enter into a covenant that they would no more take up their weapon of war against the nephites . alma and when they have enter into this covenant they send them to dwell with the people of ammon and they be in number about four thousand who have not be slay . alma and it come to pass that when they have send them away they pursue their march towards the land of nephihah . and it come to pass that when they have come to the city of nephihah they do pitch their tent in the plain of nephihah which be near the city of nephihah . alma now moroni be desirous that the lamanites should come out to battle against them upon the plain but the lamanites know of their exceedingly great courage and behold the greatness of their number therefore they durst not come out against them therefore they do not come to battle in that day . alma and when the night come moroni go forth in the darkness of the night and come upon the top of the wall to spy out in what part of the city the lamanites do camp with their army . alma and it come to pass that they be on the east by the entrance and they be all asleep . and now moroni return to his army and cause that they should prepare in haste strong cord and ladder to be let down from the top of the wall into the inner part of the wall . alma and it come to pass that moroni cause that his men should march forth and come upon the top of the wall and let themselves down into that part of the city yea even on the west where the lamanites do not camp with their army . alma and it come to pass that they be all let down into the city by night by the mean of their strong cord and their ladder thus when the morning come they be all within the wall of the city . alma and now when the lamanites awake and saw that the army of moroni be within the wall they be affright exceedingly insomuch that they do flee out by the pas . alma and now when moroni saw that they be flee before him he do cause that his men should march forth against them and slew many and surround many others and take them prisoner and the remainder of them flee into the land of moroni which be in the border by the seashore . alma thus have moroni and pahoran obtain the possession of the city of nephihah without the loss of one soul and there be many of the lamanites who be slain . alma now it come to pass that many of the lamanites that be prisoner be desirous to join the people of ammon and become a free people . alma and it come to pass that as many a be desirous unto them it be grant accord to their desire . alma therefore all the prisoner of the lamanites do join the people of ammon and do begin to labor exceedingly till the ground raise all manner of grain and flock and herd of every kind and thus be the nephites relieve from a great burden yea insomuch that they be relieve from all the prisoner of the lamanites . alma now it come to pass that moroni after he have obtain possession of the city of nephihah have take many prisoner which do reduce the army of the lamanites exceedingly and have regain many of the nephites who have be take prisoner which do strengthen the army of moroni exceedingly therefore moroni go forth from the land of nephihah to the land of lehi . alma and it come to pass that when the lamanites saw that moroni be come against them they be again frighten and flee before the army of moroni . alma and it come to pass that moroni and his army do pursue them from city to city until they be meet by lehi and teancum and the lamanites flee from lehi and teancum even down upon the border by the seashore until they come to the land of moroni . alma and the army of the lamanites be all gather together insomuch that they be all in one body in the land of moroni . now ammoron the king of the lamanites be also with them . alma and it come to pass that moroni and lehi and teancum do encamp with their army round about in the border of the land of moroni insomuch that the lamanites be encircle about in the border by the wilderness on the south and in the border by the wilderness on the east . alma and thus they do encamp for the night . for behold the nephites and the lamanites also be weary because of the greatness of the march therefore they do not resolve upon any stratagem in the night time save it be teancum for he be exceedingly angry with ammoron insomuch that he consider that ammoron and amalickiah his brother have be the cause of this great and lasting war between them and the lamanites which have be the cause of so much war and bloodshed yea and so much famine . alma and it come to pass that teancum in his anger do go forth into the camp of the lamanites and do let himself down over the wall of the city . and he go forth with a cord from place to place insomuch that he do find the king and he do cast a javelin at him which do pierce him near the heart . but behold the king do awaken his servant before he die insomuch that they do pursue teancum and slew him . alma now it come to pass that when lehi and moroni knew that teancum be dead they be exceedingly sorrowful for behold he have be a man who have fight valiantly for his country yea a true friend to liberty and he have suffer very many exceedingly sore affliction . but behold he be dead and have go the way of all the earth . alma now it come to pass that moroni march forth on the morrow and come upon the lamanites insomuch that they do slay them with a great slaughter and they do drive them out of the land and they do flee even that they do not return at that time against the nephites . alma and thus end the thirty and first year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi and thus they have have war and bloodshed and famine and affliction for the space of many year . alma and there have be murder and contention and dissension and all manner of iniquity among the people of nephi nevertheless for the righteous ' sake yea because of the prayer of the righteous they be spar . alma but behold because of the exceedingly great length of the war between the nephites and the lamanites many have become hardened because of the exceedingly great length of the war and many be soften because of their affliction insomuch that they do humble themselves before god even in the depth of humility . alma and it come to pass that after moroni have fortify those part of the land which be most expose to the lamanites until they be sufficiently strong he return to the city of zarahemla and also helaman return to the place of his inheritance and there be once more peace establish among the people of nephi . alma and moroni yield up the command of his army into the hand of his son whose name be moronihah and he retire to his own house that he might spend the remainder of his day in peace . alma and pahoran do return to his judgment seat and helaman do take upon him again to preach unto the people the word of god for because of so many war and contention it have become expedient that a regulation should be make again in the church . alma therefore helaman and his brother go forth and do declare the word of god with much power unto the convincing of many people of their wickedness which do cause them to repent of their sin and to be baptize unto the lord their god . alma and it come to pass that they do establish again the church of god throughout all the land . alma yea and regulation be make concern the law . and their judge and their chief judge be choose . alma and the people of nephi begin to prosper again in the land and begin to multiply and to wax exceedingly strong again in the land . and they begin to grow exceedingly rich . alma but notwithstanding their rich or their strength or their prosperity they be not lift up in the pride of their eye neither be they slow to remember the lord their god but they do humble themselves exceedingly before him . alma yea they do remember how great thing the lord have do for them that he have deliver them from death and from bond and from prison and from all manner of affliction and he have deliver them out of the hand of their enemy . alma and they do pray unto the lord their god continually insomuch that the lord do bless them accord to his word so that they do wax strong and prosper in the land . alma and it come to pass that all these thing be do . and helaman die in the thirty and fifth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma chapter alma and it come to pass in the commencement of the thirty and sixth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi that shiblon take possession of those sacred thing which have be deliver unto helaman by alma . alma and he be a just man and he do walk uprightly before god and he do observe to do good continually to keep the commandment of the lord his god and also do his brother . alma and it come to pass that moroni die also . and thus end the thirty and sixth year of the reign of the judge . alma and it come to pass that in the thirty and seventh year of the reign of the judge there be a large company of men even to the amount of five thousand and four hundred men with their wife and their child depart out of the land of zarahemla into the land which be northward . alma and it come to pass that hagoth he be an exceedingly curious man therefore he go forth and build him an exceedingly large ship on the border of the land bountiful by the land desolation and launch it forth into the west sea by the narrow neck which lead into the land northward . alma and behold there be many of the nephites who do enter therein and do sail forth with much provision and also many woman and child and they take their course northward . and thus end the thirty and seventh year . alma and in the thirty and eighth year this man build other ship . and the first ship do also return and many more people do enter into it and they also take much provision and set out again to the land northward . alma and it come to pass that they be never hear of more . and we suppose that they be drown in the depth of the sea . and it come to pass that one other ship also do sail forth and whither she do go we know not . alma and it come to pass that in this year there be many people who go forth into the land northward . and thus end the thirty and eighth year . alma and it come to pass in the thirty and ninth year of the reign of the judge shiblon die also and corianton have go forth to the land northward in a ship to carry forth provision unto the people who have go forth into that land . alma therefore it become expedient for shiblon to confer those sacred thing before his death upon the son of helaman who be call helaman be call after the name of his father . alma now behold all those engraving which be in the possession of helaman be write and send forth among the child of men throughout all the land save it be those part which have be command by alma should not go forth . alma nevertheless these thing be to be keep sacred and hand down from one generation to another therefore in this year they have be confer upon helaman before the death of shiblon . alma and it come to pass also in this year that there be some dissenter who have go forth unto the lamanites and they be stir up again to anger against the nephites . alma and also in this same year they come down with a numerous army to war against the people of moronihah or against the army of moronihah in the which they be beat and drive back again to their own land suffer great loss . alma and thus end the thirty and ninth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . alma and thus end the account of alma and helaman his son and also shiblon who be his son . the book of helaman an account of the nephites . their war and contention and their dissension . and also the prophecy of many holy prophet before the come of christ accord to the record of helaman who be the son of helaman and also accord to the record of his son even down to the come of christ . and also many of the lamanites be convert . an account of their conversion . an account of the righteousness of the lamanites and the wickedness and abomination of the nephites accord to the record of helaman and his son even down to the come of christ which be call the book of helaman . helaman chapter helaman and now behold it come to pass in the commencement of the fortieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi there begin to be a serious difficulty among the people of the nephites . helaman for behold pahoran have die and go the way of all the earth therefore there begin to be a serious contention concern who should have the judgment seat among the brother who be the son of pahoran . helaman now these be their name who do contend for the judgment seat who do also cause the people to contend pahoran paanchi and pacumeni . helaman now these be not all the son of pahoran for he have many but these be they who do contend for the judgment seat therefore they do cause three division among the people . helaman nevertheless it come to pass that pahoran be appoint by the voice of the people to be chief judge and a governor over the people of nephi . helaman and it come to pass that pacumeni when he saw that he could not obtain the judgment seat he do unite with the voice of the people . helaman but behold paanchi and that part of the people that be desirous that he should be their governor be exceedingly wroth therefore he be about to flatter away those people to rise up in rebellion against their brother . helaman and it come to pass a he be about to do this behold he be take and be try accord to the voice of the people and condemn unto death for he have raise up in rebellion and seek to destroy the liberty of the people . helaman now when those people who be desirous that he should be their governor saw that he be condemn unto death therefore they be angry and behold they send forth one kishkumen even to the judgment seat of pahoran and murder pahoran a he sit upon the judgment seat . helaman and he be pursue by the servant of pahoran but behold so speedy be the flight of kishkumen that no man could overtake him . helaman and he go unto those that send him and they all enter into a covenant yea swearing by their everlasting maker that they would tell no man that kishkumen have murder pahoran . helaman therefore kishkumen be not know among the people of nephi for he be in disguise at the time that he murder pahoran . and kishkumen and his band who have covenant with him do mingle themselves among the people in a manner that they all could not be find but as many a be find be condemn unto death . helaman and now behold pacumeni be appoint accord to the voice of the people to be a chief judge and a governor over the people to reign in the stead of his brother pahoran and it be accord to his right . and all this be do in the fortieth year of the reign of the judge and it have an end . helaman and it come to pass in the forty and first year of the reign of the judge that the lamanites have gather together an innumerable army of men and arm them with sword and with cimeters and with bow and with arrow and with head plate and with breastplate and with all manner of shield of every kind . helaman and they come down again that they might pitch battle against the nephites . and they be lead by a man whose name be coriantumr and he be a descendant of zarahemla and he be a dissenter from among the nephites and he be a large and a mighty man . helaman therefore the king of the lamanites whose name be tubaloth who be the son of ammoron suppose that coriantumr be a mighty man could stand against the nephites with his strength and also with his great wisdom insomuch that by send him forth he should gain power over the nephites helaman therefore he do stir them up to anger and he do gather together his army and he do appoint coriantumr to be their leader and do cause that they should march down to the land of zarahemla to battle against the nephites . helaman and it come to pass that because of so much contention and so much difficulty in the government that they have not keep sufficient guard in the land of zarahemla for they have suppose that the lamanites durst not come into the heart of their land to attack that great city zarahemla . helaman but it come to pass that coriantumr do march forth at the head of his numerous host and come upon the inhabitant of the city and their march be with such exceedingly great speed that there be no time for the nephites to gather together their army . helaman therefore coriantumr do cut down the watch by the entrance of the city and do march forth with his whole army into the city and they do slay every one who do oppose them insomuch that they do take possession of the whole city . helaman and it come to pass that pacumeni who be the chief judge do flee before coriantumr even to the wall of the city . and it come to pass that coriantumr do smite him against the wall insomuch that he die . and thus end the day of pacumeni . helaman and now when coriantumr saw that he be in possession of the city of zarahemla and saw that the nephites have flee before them and be slay and be take and be cast into prison and that he have obtain the possession of the strong hold in all the land his heart take courage insomuch that he be about to go forth against all the land . helaman and now he do not tarry in the land of zarahemla but he do march forth with a large army even towards the city of bountiful for it be his determination to go forth and cut his way through with the sword that he might obtain the north part of the land . helaman and suppose that their great strength be in the center of the land therefore he do march forth give them no time to assemble themselves together save it be in small body and in this manner they do fall upon them and cut them down to the earth . helaman but behold this march of coriantumr through the center of the land give moronihah great advantage over them notwithstanding the greatness of the number of the nephites who be slain . helaman for behold moronihah have suppose that the lamanites durst not come into the center of the land but that they would attack the city round about in the border a they have hitherto do therefore moronihah have cause that their strong army should maintain those part round about by the border . helaman but behold the lamanites be not frighten accord to his desire but they have come into the center of the land and have take the capital city which be the city of zarahemla and be march through the most capital part of the land slay the people with a great slaughter both men woman and child take possession of many city and of many stronghold . helaman but when moronihah have discover this he immediately send forth lehi with an army round about to head them before they should come to the land bountiful . helaman and thus he do and he do head them before they come to the land bountiful and give unto them battle insomuch that they begin to retreat back towards the land of zarahemla . helaman and it come to pass that moronihah do head them in their retreat and do give unto them battle insomuch that it become an exceedingly bloody battle yea many be slain and among the number who be slain coriantumr be also find . helaman and now behold the lamanites could not retreat either way neither on the north nor on the south nor on the east nor on the west for they be surround on every hand by the nephites . helaman and thus have coriantumr plunge the lamanites into the midst of the nephites insomuch that they be in the power of the nephites and he himself be slay and the lamanites do yield themselves into the hand of the nephites . helaman and it come to pass that moronihah take possession of the city of zarahemla again and cause that the lamanites who have be take prisoner should depart out of the land in peace . helaman and thus end the forty and first year of the reign of the judge . helaman chapter helaman and it come to pass in the forty and second year of the reign of the judge after moronihah have establish again peace between the nephites and the lamanites behold there be no one to fill the judgment seat therefore there begin to be a contention again among the people concern who should fill the judgment seat . helaman and it come to pass that helaman who be the son of helaman be appoint to fill the judgment seat by the voice of the people . helaman but behold kishkumen who have murder pahoran do lay wait to destroy helaman also and he be uphold by his band who have enter into a covenant that no one should know his wickedness . helaman for there be one gadianton who be exceedingly expert in many word and also in his craft to carry on the secret work of murder and of robbery therefore he become the leader of the band of kishkumen . helaman therefore he do flatter them and also kishkumen that if they would place him in the judgment seat he would grant unto those who belong to his band that they should be place in power and authority among the people therefore kishkumen seek to destroy helaman . helaman and it come to pass a he go forth towards the judgment seat to destroy helaman behold one of the servant of helaman have be out by night and have obtain through disguise a knowledge of those plan which have be lay by this band to destroy helaman helaman and it come to pass that he meet kishkumen and he give unto him a sign therefore kishkumen make know unto him the object of his desire desiring that he would conduct him to the judgment seat that he might murder helaman . helaman and when the servant of helaman have know all the heart of kishkumen and how that it be his object to murder and also that it be the object of all those who belong to his band to murder and to rob and to gain power and this be their secret plan and their combination the servant of helaman say unto kishkumen let u go forth unto the judgment seat . helaman now this do please kishkumen exceedingly for he do suppose that he should accomplish his design but behold the servant of helaman a they be go forth unto the judgment seat do stab kishkumen even to the heart that he fell dead without a groan . and he run and tell helaman all the thing which he have see and hear and do . helaman and it come to pass that helaman do send forth to take this band of robber and secret murderer that they might be execute accord to the law . helaman but behold when gadianton have find that kishkumen do not return he fear l that he should be destroy therefore he cause that his band should follow him . and they take their flight out of the land by a secret way into the wilderness and thus when helaman send forth to take them they could nowhere be find . helaman and more of this gadianton shall be speak hereafter . and thus end the forty and second year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and behold in the end of this book ye shall see that this gadianton do prove the overthrow yea almost the entire destruction of the people of nephi . helaman behold i do not mean the end of the book of helaman but i mean the end of the book of nephi from which i have take all the account which i have write . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass in the forty and third year of the reign of the judge there be no contention among the people of nephi save it be a little pride which be in the church which do cause some little dissension among the people which affair be settle in the end of the forty and third year . helaman and there be no contention among the people in the forty and fourth year neither be there much contention in the forty and fifth year . helaman and it come to pass in the forty and sixth yea there be much contention and many dissension in the which there be an exceedingly great many who depart out of the land of zarahemla and go forth unto the land northward to inherit the land . helaman and they do travel to an exceedingly great distance insomuch that they come to large body of water and many river . helaman yea and even they do spread forth into all part of the land into whatever part it have not be render desolate and without timber because of the many inhabitant who have before inherit the land . helaman and now no part of the land be desolate save it be for timber but because of the greatness of the destruction of the people who have before inhabit the land it be call desolate . helaman and there be but little timber upon the face of the land nevertheless the people who go forth become exceedingly expert in the working of cement therefore they do build house of cement in the which they do dwell . helaman and it come to pass that they do multiply and spread and do go forth from the land southward to the land northward and do spread insomuch that they begin to cover the face of the whole earth from the sea south to the sea north from the sea west to the sea east . helaman and the people who be in the land northward do dwell in tent and in house of cement and they do suffer whatsoever tree should spring up upon the face of the land that it should grow up that in time they might have timber to build their house yea their city and their temple and their synagogue and their sanctuary and all manner of their building . helaman and it come to pass a timber be exceedingly scarce in the land northward they do send forth much by the way of shipping . helaman and thus they do enable the people in the land northward that they might build many city both of wood and of cement . helaman and it come to pass that there be many of the people of ammon who be lamanites by birth do also go forth into this land . helaman and now there be many record keep of the proceeding of this people by many of this people which be particular and very large concern them . helaman but behold a hundredth part of the proceeding of this people yea the account of the lamanites and of the nephites and their war and contention and dissension and their preaching and their prophecy and their shipping and their building of ship and their building of temple and of synagogue and their sanctuary and their righteousness and their wickedness and their murder and their robbings and their plundering and all manner of abomination and whoredom can not be contain in this work . helaman but behold there be many book and many record of every kind and they have be keep chiefly by the nephites . helaman and they have be hand down from one generation to another by the nephites even until they have fall into transgression and have be murder plundered and hunt and drive forth and slain and scatter upon the face of the earth and mixed with the lamanites until they be no more call the nephites become wicked and wild and ferocious yea even become lamanites . helaman and now i return again to mine account therefore what i have speak have pass after there have be great contention and disturbance and war and dissension among the people of nephi . helaman the forty and sixth year of the reign of the judge end helaman and it come to pass that there be still great contention in the land yea even in the forty and seventh year and also in the forty and eighth year . helaman nevertheless helaman do fill the judgment seat with justice and equity yea he do observe to keep the statute and the judgment and the commandment of god and he do do that which be right in the sight of god continually and he do walk after the way of his father insomuch that he do prosper in the land . helaman and it come to pass that he have two son . he give unto the eldest the name of nephi and unto the young the name of lehi . and they begin to grow up unto the lord . helaman and it come to pass that the war and contention begin to cease in a small degree among the people of the nephites in the latter end of the forty and eighth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and it come to pass in the forty and ninth year of the reign of the judge there be continual peace establish in the land all save it be the secret combination which gadianton the robber have establish in the more settled part of the land which at that time be not know unto those who be at the head of government therefore they be not destroy out of the land . helaman and it come to pass that in this same year there be exceedingly great prosperity in the church insomuch that there be thousand who do join themselves unto the church and be baptize unto repentance . helaman and so great be the prosperity of the church and so many the blessing which be pour out upon the people that even the high priest and the teacher be themselves astonish beyond measure . helaman and it come to pass that the work of the lord do prosper unto the baptizing and uniting to the church of god many soul yea even ten of thousand . helaman thus we may see that the lord be merciful unto all who will in the sincerity of their heart call upon his holy name . helaman yea thus we see that the gate of heaven be open unto all even to those who will believe on the name of jesus christ who be the son of god . helaman yea we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of god which be quick and powerful which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snare and the wile of the devil and lead the man of christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which be prepared to engulf the wicked helaman and land their soul yea their immortal soul at the right hand of god in the kingdom of heaven to sit down with abraham and isaac and with jacob and with all our holy father to go no more out . helaman and in this year there be continual rejoicing in the land of zarahemla and in all the region round about even in all the land which be possess by the nephites . helaman and it come to pass that there be peace and exceedingly great joy in the remainder of the forty and ninth year yea and also there be continual peace and great joy in the fiftieth year of the reign of the judge . helaman and in the fifty and first year of the reign of the judge there be peace also save it be the pride which begin to enter into the church not into the church of god but into the heart of the people who profess to belong to the church of god helaman and they be lift up in pride even to the persecution of many of their brother . now this be a great evil which do cause the more humble part of the people to suffer great persecution and to wade through much affliction . helaman nevertheless they do fast and pray oft and do wax strong and strong in their humility and firmer and firmer in the faith of christ unto the fill their soul with joy and consolation yea even to the purifying and the sanctification of their heart which sanctification cometh because of their yield their heart unto god . helaman and it come to pass that the fifty and second year end in peace also save it be the exceedingly great pride which have get into the heart of the people and it be because of their exceedingly great rich and their prosperity in the land and it do grow upon them from day to day . helaman and it come to pass in the fifty and third year of the reign of the judge helaman die and his eldest son nephi begin to reign in his stead . and it come to pass that he do fill the judgment seat with justice and equity yea he do keep the commandment of god and do walk in the way of his father . helaman chapter helaman and it come to pass in the fifty and fourth year there be many dissension in the church and there be also a contention among the people insomuch that there be much bloodshed . helaman and the rebellious part be slain and drive out of the land and they do go unto the king of the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass that they do endeavor to stir up the lamanites to war against the nephites but behold the lamanites be exceedingly afraid insomuch that they would not hearken to the word of those dissenter . helaman but it come to pass in the fifty and sixth year of the reign of the judge there be dissenter who go up from the nephites unto the lamanites and they succeed with those others in stir them up to anger against the nephites and they be all that year prepare for war . helaman and in the fifty and seventh year they do come down against the nephites to battle and they do commence the work of death yea insomuch that in the fifty and eighth year of the reign of the judge they succeed in obtain possession of the land of zarahemla yea and also all the land even unto the land which be near the land bountiful . helaman and the nephites and the army of moronihah be drive even into the land of bountiful helaman and there they do fortify against the lamanites from the west sea even unto the east it be a day 's journey for a nephite on the line which they have fortify and station their army to defend their north country . helaman and thus those dissenter of the nephites with the help of a numerous army of the lamanites have obtain all the possession of the nephites which be in the land southward . and all this be do in the fifty and eighth and ninth year of the reign of the judge . helaman and it come to pass in the sixtieth year of the reign of the judge moronihah do succeed with his army in obtain many part of the land yea they regain many city which have fall into the hand of the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass in the sixty and first year of the reign of the judge they succeed in regain even the half of all their possession . helaman now this great loss of the nephites and the great slaughter which be among them would not have happen have it not be for their wickedness and their abomination which be among them yea and it be among those also who profess to belong to the church of god . helaman and it be because of the pride of their heart because of their exceeding rich yea it be because of their oppression to the poor withhold their food from the hungry withhold their clothing from the naked and smite their humble brother upon the cheek make a mock of that which be sacred deny the spirit of prophecy and of revelation murder plunder lie steal commit adultery rise up in great contention and desert away into the land of nephi among the lamanites helaman and because of this their great wickedness and their boasting in their own strength they be leave in their own strength therefore they do not prosper but be afflict and smite and drive before the lamanites until they have lose possession of almost all their land . helaman but behold moronihah do preach many thing unto the people because of their iniquity and also nephi and lehi who be the son of helaman do preach many thing unto the people yea and do prophesy many thing unto them concern their iniquity and what should come unto them if they do not repent of their sin . helaman and it come to pass that they do repent and inasmuch a they do repent they do begin to prosper . helaman for when moronihah saw that they do repent he do venture to lead them forth from place to place and from city to city even until they have regain the one half of their property and the one half of all their land . helaman and thus end the sixty and first year of the reign of the judge . helaman and it come to pass in the sixty and second year of the reign of the judge that moronihah could obtain no more possession over the lamanites . helaman therefore they do abandon their design to obtain the remainder of their land for so numerous be the lamanites that it become impossible for the nephites to obtain more power over them therefore moronihah do employ all his army in maintain those part which he have take . helaman and it come to pass because of the greatness of the number of the lamanites the nephites be in great fear l they should be overpower and tread down and slay and destroy . helaman yea they begin to remember the prophecy of alma and also the word of mosiah and they saw that they have be a stiffnecked people and that they have set at naught the commandment of god . helaman and that they have alter and trample under their foot the law of mosiah or that which the lord command him to give unto the people and they saw that their law have become corrupted and that they have become a wicked people insomuch that they be wicked even like unto the lamanites . helaman and because of their iniquity the church have begin to dwindle and they begin to disbelieve in the spirit of prophecy and in the spirit of revelation and the judgment of god do stare them in the face . helaman and they saw that they have become weak like unto their brother the lamanites and that the spirit of the lord do no more preserve them yea it have withdraw from them because the spirit of the lord doth not dwell in unholy temple helaman therefore the lord do cease to preserve them by his miraculous and matchless power for they have fall into a state of unbelief and awful wickedness and they saw that the lamanites be exceedingly more numerous than they and except they should cleave unto the lord their god they must unavoidably perish . helaman for behold they saw that the strength of the lamanites be as great a their strength even man for man . and thus have they fall into this great transgression yea thus have they become weak because of their transgression in the space of not many year . helaman chapter helaman and it come to pass that in this same year behold nephi deliver up the judgment seat to a man whose name be cezoram . helaman for a their law and their government be establish by the voice of the people and they who choose evil be more numerous than they who choose good therefore they be ripen for destruction for the law have become corrupt . helaman yea and this be not all they be a stiffnecked people insomuch that they could not be govern by the law nor justice save it be to their destruction . helaman and it come to pass that nephi have become weary because of their iniquity and he yield up the judgment seat and take it upon him to preach the word of god all the remainder of his day and his brother lehi also all the remainder of his day helaman for they remember the word which their father helaman spake unto them . and these be the word which he spake helaman behold my son i desire that ye should remember to keep the commandment of god and i would that ye should declare unto the people these word . behold i have give unto you the name of our first parent who come out of the land of jerusalem and this i have do that when you remember your name ye may remember them and when ye remember them ye may remember their work and when ye remember their work ye may know how that it be say and also write that they be good . helaman therefore my son i would that ye should do that which be good that it may be say of you and also write even a it have be say and write of them . helaman and now my son behold i have somewhat more to desire of you which desire be that ye may not do these thing that ye may boast but that ye may do these thing to lay up for yourselves a treasure in heaven yea which be eternal and which fadeth not away yea that ye may have that precious gift of eternal life which we have reason to suppose hath be give to our father . helaman o remember remember my son the word which king benjamin spake unto his people yea remember that there be no other way nor mean whereby man can be save only through the atone blood of jesus christ who shall come yea remember that he cometh to redeem the world . helaman and remember also the word which amulek spake unto zeezrom in the city of ammonihah for he say unto him that the lord surely should come to redeem his people but that he should not come to redeem them in their sin but to redeem them from their sin . helaman and he hath power give unto him from the father to redeem them from their sin because of repentance therefore he hath send his angel to declare the tidings of the condition of repentance which bringeth unto the power of the redeemer unto the salvation of their soul . helaman and now my son remember remember that it be upon the rock of our redeemer who be christ the son of god that ye must build your foundation that when the devil shall send forth his mighty wind yea his shaft in the whirlwind yea when all his hail and his mighty storm shall beat upon you it shall have no power over you to drag you down to the gulf of misery and endless wo because of the rock upon which ye be build which be a sure foundation a foundation whereon if men build they can not fall . helaman and it come to pass that these be the word which helaman taught to his son yea he do teach them many thing which be not write and also many thing which be write . helaman and they do remember his word and therefore they go forth keep the commandment of god to teach the word of god among all the people of nephi beginning at the city bountiful helaman and from thenceforth to the city of gid and from the city of gid to the city of mulek helaman and even from one city to another until they have go forth among all the people of nephi who be in the land southward and from thence into the land of zarahemla among the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass that they do preach with great power insomuch that they do confound many of those dissenter who have go over from the nephites insomuch that they come forth and do confess their sin and be baptize unto repentance and immediately return to the nephites to endeavor to repair unto them the wrong which they have do . helaman and it come to pass that nephi and lehi do preach unto the lamanites with such great power and authority for they have power and authority give unto them that they might speak and they also have what they should speak give unto them helaman therefore they do speak unto the great astonishment of the lamanites to the convince them insomuch that there be eight thousand of the lamanites who be in the land of zarahemla and round about baptize unto repentance and be convince of the wickedness of the tradition of their father . helaman and it come to pass that nephi and lehi do proceed from thence to go to the land of nephi . helaman and it come to pass that they be take by an army of the lamanites and cast into prison yea even in that same prison in which ammon and his brother be cast by the servant of limhi . helaman and after they have be cast into prison many day without food behold they go forth into the prison to take them that they might slay them . helaman and it come to pass that nephi and lehi be encircle about a if by fire even insomuch that they durst not lay their hand upon them for fear l they should be burn . nevertheless nephi and lehi be not burn and they be a stand in the midst of fire and be not burn . helaman and when they saw that they be encircle about with a pillar of fire and that it burn them not their heart do take courage . helaman for they saw that the lamanites durst not lay their hand upon them neither durst they come near unto them but stand a if they be strike dumb with amazement . helaman and it come to pass that nephi and lehi do stand forth and begin to speak unto them say fear not for behold it be god that have show unto you this marvelous thing in the which be show unto you that ye can not lay your hand on u to slay u . helaman and behold when they have say these word the earth shook exceedingly and the wall of the prison do shake a if they be about to tumble to the earth but behold they do not fall . and behold they that be in the prison be lamanites and nephites who be dissenter . helaman and it come to pass that they be overshadow with a cloud of darkness and an awful solemn fear come upon them . helaman and it come to pass that there come a voice a if it be above the cloud of darkness say repent ye repent ye and seek no more to destroy my servant whom i have send unto you to declare good tidings . helaman and it come to pass when they hear this voice and beheld that it be not a voice of thunder neither be it a voice of a great tumultuous noise but behold it be a still voice of perfect mildness a if it have be a whisper and it do pierce even to the very soul helaman and notwithstanding the mildness of the voice behold the earth shook exceedingly and the wall of the prison tremble again a if it be about to tumble to the earth and behold the cloud of darkness which have overshadow them do not disperse helaman and behold the voice come again say repent ye repent ye for the kingdom of heaven be at hand and seek no more to destroy my servant . and it come to pass that the earth shook again and the wall tremble . helaman and also again the third time the voice come and do speak unto them marvelous word which can not be utter by man and the wall do tremble again and the earth shook a if it be about to divide asunder . helaman and it come to pass that the lamanites could not flee because of the cloud of darkness which do overshadow them yea and also they be immovable because of the fear which do come upon them . helaman now there be one among them who be a nephite by birth who have once belong to the church of god but have dissent from them . helaman and it come to pass that he turn him about and behold he saw through the cloud of darkness the face of nephi and lehi and behold they do shine exceedingly even a the face of angel . and he behold that they do lift their eye to heaven and they be in the attitude a if talk or lift their voice to some be whom they behold . helaman and it come to pass that this man do cry unto the multitude that they might turn and look . and behold there be power give unto them that they do turn and look and they do behold the face of nephi and lehi . helaman and they say unto the man behold what do all these thing mean and who be it with whom these men do converse ? helaman now the man 's name be aminadab . and aminadab say unto them they do converse with the angel of god . helaman and it come to pass that the lamanites say unto him what shall we do that this cloud of darkness may be remove from overshadow u ? helaman and aminadab say unto them you must repent and cry unto the voice even until ye shall have faith in christ who be teach unto you by alma and amulek and zeezrom and when ye shall do this the cloud of darkness shall be remove from overshadow you . helaman and it come to pass that they all do begin to cry unto the voice of him who have shake the earth yea they do cry even until the cloud of darkness be disperse . helaman and it come to pass that when they cast their eye about and saw that the cloud of darkness be disperse from overshadow them behold they saw that they be encircle about yea every soul by a pillar of fire . helaman and nephi and lehi be in the midst of them yea they be encircle about yea they be a if in the midst of a flaming fire yet it do harm them not neither do it take hold upon the wall of the prison and they be fill with that joy which be unspeakable and full of glory . helaman and behold the holy spirit of god do come down from heaven and do enter into their heart and they be fill a if with fire and they could speak forth marvelous word . helaman and it come to pass that there come a voice unto them yea a pleasant voice a if it be a whisper say helaman peace peace be unto you because of your faith in my well beloved who be from the foundation of the world . helaman and now when they hear this they cast up their eye a if to behold from whence the voice come and behold they saw the heaven open and angel come down out of heaven and minister unto them . helaman and there be about three hundred soul who saw and hear these thing and they be bid to go forth and marvel not neither should they doubt . helaman and it come to pass that they do go forth and do minister unto the people declare throughout all the region round about all the thing which they have hear and see insomuch that the more part of the lamanites be convince of them because of the greatness of the evidence which they have receive . helaman and as many a be convince do lay down their weapon of war and also their hatred and the tradition of their father . helaman and it come to pass that they do yield up unto the nephites the land of their possession . helaman chapter helaman and it come to pass that when the sixty and second year of the reign of the judge have end all these thing have happen and the lamanites have become the more part of them a righteous people insomuch that their righteousness do exceed that of the nephites because of their firmness and their steadiness in the faith . helaman for behold there be many of the nephites who have become harden and impenitent and grossly wicked insomuch that they do reject the word of god and all the preaching and prophesy which do come among them . helaman nevertheless the people of the church do have great joy because of the conversion of the lamanites yea because of the church of god which have be establish among them . and they do fellowship one with another and do rejoice one with another and do have great joy . helaman and it come to pass that many of the lamanites do come down into the land of zarahemla and do declare unto the people of the nephites the manner of their conversion and do exhort them to faith and repentance . helaman yea and many do preach with exceedingly great power and authority unto the bring down many of them into the depth of humility to be the humble follower of god and the lamb . helaman and it come to pass that many of the lamanites do go into the land northward and also nephi and lehi go into the land northward to preach unto the people . and thus end the sixty and third year . helaman and behold there be peace in all the land insomuch that the nephites do go into whatsoever part of the land they would whether among the nephites or the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass that the lamanites do also go whithersoever they would whether it be among the lamanites or among the nephites and thus they do have free intercourse one with another to buy and to sell and to get gain accord to their desire . helaman and it come to pass that they become exceedingly rich both the lamanites and the nephites and they do have an exceed plenty of gold and of silver and of all manner of precious metal both in the land south and in the land north . helaman now the land south be call lehi and the land north be call mulek which be after the son of zedekiah for the lord do bring mulek into the land north and lehi into the land south . helaman and behold there be all manner of gold in both these land and of silver and of precious ore of every kind and there be also curious workman who do work all kind of ore and do refine it and thus they do become rich . helaman they do raise grain in abundance both in the north and in the south and they do flourish exceedingly both in the north and in the south . and they do multiply and wax exceedingly strong in the land . and they do raise many flock and herd yea many fatlings . helaman behold their woman do toil and spin and do make all manner of cloth of fine twin linen and cloth of every kind to clothe their nakedness . and thus the sixty and fourth year do pass away in peace . helaman and in the sixty and fifth year they do also have great joy and peace yea much preaching and many prophecy concern that which be to come . and thus pass away the sixty and fifth year . helaman and it come to pass that in the sixty and sixth year of the reign of the judge behold cezoram be murder by an unknown hand a he sit upon the judgment seat . and it come to pass that in the same year that his son who have be appoint by the people in his stead be also murder . and thus end the sixty and sixth year . helaman and in the commencement of the sixty and seventh year the people begin to grow exceedingly wicked again . helaman for behold the lord have bless them so long with the rich of the world that they have not be stir up to anger to war nor to bloodshed therefore they begin to set their heart upon their rich yea they begin to seek to get gain that they might be lift up one above another therefore they begin to commit secret murder and to rob and to plunder that they might get gain . helaman and now behold those murderer and plunderer be a band who have be form by kishkumen and gadianton . and now it have come to pass that there be many even among the nephites of gadianton 's band . but behold they be more numerous among the more wicked part of the lamanites . and they be call gadianton 's robber and murderer . helaman and it be they who do murder the chief judge cezoram and his son while in the judgment seat and behold they be not find . helaman and now it come to pass that when the lamanites find that there be robber among them they be exceedingly sorrowful and they do use every mean in their power to destroy them off the face of the earth . helaman but behold satan do stir up the heart of the more part of the nephites insomuch that they do unite with those band of robber and do enter into their covenant and their oath that they would protect and preserve one another in whatsoever difficult circumstance they should be place that they should not suffer for their murder and their plundering and their stealing . helaman and it come to pass that they do have their sign yea their secret sign and their secret word and this that they might distinguish a brother who have enter into the covenant that whatsoever wickedness his brother should do he should not be injure by his brother nor by those who do belong to his band who have take this covenant . helaman and thus they might murder and plunder and steal and commit whoredom and all manner of wickedness contrary to the law of their country and also the law of their god . helaman and whosoever of those who belong to their band should reveal unto the world of their wickedness and their abomination should be try not accord to the law of their country but accord to the law of their wickedness which have be give by gadianton and kishkumen . helaman now behold it be these secret oath and covenant which alma command his son should not go forth unto the world l they should be a mean of bring down the people unto destruction . helaman now behold those secret oath and covenant do not come forth unto gadianton from the record which be deliver unto helaman but behold they be put into the heart of gadianton by that same be who do entice our first parent to partake of the forbidden fruit helaman yea that same be who do plot with cain that if he would murder his brother abel it should not be know unto the world . and he do plot with cain and his follower from that time forth . helaman and also it be that same be who put it into the heart of the people to build a tower sufficiently high that they might get to heaven . and it be that same be who lead on the people who come from that tower into this land who spread the work of darkness and abomination over all the face of the land until he drag the people down to an entire destruction and to an everlasting hell . helaman yea it be that same be who put it into the heart of gadianton to still carry on the work of darkness and of secret murder and he have bring it forth from the beginning of man even down to this time . helaman and behold it be he who be the author of all sin . and behold he doth carry on his work of darkness and secret murder and doth hand down their plot and their oath and their covenant and their plan of awful wickedness from generation to generation accord a he can get hold upon the heart of the child of men . helaman and now behold he have get great hold upon the heart of the nephites yea insomuch that they have become exceedingly wicked yea the more part of them have turn out of the way of righteousness and do trample under their foot the commandment of god and do turn unto their own way and do build up unto themselves idol of their gold and their silver . helaman and it come to pass that all these iniquity do come unto them in the space of not many year insomuch that a more part of it have come unto them in the sixty and seventh year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and they do grow in their iniquity in the sixty and eighth year also . helaman and thus we see that the nephites do begin to dwindle in unbelief and grow in wickedness and abomination while the lamanites begin to grow exceedingly in the knowledge of their god yea they do begin to keep his statute and commandment and to walk in truth and uprightness before him . helaman and thus we see that the spirit of the lord begin to withdraw from the nephites because of the wickedness and the hardness of their heart . helaman and thus we see that the lord begin to pour out his spirit upon the lamanites because of their easiness and willingness to believe in his word . helaman and it come to pass that the lamanites do hunt the band of robber of gadianton and they do preach the word of god among the more wicked part of them insomuch that this band of robber be utterly destroy from among the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass on the other hand that the nephites do build them up and support them begin at the more wicked part of them until they have overspread all the land of the nephites and have seduce the more part of the righteous until they have come down to believe in their work and partake of their spoil and to join with them in their secret murder and combination . helaman and thus they do obtain the sole management of the government insomuch that they do trample under their foot and smite and rend and turn their back upon the poor and the meek and the humble follower of god . helaman and thus we see that they be in an awful state and ripen for an everlasting destruction . helaman and it come to pass that thus end the sixty and eighth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman chapter helaman behold now it come to pass in the sixty and ninth year of the reign of the judge over the people of the nephites that nephi the son of helaman return to the land of zarahemla from the land northward . helaman for he have be forth among the people who be in the land northward and do preach the word of god unto them and do prophesy many thing unto them helaman and they do reject all his word insomuch that he could not stay among them but return again unto the land of his nativity . helaman and see the people in a state of such awful wickedness and those gadianton robber fill the judgment seat have usurp the power and authority of the land lay aside the commandment of god and not in the least aright before him do no justice unto the child of men helaman condemn the righteous because of their righteousness let the guilty and the wicked go unpunished because of their money and moreover to be hold in office at the head of government to rule and do accord to their will that they might get gain and glory of the world and moreover that they might the more easily commit adultery and steal and kill and do accord to their own will helaman now this great iniquity have come upon the nephites in the space of not many year and when nephi saw it his heart be swell with sorrow within his breast and he do exclaim in the agony of his soul helaman oh that i could have have my day in the day when my father nephi first come out of the land of jerusalem that i could have joy with him in the promised land then be his people easy to be entreat firm to keep the commandment of god and slow to be lead to do iniquity and they be quick to hearken unto the word of the lord helaman yea if my day could have be in those day then would my soul have have joy in the righteousness of my brother . helaman but behold i be consign that these be my day and that my soul shall be fill with sorrow because of this the wickedness of my brother . helaman and behold now it come to pass that it be upon a tower which be in the garden of nephi which be by the highway which lead to the chief market which be in the city of zarahemla therefore nephi have bow himself upon the tower which be in his garden which tower be also near unto the garden gate by which lead the highway . helaman and it come to pass that there be certain men pass by and saw nephi a he be pour out his soul unto god upon the tower and they run and tell the people what they have see and the people come together in multitude that they might know the cause of so great mourning for the wickedness of the people . helaman and now when nephi arise he behold the multitude of people who have gather together . helaman and it come to pass that he open his mouth and say unto them behold why have ye gather yourselves together ? that i may tell you of your iniquity ? helaman yea because i have get upon my tower that i might pour out my soul unto my god because of the exceed sorrow of my heart which be because of your iniquity ! helaman and because of my mourning and lamentation ye have gather yourselves together and do marvel yea and ye have great need to marvel yea ye ought to marvel because ye be give away that the devil have get so great hold upon your heart . helaman yea how could you have give way to the enticing of him who be seek to hurl away your soul down to everlasting misery and endless wo ? helaman o repent ye repent ye ! why will ye die ? turn ye turn ye unto the lord your god . why have he forsake you ? helaman it be because you have harden your heart yea ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd yea ye have provoke him to anger against you . helaman and behold instead of gather you except ye will repent behold he shall scatter you forth that ye shall become meat for dog and wild beast . helaman o how could you have forget your god in the very day that he have deliver you ? helaman but behold it be to get gain to be praise of men yea and that ye might get gold and silver . and ye have set your heart upon the rich and the vain thing of this world for the which ye do murder and plunder and steal and bear false witness against your neighbor and do all manner of iniquity . helaman and for this cause wo shall come unto you except ye shall repent . for if ye will not repent behold this great city and also all those great city which be round about which be in the land of our possession shall be take away that ye shall have no place in them for behold the lord will not grant unto you strength a he have hitherto do to withstand against your enemy . helaman for behold thus saith the lord i will not show unto the wicked of my strength to one more than the other save it be unto those that repent of their sin and hearken unto my word . now therefore i would that ye should behold my brother that it shall be good for the lamanites than for you except ye shall repent . helaman for behold they be more righteous than you for they have not sin against that great knowledge which ye have receive therefore the lord will be merciful unto them yea he will lengthen out their day and increase their seed even when thou shalt be utterly destroy except thou shalt repent . helaman yea wo be unto you because of that great abomination which have come among you and ye have unite yourselves unto it yea to that secret band which be establish by gadianton ! helaman yea wo shall come unto you because of that pride which ye have suffer to enter your heart which have lift you up beyond that which be good because of your exceedingly great rich ! helaman yea wo be unto you because of your wickedness and abomination ! helaman and except ye repent ye shall perish yea even your land shall be take from you and ye shall be destroy from off the face of the earth . helaman behold now i do not say that these thing shall be of myself because it be not of myself that i know these thing but behold i know that these thing be true because the lord god have make them know unto me therefore i testify that they shall be . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass that when nephi have say these word behold there be men who be judge who also belong to the secret band of gadianton and they be angry and they cry out against him say unto the people why do ye not seize upon this man and bring him forth that he may be condemn accord to the crime which he have do ? helaman why seest thou this man and hearest him revile against this people and against our law ? helaman for behold nephi have speak unto them concern the corruptness of their law yea many thing do nephi speak which can not be write and nothing do he speak which be contrary to the commandment of god . helaman and those judge be angry with him because he spake plainly unto them concern their secret work of darkness nevertheless they durst not lay their own hand upon him for they fear the people lest they should cry out against them . helaman therefore they do cry unto the people say why do you suffer this man to revile against u ? for behold he doth condemn all this people even unto destruction yea and also that these our great city shall be take from u that we shall have no place in them . helaman and now we know that this be impossible for behold we be powerful and our city great therefore our enemy can have no power over u . helaman and it come to pass that thus they do stir up the people to anger against nephi and raise contention among them for there be some who do cry out let this man alone for he be a good man and those thing which he saith will surely come to pass except we repent helaman yea behold all the judgment will come upon u which he have testify unto u for we know that he have testify aright unto u concern our iniquity . and behold they be many and he knoweth as well all thing which shall befall u a he knoweth of our iniquity helaman yea and behold if he have not be a prophet he could not have testify concern those thing . helaman and it come to pass that those people who seek to destroy nephi be compel because of their fear that they do not lay their hand on him therefore he begin again to speak unto them see that he have gain favor in the eye of some insomuch that the remainder of them do fear . helaman therefore he be constrain to speak more unto them say behold my brother have ye not read that god give power unto one man even moses to smite upon the water of the red sea and they part hither and thither insomuch that the israelite who be our father come through upon dry ground and the water close upon the army of the egyptian and swallow them up ? helaman and now behold if god give unto this man such power then why should ye dispute among yourselves and say that he hath give unto me no power whereby i may know concern the judgment that shall come upon you except ye repent ? helaman but behold ye not only deny my word but ye also deny all the word which have be speak by our father and also the word which be speak by this man moses who have such great power give unto him yea the word which he hath spoken concern the come of the messiah . helaman yea do he not bear record that the son of god should come ? and a he lift up the brazen serpent in the wilderness even so shall he be lift up who should come . helaman and as many a should look upon that serpent should live even so as many a should look upon the son of god with faith have a contrite spirit might live even unto that life which be eternal . helaman and now behold moses do not only testify of these thing but also all the holy prophet from his day even to the day of abraham . helaman yea and behold abraham saw of his come and be fill with gladness and do rejoice . helaman yea and behold i say unto you that abraham not only know of these thing but there be many before the day of abraham who be call by the order of god yea even after the order of his son and this that it should be show unto the people a great many thousand year before his come that even redemption should come unto them . helaman and now i would that ye should know that even since the day of abraham there have be many prophet that have testify these thing yea behold the prophet zeno do testify boldly for the which he be slain . helaman and behold also zenock and also ezias and also isaiah and jeremiah jeremiah be that same prophet who testify of the destruction of jerusalem and now we know that jerusalem be destroy accord to the word of jeremiah . o then why not the son of god come accord to his prophecy ? helaman and now will you dispute that jerusalem be destroy ? will ye say that the son of zedekiah be not slay all except it be mulek ? yea and do ye not behold that the seed of zedekiah be with u and they be drive out of the land of jerusalem ? but behold this be not all helaman our father lehi be drive out of jerusalem because he testify of these thing . nephi also testify of these thing and also almost all of our father even down to this time yea they have testify of the come of christ and have look forward and have rejoice in his day which be to come . helaman and behold he be god and he be with them and he do manifest himself unto them that they be redeem by him and they give unto him glory because of that which be to come . helaman and now see ye know these thing and can not deny them except ye shall lie therefore in this ye have sin for ye have reject all these thing notwithstanding so many evidence which ye have receive yea even ye have receive all thing both thing in heaven and all thing which be in the earth a a witness that they be true . helaman but behold ye have reject the truth and rebel against your holy god and even at this time instead of lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven where nothing doth corrupt and where nothing can come which be unclean ye be heap up for yourselves wrath against the day of judgment . helaman yea even at this time ye be ripen because of your murder and your fornication and wickedness for everlasting destruction yea and except ye repent it will come unto you soon . helaman yea behold it be now even at your door yea go ye in unto the judgment seat and search and behold your judge be murder and he lieth in his blood and he hath be murder by his brother who seeketh to sit in the judgment seat . helaman and behold they both belong to your secret band whose author be gadianton and the evil one who seeketh to destroy the soul of men . helaman chapter helaman behold now it come to pass that when nephi have speak these word certain men who be among them run to the judgment seat yea even there be five who go and they say among themselves a they go helaman behold now we will know of a surety whether this man be a prophet and god hath command him to prophesy such marvelous thing unto u . behold we do not believe that he hath yea we do not believe that he be a prophet nevertheless if this thing which he have say concern the chief judge be true that he be dead then will we believe that the other word which he have speak be true . helaman and it come to pass that they run in their might and come in unto the judgment seat and behold the chief judge have fall to the earth and do lie in his blood . helaman and now behold when they saw this they be astonish exceedingly insomuch that they fell to the earth for they have not believe the word which nephi have speak concern the chief judge . helaman but now when they saw they believe and fear come upon them l all the judgment which nephi have speak should come upon the people therefore they do quake and have fall to the earth . helaman now immediately when the judge have be murder he be stab by his brother by a garb of secrecy and he flee and the servant run and tell the people raise the cry of murder among them helaman and behold the people do gather themselves together unto the place of the judgment seat and behold to their astonishment they saw those five men who have fall to the earth . helaman and now behold the people know nothing concern the multitude who have gather together at the garden of nephi therefore they say among themselves these men be they who have murder the judge and god have smite them that they could not flee from u . helaman and it come to pass that they lay hold on them and bind them and cast them into prison . and there be a proclamation send abroad that the judge be slay and that the murderer have be take and be cast into prison . helaman and it come to pass that on the morrow the people do assemble themselves together to mourn and to fast at the burial of the great chief judge who have be slay . helaman and thus also those judge who be at the garden of nephi and hear his word be also gather together at the burial . helaman and it come to pass that they inquire among the people say where be the five who be send to inquire concern the chief judge whether he be dead ? and they answer and say concern this five whom ye say ye have send we know not but there be five who be the murderer whom we have cast into prison . helaman and it come to pass that the judge desire that they should be bring and they be bring and behold they be the five who be send and behold the judge inquire of them to know concern the matter and they tell them all that they have do say helaman we run and come to the place of the judgment seat and when we saw all thing even a nephi have testify we be astonish insomuch that we fell to the earth and when we be recover from our astonishment behold they cast u into prison . helaman now a for the murder of this man we know not who have do it and only this much we know we run and come accord a ye desire and behold he be dead accord to the word of nephi . helaman and now it come to pass that the judge do expound the matter unto the people and do cry out against nephi say behold we know that this nephi must have agree with some one to slay the judge and then he might declare it unto u that he might convert u unto his faith that he might raise himself to be a great man chosen of god and a prophet . helaman and now behold we will detect this man and he shall confess his fault and make know unto u the true murderer of this judge . helaman and it come to pass that the five be liberate on the day of the burial . nevertheless they do rebuke the judge in the word which they have speak against nephi and do contend with them one by one insomuch that they do confound them . helaman nevertheless they cause that nephi should be take and bind and bring before the multitude and they begin to question him in diver way that they might cross him that they might accuse him to death helaman say unto him thou art confederate who be this man that hath do this murder ? now tell u and acknowledge thy fault say behold here be money and also we will grant unto thee thy life if thou wilt tell u and acknowledge the agreement which thou hast make with him . helaman but nephi say unto them o ye fool ye uncircumcised of heart ye blind and ye stiffnecked people do ye know how long the lord your god will suffer you that ye shall go on in this your way of sin ? helaman o ye ought to begin to howl and mourn because of the great destruction which at this time doth await you except ye shall repent . helaman behold ye say that i have agree with a man that he should murder seezoram our chief judge . but behold i say unto you that this be because i have testify unto you that ye might know concern this thing yea even for a witness unto you that i do know of the wickedness and abomination which be among you . helaman and because i have do this ye say that i have agree with a man that he should do this thing yea because i show unto you this sign ye be angry with me and seek to destroy my life . helaman and now behold i will show unto you another sign and see if ye will in this thing seek to destroy me . helaman behold i say unto you go to the house of seantum who be the brother of seezoram and say unto him helaman have nephi the pretended prophet who doth prophesy so much evil concern this people agree with thee in the which ye have murder seezoram who be your brother ? helaman and behold he shall say unto you nay . helaman and ye shall say unto him have ye murder your brother ? helaman and he shall stand with fear and wist not what to say . and behold he shall deny unto you and he shall make a if he be astonished nevertheless he shall declare unto you that he be innocent . helaman but behold ye shall examine him and ye shall find blood upon the skirt of his cloak . helaman and when ye have see this ye shall say from whence cometh this blood ? do we not know that it be the blood of your brother ? helaman and then shall he tremble and shall look pale even a if death have come upon him . helaman and then shall ye say because of this fear and this paleness which have come upon your face behold we know that thou art guilty . helaman and then shall great fear come upon him and then shall he confess unto you and deny no more that he have do this murder . helaman and then shall he say unto you that i nephi know nothing concern the matter save it be give unto me by the power of god . and then shall ye know that i be an honest man and that i be send unto you from god . helaman and it come to pass that they go and do even accord a nephi have say unto them . and behold the word which he have say be true for accord to the word he do deny and also accord to the word he do confess . helaman and he be bring to prove that he himself be the very murderer insomuch that the five be set at liberty and also be nephi . helaman and there be some of the nephites who believe on the word of nephi and there be some also who believe because of the testimony of the five for they have be convert while they be in prison . helaman and now there be some among the people who say that nephi be a prophet . helaman and there be others who say behold he be a god for except he be a god he could not know of all thing . for behold he have tell u the thought of our heart and also have tell u thing and even he have bring unto our knowledge the true murderer of our chief judge . helaman chapter helaman and it come to pass that there arise a division among the people insomuch that they divide hither and thither and go their way leave nephi alone a he be stand in the midst of them . helaman and it come to pass that nephi go his way towards his own house ponder upon the thing which the lord have show unto him . helaman and it come to pass a he be thus ponder be much cast down because of the wickedness of the people of the nephites their secret work of darkness and their murderings and their plundering and all manner of iniquity and it come to pass a he be thus ponder in his heart behold a voice come unto him say helaman bless art thou nephi for those thing which thou hast do for i have behold how thou hast with unwearyingness declare the word which i have give unto thee unto this people . and thou hast not fear them and hast not seek thine own life but hast seek my will and to keep my commandment . helaman and now because thou hast do this with such unwearyingness behold i will bless thee forever and i will make thee mighty in word and in deed in faith and in work yea even that all thing shall be do unto thee accord to thy word for thou shalt not ask that which be contrary to my will . helaman behold thou art nephi and i be god . behold i declare it unto thee in the presence of mine angel that ye shall have power over this people and shall smite the earth with famine and with pestilence and destruction accord to the wickedness of this people . helaman behold i give unto you power that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be seal in heaven and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loose in heaven and thus shall ye have power among this people . helaman and thus if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in twain it shall be do . helaman and if ye shall say unto this mountain be thou cast down and become smooth it shall be do . helaman and behold if ye shall say that god shall smite this people it shall come to pass . helaman and now behold i command you that ye shall go and declare unto this people that thus saith the lord god who be the almighty except ye repent ye shall be smite even unto destruction . helaman and behold now it come to pass that when the lord have speak these word unto nephi he do stop and do not go unto his own house but do return unto the multitude who be scatter about upon the face of the land and begin to declare unto them the word of the lord which have be speak unto him concern their destruction if they do not repent . helaman now behold notwithstanding that great miracle which nephi have do in tell them concern the death of the chief judge they do harden their heart and do not hearken unto the word of the lord . helaman therefore nephi do declare unto them the word of the lord say except ye repent thus saith the lord ye shall be smite even unto destruction . helaman and it come to pass that when nephi have declare unto them the word behold they do still harden their heart and would not hearken unto his word therefore they do revile against him and do seek to lay their hand upon him that they might cast him into prison . helaman but behold the power of god be with him and they could not take him to cast him into prison for he be take by the spirit and convey away out of the midst of them . helaman and it come to pass that thus he do go forth in the spirit from multitude to multitude declare the word of god even until he have declare it unto them all or send it forth among all the people . helaman and it come to pass that they would not hearken unto his word and there begin to be contention insomuch that they be divide against themselves and begin to slay one another with the sword . helaman and thus end the seventy and first year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass in the seventy and second year of the reign of the judge that the contention do increase insomuch that there be war throughout all the land among all the people of nephi . helaman and it be this secret band of robber who do carry on this work of destruction and wickedness . and this war do last all that year and in the seventy and third year it do also last . helaman and it come to pass that in this year nephi do cry unto the lord say helaman o lord do not suffer that this people shall be destroy by the sword but o lord rather let there be a famine in the land to stir them up in remembrance of the lord their god and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee . helaman and so it be do accord to the word of nephi . and there be a great famine upon the land among all the people of nephi . and thus in the seventy and fourth year the famine do continue and the work of destruction do cease by the sword but become sore by famine . helaman and this work of destruction do also continue in the seventy and fifth year . for the earth be smite that it be dry and do not yield forth grain in the season of grain and the whole earth be smite even among the lamanites as well a among the nephites so that they be smite that they do perish by thousand in the more wicked part of the land . helaman and it come to pass that the people saw that they be about to perish by famine and they begin to remember the lord their god and they begin to remember the word of nephi . helaman and the people begin to plead with their chief judge and their leader that they would say unto nephi behold we know that thou art a man of god and therefore cry unto the lord our god that he turn away from u this famine l all the word which thou hast speak concern our destruction be fulfil . helaman and it come to pass that the judge do say unto nephi accord to the word which have be desire . and it come to pass that when nephi saw that the people have repent and do humble themselves in sackcloth he cry again unto the lord say helaman o lord behold this people repenteth and they have sweep away the band of gadianton from amongst them insomuch that they have become extinct and they have conceal their secret plan in the earth . helaman now o lord because of this their humility wilt thou turn away thine anger and let thine anger be appease in the destruction of those wicked men whom thou hast already destroy . helaman o lord wilt thou turn away thine anger yea thy fierce anger and cause that this famine may cease in this land . helaman o lord wilt thou hearken unto me and cause that it may be do accord to my word and send forth rain upon the face of the earth that she may bring forth her fruit and her grain in the season of grain . helaman o lord thou didst hearken unto my word when i say let there be a famine that the pestilence of the sword might cease and i know that thou wilt even at this time hearken unto my word for thou saidst that if this people repent i will spare them . helaman yea o lord and thou seest that they have repent because of the famine and the pestilence and destruction which have come unto them . helaman and now o lord wilt thou turn away thine anger and try again if they will serve thee ? and if so o lord thou canst bless them accord to thy word which thou hast say . helaman and it come to pass that in the seventy and sixth year the lord do turn away his anger from the people and cause that rain should fall upon the earth insomuch that it do bring forth her fruit in the season of her fruit . and it come to pass that it do bring forth her grain in the season of her grain . helaman and behold the people do rejoice and glorify god and the whole face of the land be fill with rejoice and they do no more seek to destroy nephi but they do esteem him a a great prophet and a man of god have great power and authority give unto him from god . helaman and behold lehi his brother be not a whit behind him a to thing pertain to righteousness . helaman and thus it do come to pass that the people of nephi begin to prosper again in the land and begin to build up their waste place and begin to multiply and spread even until they do cover the whole face of the land both on the northward and on the southward from the sea west to the sea east . helaman and it come to pass that the seventy and sixth year do end in peace . and the seventy and seventh year begin in peace and the church do spread throughout the face of all the land and the more part of the people both the nephites and the lamanites do belong to the church and they do have exceedingly great peace in the land and thus end the seventy and seventh year . helaman and also they have peace in the seventy and eighth year save it be a few contention concern the point of doctrine which have be lay down by the prophet . helaman and in the seventy and ninth year there begin to be much strife . but it come to pass that nephi and lehi and many of their brother who know concern the true point of doctrine have many revelation daily therefore they do preach unto the people insomuch that they do put an end to their strife in that same year . helaman and it come to pass that in the eightieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi there be a certain number of the dissenter from the people of nephi who have some year before go over unto the lamanites and take upon themselves the name of lamanites and also a certain number who be real descendant of the lamanites be stir up to anger by them or by those dissenter therefore they commence a war with their brother . helaman and they do commit murder and plunder and then they would retreat back into the mountain and into the wilderness and secret place hide themselves that they could not be discover receive daily an addition to their number inasmuch a there be dissenter that go forth unto them . helaman and thus in time yea even in the space of not many year they become an exceedingly great band of robber and they do search out all the secret plan of gadianton and thus they become robber of gadianton . helaman now behold these robber do make great havoc yea even great destruction among the people of nephi and also among the people of the lamanites . helaman and it come to pass that it be expedient that there should be a stop put to this work of destruction therefore they send an army of strong men into the wilderness and upon the mountain to search out this band of robber and to destroy them . helaman but behold it come to pass that in that same year they be drive back even into their own land . and thus end the eightieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and it come to pass in the commencement of the eighty and first year they do go forth again against this band of robber and do destroy many and they be also visit with much destruction . helaman and they be again oblige to return out of the wilderness and out of the mountain unto their own land because of the exceed greatness of the number of those robber who infest the mountain and the wilderness . helaman and it come to pass that thus end this year . and the robber do still increase and wax strong insomuch that they do defy the whole army of the nephites and also of the lamanites and they do cause great fear to come unto the people upon all the face of the land . helaman yea for they do visit many part of the land and do do great destruction unto them yea do kill many and do carry away others captive into the wilderness yea and more especially their woman and their child . helaman now this great evil which come unto the people because of their iniquity do stir them up again in remembrance of the lord their god . helaman and thus end the eighty and first year of the reign of the judge . helaman and in the eighty and second year they begin again to forget the lord their god . and in the eighty and third year they begin to wax strong in iniquity . and in the eighty and fourth year they do not mend their way . helaman and it come to pass in the eighty and fifth year they do wax strong and strong in their pride and in their wickedness and thus they be ripen again for destruction . helaman and thus end the eighty and fifth year . helaman chapter helaman and thus we can behold how false and also the unsteadiness of the heart of the child of men yea we can see that the lord in his great infinite goodness doth bless and prosper those who put their trust in him . helaman yea and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people yea in the increase of their field their flock and their herd and in gold and in silver and in all manner of precious thing of every kind and art spar their life and deliver them out of the hand of their enemy soften the heart of their enemy that they should not declare war against them yea and in fine do all thing for the welfare and happiness of his people yea then be the time that they do harden their heart and do forget the lord their god and do trample under their foot the holy one yea and this because of their ease and their exceedingly great prosperity . helaman and thus we see that except the lord doth chasten his people with many affliction yea except he doth visit them with death and with terror and with famine and with all manner of pestilence they will not remember him . helaman o how foolish and how vain and how evil and devilish and how quick to do iniquity and how slow to do good be the child of men yea how quick to hearken unto the word of the evil one and to set their heart upon the vain thing of the world ! helaman yea how quick to be lift up in pride yea how quick to boast and do all manner of that which be iniquity and how slow be they to remember the lord their god and to give ear unto his counsel yea how slow to walk in wisdom 's path ! helaman behold they do not desire that the lord their god who hath create them should rule and reign over them notwithstanding his great goodness and his mercy towards them they do set at naught his counsel and they will not that he should be their guide . helaman o how great be the nothingness of the child of men yea even they be less than the dust of the earth . helaman for behold the dust of the earth moveth hither and thither to the divide asunder at the command of our great and everlasting god . helaman yea behold at his voice do the hill and the mountain tremble and quake . helaman and by the power of his voice they be break up and become smooth yea even like unto a valley . helaman yea by the power of his voice doth the whole earth shake helaman yea by the power of his voice do the foundation rock even to the very center . helaman yea and if he say unto the earth move it be move . helaman yea if he say unto the earth thou shalt go back that it lengthen out the day for many hour it be do helaman and thus accord to his word the earth goeth back and it appeareth unto man that the sun standeth still yea and behold this be so for surely it be the earth that moveth and not the sun . helaman and behold also if he say unto the water of the great deep be thou dry up it be do . helaman behold if he say unto this mountain be thou raise up and come over and fall upon that city that it be bury up behold it be do . helaman and behold if a man hide up a treasure in the earth and the lord shall say let it be accurse because of the iniquity of him who hath hid it up behold it shall be accurse . helaman and if the lord shall say be thou accurse that no man shall find thee from this time henceforth and forever behold no man getteth it henceforth and forever . helaman and behold if the lord shall say unto a man because of thine iniquity thou shalt be accurse forever it shall be do . helaman and if the lord shall say because of thine iniquity thou shalt be cut off from my presence he will cause that it shall be so . helaman and wo unto him to whom he shall say this for it shall be unto him that will do iniquity and he can not be save therefore for this cause that men might be save hath repentance be declare . helaman therefore bless be they who will repent and hearken unto the voice of the lord their god for these be they that shall be save . helaman and may god grant in his great fulness that men might be bring unto repentance and good work that they might be restore unto grace for grace accord to their work . helaman and i would that all men might be save . but we read that in the great and last day there be some who shall be cast out yea who shall be cast off from the presence of the lord helaman yea who shall be consign to a state of endless misery fulfil the word which say they that have do good shall have everlasting life and they that have do evil shall have everlasting damnation . and thus it be . amen . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass in the eighty and sixth year the nephites do still remain in wickedness yea in great wickedness while the lamanites do observe strictly to keep the commandment of god accord to the law of moses . helaman and it come to pass that in this year there be one samuel a lamanite come into the land of zarahemla and begin to preach unto the people . and it come to pass that he do preach many day repentance unto the people and they do cast him out and he be about to return to his own land . helaman but behold the voice of the lord come unto him that he should return again and prophesy unto the people whatsoever thing should come into his heart . helaman and it come to pass that they would not suffer that he should enter into the city therefore he go and get upon the wall thereof and stretch forth his hand and cry with a loud voice and prophesy unto the people whatsoever thing the lord put into his heart . helaman and he say unto them behold i samuel a lamanite do speak the word of the lord which he doth put into my heart and behold he hath put it into my heart to say unto this people that the sword of justice hangeth over this people and four hundred year pass not away save the sword of justice falleth upon this people . helaman yea heavy destruction awaiteth this people and it surely cometh unto this people and nothing can save this people save it be repentance and faith on the lord jesus christ who surely shall come into the world and shall suffer many thing and shall be slay for his people . helaman and behold an angel of the lord hath declare it unto me and he do bring glad tidings to my soul . and behold i be send unto you to declare it unto you also that ye might have glad tidings but behold ye would not receive me . helaman therefore thus saith the lord because of the hardness of the heart of the people of the nephites except they repent i will take away my word from them and i will withdraw my spirit from them and i will suffer them no longer and i will turn the heart of their brother against them . helaman and four hundred year shall not pass away before i will cause that they shall be smitten yea i will visit them with the sword and with famine and with pestilence . helaman yea i will visit them in my fierce anger and there shall be those of the fourth generation who shall live of your enemy to behold your utter destruction and this shall surely come except ye repent saith the lord and those of the fourth generation shall visit your destruction . helaman but if ye will repent and return unto the lord your god i will turn away mine anger saith the lord yea thus saith the lord bless be they who will repent and turn unto me but wo unto him that repenteth not . helaman yea wo unto this great city of zarahemla for behold it be because of those who be righteous that it be save yea wo unto this great city for i perceive saith the lord that there be many yea even the more part of this great city that will harden their heart against me saith the lord . helaman but bless be they who will repent for them will i spare . but behold if it be not for the righteous who be in this great city behold i would cause that fire should come down out of heaven and destroy it . helaman but behold it be for the righteous ' sake that it be spar . but behold the time cometh saith the lord that when ye shall cast out the righteous from among you then shall ye be ripe for destruction yea wo be unto this great city because of the wickedness and abomination which be in her . helaman yea and wo be unto the city of gideon for the wickedness and abomination which be in her . helaman yea and wo be unto all the city which be in the land round about which be possess by the nephites because of the wickedness and abomination which be in them . helaman and behold a curse shall come upon the land saith the lord of host because of the people 's sake who be upon the land yea because of their wickedness and their abomination . helaman and it shall come to pass saith the lord of host yea our great and true god that whoso shall hide up treasure in the earth shall find them again no more because of the great curse of the land save he be a righteous man and shall hide it up unto the lord . helaman for i will saith the lord that they shall hide up their treasure unto me and curse be they who hide not up their treasure unto me for none hideth up their treasure unto me save it be the righteous and he that hideth not up his treasure unto me curse be he and also the treasure and none shall redeem it because of the curse of the land . helaman and the day shall come that they shall hide up their treasure because they have set their heart upon rich and because they have set their heart upon their rich and will hide up their treasure when they shall flee before their enemy because they will not hide them up unto me curse be they and also their treasure and in that day shall they be smite saith the lord . helaman behold ye the people of this great city and hearken unto my word yea hearken unto the word which the lord saith for behold he saith that ye be curse because of your rich and also be your rich curse because ye have set your heart upon them and have not hearken unto the word of him who give them unto you . helaman ye do not remember the lord your god in the thing with which he hath bless you but ye do always remember your rich not to thank the lord your god for them yea your heart be not draw out unto the lord but they do swell with great pride unto boasting and unto great swell envyings strifes malice persecution and murder and all manner of iniquity . helaman for this cause hath the lord god cause that a curse should come upon the land and also upon your rich and this because of your iniquity . helaman yea wo unto this people because of this time which have arrive that ye do cast out the prophet and do mock them and cast stone at them and do slay them and do all manner of iniquity unto them even a they do of old time . helaman and now when ye talk ye say if our day have be in the day of our father of old we would not have slay the prophet we would not have stone them and cast them out . helaman behold ye be bad than they for a the lord liveth if a prophet come among you and declareth unto you the word of the lord which testifieth of your sin and iniquity ye be angry with him and cast him out and seek all manner of way to destroy him yea you will say that he be a false prophet and that he be a sinner and of the devil because he testifieth that your deed be evil . helaman but behold if a man shall come among you and shall say do this and there be no iniquity do that and ye shall not suffer yea he will say walk after the pride of your own heart yea walk after the pride of your eye and do whatsoever your heart desireth and if a man shall come among you and say this ye will receive him and say that he be a prophet . helaman yea ye will lift him up and ye will give unto him of your substance ye will give unto him of your gold and of your silver and ye will clothe him with costly apparel and because he speaketh flatter word unto you and he saith that all be well then ye will not find fault with him . helaman o ye wicked and ye perverse generation ye harden and ye stiffnecked people how long will ye suppose that the lord will suffer you ? yea how long will ye suffer yourselves to be lead by foolish and blind guide ? yea how long will ye choose darkness rather than light ? helaman yea behold the anger of the lord be already kindle against you behold he hath curse the land because of your iniquity . helaman and behold the time cometh that he curseth your rich that they become slippery that ye can not hold them and in the day of your poverty ye can not retain them . helaman and in the day of your poverty ye shall cry unto the lord and in vain shall ye cry for your desolation be already come upon you and your destruction be make sure and then shall ye weep and howl in that day saith the lord of host . and then shall ye lament and say helaman o that i have repent and have not kill the prophet and stone them and cast them out . yea in that day ye shall say o that we have remember the lord our god in the day that he give u our rich and then they would not have become slippery that we should lose them for behold our rich be go from u . helaman behold we lay a tool here and on the morrow it be go and behold our sword be take from u in the day we have seek them for battle . helaman yea we have hide up our treasure and they have slip away from u because of the curse of the land . helaman o that we have repent in the day that the word of the lord come unto u for behold the land be curse and all thing be become slippery and we can not hold them . helaman behold we be surround by demon yea we be encircle about by the angel of him who hath seek to destroy our soul . behold our iniquity be great . o lord canst thou not turn away thine anger from u ? and this shall be your language in those day . helaman but behold your day of probation be past ye have procrastinate the day of your salvation until it be everlastingly too late and your destruction be make sure yea for ye have seek all the day of your life for that which ye could not obtain and ye have seek for happiness in do iniquity which thing be contrary to the nature of that righteousness which be in our great and eternal head . helaman o ye people of the land that ye would hear my word ! and i pray that the anger of the lord be turn away from you and that ye would repent and be save . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass that samuel the lamanite do prophesy a great many more thing which can not be write . helaman and behold he say unto them behold i give unto you a sign for five year more cometh and behold then cometh the son of god to redeem all those who shall believe on his name . helaman and behold this will i give unto you for a sign at the time of his come for behold there shall be great light in heaven insomuch that in the night before he cometh there shall be no darkness insomuch that it shall appear unto man a if it be day . helaman therefore there shall be one day and a night and a day a if it be one day and there be no night and this shall be unto you for a sign for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and also of it set therefore they shall know of a surety that there shall be two day and a night nevertheless the night shall not be darken and it shall be the night before he be bear . helaman and behold there shall a new star arise such an one a ye never have behold and this also shall be a sign unto you . helaman and behold this be not all there shall be many sign and wonder in heaven . helaman and it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amaze and wonder insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth . helaman and it shall come to pass that whosoever shall believe on the son of god the same shall have everlasting life . helaman and behold thus hath the lord command me by his angel that i should come and tell this thing unto you yea he hath command that i should prophesy these thing unto you yea he hath say unto me cry unto this people repent and prepare the way of the lord . helaman and now because i be a lamanite and have speak unto you the word which the lord hath command me and because it be hard against you ye be angry with me and do seek to destroy me and have cast me out from among you . helaman and ye shall hear my word for for this intent have i come up upon the wall of this city that ye might hear and know of the judgment of god which do await you because of your iniquity and also that ye might know the condition of repentance helaman and also that ye might know of the come of jesus christ the son of god the father of heaven and of earth the creator of all thing from the beginning and that ye might know of the sign of his come to the intent that ye might believe on his name . helaman and if ye believe on his name ye will repent of all your sin that thereby ye may have a remission of them through his merit . helaman and behold again another sign i give unto you yea a sign of his death . helaman for behold he surely must die that salvation may come yea it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead that thereby men may be bring into the presence of the lord . helaman yea behold this death bringeth to pass the resurrection and redeemeth all mankind from the first death that spiritual death for all mankind by the fall of adam be cut off from the presence of the lord be consider a dead both a to thing temporal and to thing spiritual . helaman but behold the resurrection of christ redeemeth mankind yea even all mankind and bringeth them back into the presence of the lord . helaman yea and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance that whosoever repenteth the same be not hewn down and cast into the fire but whosoever repenteth not be hewn down and cast into the fire and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death yea a second death for they be cut off again a to thing pertain to righteousness . helaman therefore repent ye repent ye lest by know these thing and not do them ye shall suffer yourselves to come under condemnation and ye be bring down unto this second death . helaman but behold a i say unto you concern another sign a sign of his death behold in that day that he shall suffer death the sun shall be darken and refuse to give his light unto you and also the moon and the star and there shall be no light upon the face of this land even from the time that he shall suffer death for the space of three day to the time that he shall rise again from the dead . helaman yea at the time that he shall yield up the ghost there shall be thunderings and lightning for the space of many hour and the earth shall shake and tremble and the rock which be upon the face of this earth which be both above the earth and beneath which ye know at this time be solid or the more part of it be one solid mass shall be break up helaman yea they shall be rent in twain and shall ever after be find in seam and in crack and in broken fragment upon the face of the whole earth yea both above the earth and beneath . helaman and behold there shall be great tempest and there shall be many mountain lay low like unto a valley and there shall be many place which be now call valley which shall become mountain whose height be great . helaman and many highway shall be break up and many city shall become desolate . helaman and many graf shall be open and shall yield up many of their dead and many saint shall appear unto many . helaman and behold thus hath the angel speak unto me for he say unto me that there should be thunderings and lightning for the space of many hour . helaman and he say unto me that while the thunder and the lightning last and the tempest that these thing should be and that darkness should cover the face of the whole earth for the space of three day . helaman and the angel say unto me that many shall see great thing than these to the intent that they might believe that these sign and these wonder should come to pass upon all the face of this land to the intent that there should be no cause for unbelief among the child of men helaman and this to the intent that whosoever will believe might be save and that whosoever will not believe a righteous judgment might come upon them and also if they be condemn they bring upon themselves their own condemnation . helaman and now remember remember my brother that whosoever perisheth perisheth unto himself and whosoever doeth iniquity doeth it unto himself for behold ye be free ye be permit to act for yourselves for behold god hath give unto you a knowledge and he hath make you free . helaman he hath give unto you that ye might know good from evil and he hath give unto you that ye might choose life or death and ye can do good and be restore unto that which be good or have that which be good restore unto you or ye can do evil and have that which be evil restore unto you . helaman chapter helaman and now my beloved brother behold i declare unto you that except ye shall repent your house shall be leave unto you desolate . helaman yea except ye repent your woman shall have great cause to mourn in the day that they shall give suck for ye shall attempt to flee and there shall be no place for refuge yea and wo unto them which be with child for they shall be heavy and can not flee therefore they shall be tread down and shall be leave to perish . helaman yea wo unto this people who be call the people of nephi except they shall repent when they shall see all these sign and wonder which shall be show unto them for behold they have be a chosen people of the lord yea the people of nephi hath he love and also hath he chasten them yea in the day of their iniquity hath he chasten them because he loveth them . helaman but behold my brother the lamanites hath he hat because their deed have be evil continually and this because of the iniquity of the tradition of their father . but behold salvation hath come unto them through the preaching of the nephites and for this intent hath the lord prolong their day . helaman and i would that ye should behold that the more part of them be in the path of their duty and they do walk circumspectly before god and they do observe to keep his commandment and his statute and his judgment accord to the law of moses . helaman yea i say unto you that the more part of them be do this and they be strive with unwearied diligence that they may bring the remainder of their brother to the knowledge of the truth therefore there be many who do add to their number daily . helaman and behold ye do know of yourselves for ye have witness it that a many of them a be bring to the knowledge of the truth and to know of the wicked and abominable tradition of their father and be lead to believe the holy scriptures yea the prophecy of the holy prophet which be write which leadeth them to faith on the lord and unto repentance which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them helaman therefore as many a have come to this ye know of yourselves be firm and steadfast in the faith and in the thing wherewith they have be make free . helaman and ye know also that they have bury their weapon of war and they fear to take them up l by any mean they should sin yea ye can see that they fear to sin for behold they will suffer themselves that they be tread down and slay by their enemy and will not lift their sword against them and this because of their faith in christ . helaman and now because of their steadfastness when they do believe in that thing which they do believe for because of their firmness when they be once enlighten behold the lord shall bless them and prolong their day notwithstanding their iniquity helaman yea even if they should dwindle in unbelief the lord shall prolong their day until the time shall come which hath be speak of by our father and also by the prophet zeno and many other prophet concern the restoration of our brother the lamanites again to the knowledge of the truth helaman yea i say unto you that in the latter time the promise of the lord have be extend to our brother the lamanites and notwithstanding the many affliction which they shall have and notwithstanding they shall be drive to and fro upon the face of the earth and be hunt and shall be smite and scatter abroad have no place for refuge the lord shall be merciful unto them . helaman and this be accord to the prophecy that they shall again be bring to the true knowledge which be knowledge of their redeemer and their great and true shepherd and be number among his sheep . helaman therefore i say unto you it shall be good for them than for you except ye repent . helaman for behold have the mighty work be show unto them which have be show unto you yea unto them who have dwindle in unbelief because of the tradition of their father ye can see of yourselves that they never would again have dwindle in unbelief . helaman therefore saith the lord i will not utterly destroy them but i will cause that in the day of my wisdom they shall return again unto me saith the lord . helaman and now behold saith the lord concern the people of the nephites if they will not repent and observe to do my will i will utterly destroy them saith the lord because of their unbelief notwithstanding the many mighty work which i have do among them and as surely a the lord liveth shall these thing be saith the lord . helaman chapter helaman and now it come to pass that there be many who hear the word of samuel the lamanite which he spake upon the wall of the city . and as many a believe on his word go forth and seek for nephi and when they have come forth and find him they confess unto him their sin and deny not desire that they might be baptize unto the lord . helaman but as many a there be who do not believe in the word of samuel be angry with him and they cast stone at him upon the wall and also many shot arrow at him a he stand upon the wall but the spirit of the lord be with him insomuch that they could not hit him with their stone neither with their arrow . helaman now when they saw that they could not hit him there be many more who do believe on his word insomuch that they go away unto nephi to be baptize . helaman for behold nephi be baptize and prophesy and preach cry repentance unto the people show sign and wonder work miracle among the people that they might know that the christ must shortly come helaman tell them of thing which must shortly come that they might know and remember at the time of their come that they have be make know unto them beforehand to the intent that they might believe therefore as many a believe on the word of samuel go forth unto him to be baptize for they come repent and confess their sin . helaman but the more part of them do not believe in the word of samuel therefore when they saw that they could not hit him with their stone and their arrow they cry unto their captain say take this fellow and bind him for behold he hath a devil and because of the power of the devil which be in him we can not hit him with our stone and our arrow therefore take him and bind him and away with him . helaman and a they go forth to lay their hand on him behold he do cast himself down from the wall and do flee out of their land yea even unto his own country and begin to preach and to prophesy among his own people . helaman and behold he be never hear of more among the nephites and thus be the affair of the people . helaman and thus end the eighty and sixth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and thus end also the eighty and seventh year of the reign of the judge the more part of the people remain in their pride and wickedness and the less part walk more circumspectly before god . helaman and these be the condition also in the eighty and eighth year of the reign of the judge . helaman and there be but little alteration in the affair of the people save it be the people begin to be more harden in iniquity and do more and more of that which be contrary to the commandment of god in the eighty and ninth year of the reign of the judge . helaman but it come to pass in the ninetieth year of the reign of the judge there be great sign give unto the people and wonder and the word of the prophet begin to be fulfil . helaman and angel do appear unto men wise men and do declare unto them glad tidings of great joy thus in this year the scripture begin to be fulfil . helaman nevertheless the people begin to harden their heart all save it be the most believing part of them both of the nephites and also of the lamanites and begin to depend upon their own strength and upon their own wisdom say helaman some thing they may have guess right among so many but behold we know that all these great and marvelous work can not come to pas of which have be speak . helaman and they begin to reason and to contend among themselves say helaman that it be not reasonable that such a be a a christ shall come if so and he be the son of god the father of heaven and of earth a it have be speak why will he not show himself unto u as well a unto them who shall be at jerusalem ? helaman yea why will he not show himself in this land as well a in the land of jerusalem ? helaman but behold we know that this be a wicked tradition which have be hand down unto u by our father to cause u that we should believe in some great and marvelous thing which should come to pass but not among u but in a land which be far distant a land which we know not therefore they can keep u in ignorance for we can not witness with our own eye that they be true . helaman and they will by the cunning and the mysterious art of the evil one work some great mystery which we can not understand which will keep u down to be servant to their word and also servant unto them for we depend upon them to teach u the word and thus will they keep u in ignorance if we will yield ourselves unto them all the day of our life . helaman and many more thing do the people imagine up in their heart which be foolish and vain and they be much disturb for satan do stir them up to do iniquity continually yea he do go about spread rumor and contention upon all the face of the land that he might harden the heart of the people against that which be good and against that which should come . helaman and notwithstanding the sign and the wonder which be work among the people of the lord and the many miracle which they do satan do get great hold upon the heart of the people upon all the face of the land . helaman and thus end the ninetieth year of the reign of the judge over the people of nephi . helaman and thus end the book of helaman accord to the record of helaman and his son . third book of nephi the son of nephi who be the son of helaman and helaman be the son of helaman who be the son of alma who be the son of alma be a descendant of nephi who be the son of lehi who come out of jerusalem in the first year of the reign of zedekiah the king of judah . nephi chapter nephi now it come to pass that the ninety and first year have pass away and it be six hundred year from the time that lehi leave jerusalem and it be in the year that lachoneus be the chief judge and the governor over the land . nephi and nephi the son of helaman have depart out of the land of zarahemla give charge unto his son nephi who be his eldest son concern the plate of brass and all the record which have be keep and all those thing which have be keep sacred from the departure of lehi out of jerusalem . nephi then he depart out of the land and whither he go no man knoweth and his son nephi do keep the record in his stead yea the record of this people . nephi and it come to pass that in the commencement of the ninety and second year behold the prophecy of the prophet begin to be fulfil more fully for there begin to be great sign and great miracle work among the people . nephi but there be some who begin to say that the time be past for the word to be fulfil which be speak by samuel the lamanite . nephi and they begin to rejoice over their brother say behold the time be past and the word of samuel be not fulfil therefore your joy and your faith concern this thing hath be vain . nephi and it come to pass that they do make a great uproar throughout the land and the people who believe begin to be very sorrowful l by any mean those thing which have be speak might not come to pass . nephi but behold they do watch steadfastly for that day and that night and that day which should be a one day a if there be no night that they might know that their faith have not be vain . nephi now it come to pass that there be a day set apart by the unbeliever that all those who believe in those tradition should be put to death except the sign should come to pass which have be give by samuel the prophet . nephi now it come to pass that when nephi the son of nephi saw this wickedness of his people his heart be exceedingly sorrowful . nephi and it come to pass that he go out and bow himself down upon the earth and cry mightily to his god in behalf of his people yea those who be about to be destroy because of their faith in the tradition of their father . nephi and it come to pass that he cry mightily unto the lord all that day and behold the voice of the lord come unto him say nephi lift up your head and be of good cheer for behold the time be at hand and on this night shall the sign be give and on the morrow come i into the world to show unto the world that i will fulfill all that which i have cause to be speak by the mouth of my holy prophet . nephi behold i come unto my own to fulfill all thing which i have make know unto the child of men from the foundation of the world and to do the will both of the father and of the son of the father because of me and of the son because of my flesh . and behold the time be at hand and this night shall the sign be give . nephi and it come to pass that the word which come unto nephi be fulfil accord a they have be speak for behold at the go down of the sun there be no darkness and the people begin to be astonish because there be no darkness when the night come . nephi and there be many who have not believe the word of the prophet who fell to the earth and become a if they be dead for they know that the great plan of destruction which they have lay for those who believe in the word of the prophet have be frustrate for the sign which have be give be already at hand . nephi and they begin to know that the son of god must shortly appear yea in fine all the people upon the face of the whole earth from the west to the east both in the land north and in the land south be so exceedingly astonish that they fell to the earth . nephi for they know that the prophet have testify of these thing for many year and that the sign which have be give be already at hand and they begin to fear because of their iniquity and their unbelief . nephi and it come to pass that there be no darkness in all that night but it be as light a though it be mid day . and it come to pass that the sun do rise in the morning again accord to it proper order and they know that it be the day that the lord should be bear because of the sign which have be give . nephi and it have come to pass yea all thing every whit accord to the word of the prophet . nephi and it come to pass also that a new star do appear accord to the word . nephi and it come to pass that from this time forth there begin to be lyings sent forth among the people by satan to harden their heart to the intent that they might not believe in those sign and wonder which they have see but notwithstanding these lying and deceive the more part of the people do believe and be convert unto the lord . nephi and it come to pass that nephi go forth among the people and also many others baptize unto repentance in the which there be a great remission of sin . and thus the people begin again to have peace in the land . nephi and there be no contention save it be a few that begin to preach endeavor to prove by the scripture that it be no more expedient to observe the law of moses . now in this thing they do err have not understood the scripture . nephi but it come to pass that they soon become converted and be convince of the error which they be in for it be make know unto them that the law be not yet fulfil and that it must be fulfil in every whit yea the word come unto them that it must be fulfil yea that one jot or tittle should not pass away till it should all be fulfil therefore in this same year be they bring to a knowledge of their error and do confess their fault . nephi and thus the ninety and second year do pass away bring glad tidings unto the people because of the sign which do come to pass accord to the word of the prophecy of all the holy prophet . nephi and it come to pass that the ninety and third year do also pass away in peace save it be for the gadianton robber who dwell upon the mountain who do infest the land for so strong be their hold and their secret place that the people could not overpower them therefore they do commit many murder and do do much slaughter among the people . nephi and it come to pass that in the ninety and fourth year they begin to increase in great degree because there be many dissenter of the nephites who do flee unto them which do cause much sorrow unto those nephites who do remain in the land . nephi and there be also a cause of much sorrow among the lamanites for behold they have many child who do grow up and begin to wax strong in year that they become for themselves and be lead away by some who be zoramites by their lying and their flattering word to join those gadianton robber . nephi and thus be the lamanites afflict also and begin to decrease a to their faith and righteousness because of the wickedness of the rise generation . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that thus pass away the ninety and fifth year also and the people begin to forget those sign and wonder which they have hear and begin to be less and less astonish at a sign or a wonder from heaven insomuch that they begin to be hard in their heart and blind in their mind and begin to disbelieve all which they have hear and see nephi imagine up some vain thing in their heart that it be work by men and by the power of the devil to lead away and deceive the heart of the people and thus do satan get possession of the heart of the people again insomuch that he do blind their eye and lead them away to believe that the doctrine of christ be a foolish and a vain thing . nephi and it come to pass that the people begin to wax strong in wickedness and abomination and they do not believe that there should be any more sign or wonder give and satan do go about lead away the heart of the people tempt them and cause them that they should do great wickedness in the land . nephi and thus do pass away the ninety and sixth year and also the ninety and seventh year and also the ninety and eighth year and also the ninety and ninth year nephi and also an hundred year have pass away since the day of mosiah who be king over the people of the nephites . nephi and six hundred and nine year have pass away since lehi leave jerusalem . nephi and nine year have pass away from the time when the sign be give which be speak of by the prophet that christ should come into the world . nephi now the nephites begin to reckon their time from this period when the sign be give or from the come of christ therefore nine year have pass away . nephi and nephi who be the father of nephi who have the charge of the record do not return to the land of zarahemla and could nowhere be find in all the land . nephi and it come to pass that the people do still remain in wickedness notwithstanding the much preaching and prophesy which be send among them and thus pass away the tenth year also and the eleventh year also pass away in iniquity . nephi and it come to pass in the thirteenth year there begin to be war and contention throughout all the land for the gadianton robber have become so numerous and do slay so many of the people and do lay waste so many city and do spread so much death and carnage throughout the land that it become expedient that all the people both the nephites and the lamanites should take up arm against them . nephi therefore all the lamanites who have become convert unto the lord do unite with their brother the nephites and be compel for the safety of their life and their woman and their child to take up arm against those gadianton robber yea and also to maintain their right and the privilege of their church and of their worship and their freedom and their liberty . nephi and it come to pass that before this thirteenth year have pass away the nephites be threaten with utter destruction because of this war which have become exceedingly sore . nephi and it come to pass that those lamanites who have unite with the nephites be number among the nephites nephi and their curse be take from them and their skin become white like unto the nephites nephi and their young men and their daughter become exceedingly fair and they be number among the nephites and be call nephites . and thus end the thirteenth year . nephi and it come to pass in the commencement of the fourteenth year the war between the robber and the people of nephi do continue and do become exceedingly sore nevertheless the people of nephi do gain some advantage of the robber insomuch that they do drive them back out of their land into the mountain and into their secret place . nephi and thus end the fourteenth year . and in the fifteenth year they do come forth against the people of nephi and because of the wickedness of the people of nephi and their many contention and dissension the gadianton robber do gain many advantage over them . nephi and thus end the fifteenth year and thus be the people in a state of many affliction and the sword of destruction do hang over them insomuch that they be about to be smite down by it and this because of their iniquity . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that in the sixteenth year from the come of christ lachoneus the governor of the land receive an epistle from the leader and the governor of this band of robber and these be the word which be write say nephi lachoneus most noble and chief governor of the land behold i write this epistle unto you and do give unto you exceedingly great praise because of your firmness and also the firmness of your people in maintain that which ye suppose to be your right and liberty yea ye do stand well a if ye be support by the hand of a god in the defence of your liberty and your property and your country or that which ye do call so . nephi and it seemeth a pity unto me most noble lachoneus that ye should be so foolish and vain a to suppose that ye can stand against so many brave men who be at my command who do now at this time stand in their arm and do await with great anxiety for the word go down upon the nephites and destroy them . nephi and i knowing of their unconquerable spirit have prove them in the field of battle and knowing of their everlasting hatred towards you because of the many wrong which ye have do unto them therefore if they should come down against you they would visit you with utter destruction . nephi therefore i have write this epistle seal it with mine own hand feel for your welfare because of your firmness in that which ye believe to be right and your noble spirit in the field of battle . nephi therefore i write unto you desire that ye would yield up unto this my people your city your land and your possession rather than that they should visit you with the sword and that destruction should come upon you . nephi or in other word yield yourselves up unto u and unite with u and become acquaint with our secret work and become our brother that ye may be like unto u not our slave but our brother and partner of all our substance . nephi and behold i swear unto you if ye will do this with an oath ye shall not be destroy but if ye will not do this i swear unto you with an oath that on the morrow month i will command that my army shall come down against you and they shall not stay their hand and shall spare not but shall slay you and shall let fall the sword upon you even until ye shall become extinct . nephi and behold i be giddianhi and i be the governor of this the secret society of gadianton which society and the work thereof i know to be good and they be of ancient date and they have be hand down unto u . nephi and i write this epistle unto you lachoneus and i hope that ye will deliver up your land and your possession without the shedding of blood that this my people may recover their right and government who have dissent away from you because of your wickedness in retain from them their right of government and except ye do this i will avenge their wrong . i be giddianhi . nephi and now it come to pass when lachoneus receive this epistle he be exceedingly astonished because of the boldness of giddianhi demand the possession of the land of the nephites and also of threaten the people and avenge the wrong of those that have receive no wrong save it be they have wrong themselves by dissent away unto those wicked and abominable robber . nephi now behold this lachoneus the governor be a just man and could not be frighten by the demand and the threatenings of a robber therefore he do not hearken to the epistle of giddianhi the governor of the robber but he do cause that his people should cry unto the lord for strength against the time that the robber should come down against them . nephi yea he send a proclamation among all the people that they should gather together their woman and their child their flock and their herd and all their substance save it be their land unto one place . nephi and he cause that fortification should be build round about them and the strength thereof should be exceedingly great . and he cause that armies both of the nephites and of the lamanites or of all them who be number among the nephites should be place a guard round about to watch them and to guard them from the robber day and night . nephi yea he say unto them a the lord liveth except ye repent of all your iniquity and cry unto the lord ye will in no wise be deliver out of the hand of those gadianton robber . nephi and so great and marvelous be the word and prophecy of lachoneus that they do cause fear to come upon all the people and they do exert themselves in their might to do accord to the word of lachoneus . nephi and it come to pass that lachoneus do appoint chief captain over all the army of the nephites to command them at the time that the robber should come down out of the wilderness against them . nephi now the chief among all the chief captain and the great commander of the army of the nephites be appoint and his name be gidgiddoni . nephi now it be the custom among all the nephites to appoint for their chief captain save it be in their time of wickedness some one that have the spirit of revelation and also prophecy therefore this gidgiddoni be a great prophet among them a also be the chief judge . nephi now the people say unto gidgiddoni pray unto the lord and let u go up upon the mountain and into the wilderness that we may fall upon the robber and destroy them in their own land . nephi but gidgiddoni saith unto them the lord forbid for if we should go up against them the lord would deliver u into their hand therefore we will prepare ourselves in the center of our land and we will gather all our army together and we will not go against them but we will wait till they shall come against u therefore a the lord liveth if we do this he will deliver them into our hand . nephi and it come to pass in the seventeenth year in the latter end of the year the proclamation of lachoneus have go forth throughout all the face of the land and they have take their horse and their chariot and their cattle and all their flock and their herd and their grain and all their substance and do march forth by thousand and by ten of thousand until they have all go forth to the place which have be appoint that they should gather themselves together to defend themselves against their enemy . nephi and the land which be appoint be the land of zarahemla and the land which be between the land zarahemla and the land bountiful yea to the line which be between the land bountiful and the land desolation . nephi and there be a great many thousand people who be call nephites who do gather themselves together in this land . now lachoneus do cause that they should gather themselves together in the land southward because of the great curse which be upon the land northward . nephi and they do fortify themselves against their enemy and they do dwell in one land and in one body and they do fear the word which have be speak by lachoneus insomuch that they do repent of all their sin and they do put up their prayer unto the lord their god that he would deliver them in the time that their enemy should come down against them to battle . nephi and they be exceedingly sorrowful because of their enemy . and gidgiddoni do cause that they should make weapon of war of every kind and they should be strong with armor and with shield and with buckler after the manner of his instruction . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that in the latter end of the eighteenth year those army of robber have prepare for battle and begin to come down and to sally forth from the hill and out of the mountain and the wilderness and their stronghold and their secret place and begin to take possession of the land both which be in the land south and which be in the land north and begin to take possession of all the land which have be desert by the nephites and the city which have be leave desolate . nephi but behold there be no wild beast nor game in those land which have be desert by the nephites and there be no game for the robber save it be in the wilderness . nephi and the robber could not exist save it be in the wilderness for the want of food for the nephites have leave their land desolate and have gather their flock and their herd and all their substance and they be in one body . nephi therefore there be no chance for the robber to plunder and to obtain food save it be to come up in open battle against the nephites and the nephites be in one body and have so great a number and have reserve for themselves provision and horse and cattle and flock of every kind that they might subsist for the space of seven year in the which time they do hope to destroy the robber from off the face of the land and thus the eighteenth year do pass away . nephi and it come to pass that in the nineteenth year giddianhi find that it be expedient that he should go up to battle against the nephites for there be no way that they could subsist save it be to plunder and rob and murder . nephi and they durst not spread themselves upon the face of the land insomuch that they could raise grain lest the nephites should come upon them and slay them therefore giddianhi give commandment unto his army that in this year they should go up to battle against the nephites . nephi and it come to pass that they do come up to battle and it be in the sixth month and behold great and terrible be the day that they do come up to battle and they be gird about after the manner of robber and they have a lamb skin about their loin and they be dye in blood and their head be shorn and they have head plate upon them and great and terrible be the appearance of the army of giddianhi because of their armor and because of their be dye in blood . nephi and it come to pass that the army of the nephites when they saw the appearance of the army of giddianhi have all fall to the earth and do lift their cry to the lord their god that he would spare them and deliver them out of the hand of their enemy . nephi and it come to pass that when the army of giddianhi saw this they begin to shout with a loud voice because of their joy for they have suppose that the nephites have fall with fear because of the terror of their army . nephi but in this thing they be disappoint for the nephites do not fear them but they do fear their god and do supplicate him for protection therefore when the army of giddianhi do rush upon them they be prepare to meet them yea in the strength of the lord they do receive them . nephi and the battle commence in this the sixth month and great and terrible be the battle thereof yea great and terrible be the slaughter thereof insomuch that there never be know so great a slaughter among all the people of lehi since he leave jerusalem . nephi and notwithstanding the threatenings and the oath which giddianhi have make behold the nephites do beat them insomuch that they do fall back from before them . nephi and it come to pass that gidgiddoni command that his army should pursue them as far a the border of the wilderness and that they should not spare any that should fall into their hand by the way and thus they do pursue them and do slay them to the border of the wilderness even until they have fulfil the commandment of gidgiddoni . nephi and it come to pass that giddianhi who have stand and fight with boldness be pursue a he flee and be weary because of his much fighting he be overtake and slay . and thus be the end of giddianhi the robber . nephi and it come to pass that the army of the nephites do return again to their place of security . and it come to pass that this nineteenth year do pass away and the robber do not come again to battle neither do they come again in the twentieth year . nephi and in the twenty and first year they do not come up to battle but they come up on all side to lay siege round about the people of nephi for they do suppose that if they should cut off the people of nephi from their land and should hem them in on every side and if they should cut them off from all their outward privilege that they could cause them to yield themselves up accord to their wish . nephi now they have appoint unto themselves another leader whose name be zemnarihah therefore it be zemnarihah that do cause that this siege should take place . nephi but behold this be an advantage to the nephites for it be impossible for the robber to lay siege sufficiently long to have any effect upon the nephites because of their much provision which they have lay up in store nephi and because of the scantiness of provision among the robber for behold they have nothing save it be meat for their subsistence which meat they do obtain in the wilderness nephi and it come to pass that the wild game become scarce in the wilderness insomuch that the robber be about to perish with hunger . nephi and the nephites be continually march out by day and by night and fall upon their army and cut them off by thousand and by ten of thousand . nephi and thus it become the desire of the people of zemnarihah to withdraw from their design because of the great destruction which come upon them by night and by day . nephi and it come to pass that zemnarihah do give command unto his people that they should withdraw themselves from the siege and march into the furthermost part of the land northward . nephi and now gidgiddoni be aware of their design and knowing of their weakness because of the want of food and the great slaughter which have be make among them therefore he do send out his army in the night time and do cut off the way of their retreat and do place his army in the way of their retreat . nephi and this do they do in the night time and get on their march beyond the robber so that on the morrow when the robber begin their march they be meet by the army of the nephites both in their front and in their rear . nephi and the robber who be on the south be also cut off in their place of retreat . and all these thing be do by command of gidgiddoni . nephi and there be many thousand who do yield themselves up prisoner unto the nephites and the remainder of them be slay . nephi and their leader zemnarihah be take and hang upon a tree yea even upon the top thereof until he be dead . and when they have hang him until he be dead they do fell the tree to the earth and do cry with a loud voice say nephi may the lord preserve his people in righteousness and in holiness of heart that they may cause to be fell to the earth all who shall seek to slay them because of power and secret combination even a this man hath be fell to the earth . nephi and they do rejoice and cry again with one voice say may the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob protect this people in righteousness so long a they shall call on the name of their god for protection . nephi and it come to pass that they do break forth all a one in singing and praise their god for the great thing which he have do for them in preserve them from fall into the hand of their enemy . nephi yea they do cry hosanna to the most high god . and they do cry bless be the name of the lord god almighty the most high god . nephi and their heart be swell with joy unto the gush out of many tear because of the great goodness of god in deliver them out of the hand of their enemy and they know it be because of their repentance and their humility that they have be deliver from an everlasting destruction . nephi chapter nephi and now behold there be not a living soul among all the people of the nephites who do doubt in the least the word of all the holy prophet who have speak for they know that it must needs be that they must be fulfil . nephi and they know that it must be expedient that christ have come because of the many sign which have be give accord to the word of the prophet and because of the thing which have come to pass already they know that it must needs be that all thing should come to pass accord to that which have be speak . nephi therefore they do forsake all their sin and their abomination and their whoredom and do serve god with all diligence day and night . nephi and now it come to pass that when they have take all the robber prisoner insomuch that none do escape who be not slay they do cast their prisoner into prison and do cause the word of god to be preach unto them and as many a would repent of their sin and enter into a covenant that they would murder no more be set at liberty . nephi but as many a there be who do not enter into a covenant and who do still continue to have those secret murder in their heart yea as many a be find breathe out threatenings against their brother be condemn and punish accord to the law . nephi and thus they do put an end to all those wicked and secret and abominable combination in the which there be so much wickedness and so many murder commit . nephi and thus have the twenty and second year pass away and the twenty and third year also and the twenty and fourth and the twenty and fifth and thus have twenty and five year pass away . nephi and there have many thing transpire which in the eye of some would be great and marvelous nevertheless they can not all be write in this book yea this book can not contain even a hundredth part of what be do among so many people in the space of twenty and five year nephi but behold there be record which do contain all the proceeding of this people and a short but true account be give by nephi . nephi therefore i have make my record of these thing accord to the record of nephi which be engraven on the plate which be call the plate of nephi . nephi and behold i do make the record on plate which i have make with mine own hand . nephi and behold i be call mormon be call after the land of mormon the land in which alma do establish the church among the people yea the first church which be establish among them after their transgression . nephi behold i be a disciple of jesus christ the son of god . i have be call of him to declare his word among his people that they might have everlasting life . nephi and it hath become expedient that i accord to the will of god that the prayer of those who have go hence who be the holy one should be fulfil accord to their faith should make a record of these thing which have be do nephi yea a small record of that which hath take place from the time that lehi leave jerusalem even down until the present time . nephi therefore i do make my record from the account which have be give by those who be before me until the commencement of my day nephi and then i do make a record of the thing which i have see with mine own eye . nephi and i know the record which i make to be a just and a true record nevertheless there be many thing which accord to our language we be not able to write . nephi and now i make an end of my say which be of myself and proceed to give my account of the thing which have be before me . nephi i be mormon and a pure descendant of lehi . i have reason to bless my god and my savior jesus christ that he bring our father out of the land of jerusalem and no one know it save it be himself and those whom he bring out of that land and that he hath give me and my people so much knowledge unto the salvation of our soul . nephi surely he hath bless the house of jacob and hath be merciful unto the seed of joseph . nephi and insomuch a the child of lehi have keep his commandment he hath bless them and prosper them accord to his word . nephi yea and surely shall he again bring a remnant of the seed of joseph to the knowledge of the lord their god . nephi and as surely a the lord liveth will he gather in from the four quarter of the earth all the remnant of the seed of jacob who be scatter abroad upon all the face of the earth . nephi and a he hath covenant with all the house of jacob even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenant with the house of jacob be fulfil in his own due time unto the restore all the house of jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenant with them . nephi and then shall they know their redeemer who be jesus christ the son of god and then shall they be gather in from the four quarter of the earth unto their own land from whence they have be disperse yea a the lord liveth so shall it be . amen . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that the people of the nephites do all return to their own land in the twenty and sixth year every man with his family his flock and his herd his horse and his cattle and all thing whatsoever do belong unto them . nephi and it come to pass that they have not eat up all their provision therefore they do take with them all that they have not devour of all their grain of every kind and their gold and their silver and all their precious thing and they do return to their own land and their possession both on the north and on the south both on the land northward and on the land southward . nephi and they grant unto those robber who have enter into a covenant to keep the peace of the land who be desirous to remain lamanites land accord to their number that they might have with their labor wherewith to subsist upon and thus they do establish peace in all the land . nephi and they begin again to prosper and to wax great and the twenty and sixth and seventh year pass away and there be great order in the land and they have form their law accord to equity and justice . nephi and now there be nothing in all the land to hinder the people from prosper continually except they should fall into transgression . nephi and now it be gidgiddoni and the judge lachoneus and those who have be appoint leader who have establish this great peace in the land . nephi and it come to pass that there be many city build anew and there be many old city repair . nephi and there be many highway cast up and many road make which lead from city to city and from land to land and from place to place . nephi and thus pass away the twenty and eighth year and the people have continual peace . nephi but it come to pass in the twenty and ninth year there begin to be some disputings among the people and some be lift up unto pride and boasting because of their exceedingly great rich yea even unto great persecution nephi for there be many merchant in the land and also many lawyer and many officer . nephi and the people begin to be distinguish by rank accord to their rich and their chance for learn yea some be ignorant because of their poverty and others do receive great learning because of their rich . nephi some be lift up in pride and others be exceedingly humble some do return rail for rail while others would receive railing and persecution and all manner of affliction and would not turn and revile again but be humble and penitent before god . nephi and thus there become a great inequality in all the land insomuch that the church begin to be break up yea insomuch that in the thirtieth year the church be break up in all the land save it be among a few of the lamanites who be convert unto the true faith and they would not depart from it for they be firm and steadfast and immovable willing with all diligence to keep the commandment of the lord . nephi now the cause of this iniquity of the people be this satan have great power unto the stir up of the people to do all manner of iniquity and to the puff them up with pride tempt them to seek for power and authority and rich and the vain thing of the world . nephi and thus satan do lead away the heart of the people to do all manner of iniquity therefore they have enjoy peace but a few year . nephi and thus in the commencement of the thirtieth year the people have be deliver up for the space of a long time to be carry about by the temptation of the devil whithersoever he desire to carry them and to do whatsoever iniquity he desire they should and thus in the commencement of this the thirtieth year they be in a state of awful wickedness . nephi now they do not sin ignorantly for they know the will of god concern them for it have be teach unto them therefore they do wilfully rebel against god . nephi and now it be in the day of lachoneus the son of lachoneus for lachoneus do fill the seat of his father and do govern the people that year . nephi and there begin to be men inspire from heaven and send forth standing among the people in all the land preaching and testify boldly of the sin and iniquity of the people and testify unto them concern the redemption which the lord would make for his people or in other word the resurrection of christ and they do testify boldly of his death and suffering . nephi now there be many of the people who be exceedingly angry because of those who testify of these thing and those who be angry be chiefly the chief judge and they who have be high priest and lawyer yea all those who be lawyer be angry with those who testify of these thing . nephi now there be no lawyer nor judge nor high priest that could have power to condemn any one to death save their condemnation be sign by the governor of the land . nephi now there be many of those who testify of the thing pertain to christ who testify boldly who be take and put to death secretly by the judge that the knowledge of their death come not unto the governor of the land until after their death . nephi now behold this be contrary to the law of the land that any man should be put to death except they have power from the governor of the land nephi therefore a complaint come up unto the land of zarahemla to the governor of the land against these judge who have condemn the prophet of the lord unto death not accord to the law . nephi now it come to pass that they be take and bring up before the judge to be judge of the crime which they have do accord to the law which have be give by the people . nephi now it come to pass that those judge have many friend and kindred and the remainder yea even almost all the lawyer and the high priest do gather themselves together and unite with the kindred of those judge who be to be try accord to the law . nephi and they do enter into a covenant one with another yea even into that covenant which be give by them of old which covenant be give and administer by the devil to combine against all righteousness . nephi therefore they do combine against the people of the lord and enter into a covenant to destroy them and to deliver those who be guilty of murder from the grasp of justice which be about to be administer accord to the law . nephi and they do set at defiance the law and the right of their country and they do covenant one with another to destroy the governor and to establish a king over the land that the land should no more be at liberty but should be subject unto king . nephi chapter nephi now behold i will show unto you that they do not establish a king over the land but in this same year yea the thirtieth year they do destroy upon the judgment seat yea do murder the chief judge of the land . nephi and the people be divide one against another and they do separate one from another into tribes every man accord to his family and his kindred and friend and thus they do destroy the government of the land . nephi and every tribe do appoint a chief or a leader over them and thus they become tribe and leader of tribe . nephi now behold there be no man among them save he have much family and many kindred and friend therefore their tribe become exceedingly great . nephi now all this be do and there be no war a yet among them and all this iniquity have come upon the people because they do yield themselves unto the power of satan . nephi and the regulation of the government be destroy because of the secret combination of the friend and kindred of those who murder the prophet . nephi and they do cause a great contention in the land insomuch that the more righteous part of the people have nearly all become wicked yea there be but few righteous men among them . nephi and thus six year have not pass away since the more part of the people have turn from their righteousness like the dog to his vomit or like the sow to her wallowing in the mire . nephi now this secret combination which have bring so great iniquity upon the people do gather themselves together and do place at their head a man whom they do call jacob nephi and they do call him their king therefore he become a king over this wicked band and he be one of the chiefest who have give his voice against the prophet who testify of jesus . nephi and it come to pass that they be not so strong in number a the tribe of the people who be unite together save it be their leader do establish their law every one accord to his tribe nevertheless they be enemy notwithstanding they be not a righteous people yet they be unite in the hatred of those who have enter into a covenant to destroy the government . nephi therefore jacob see that their enemy be more numerous than they he be the king of the band therefore he command his people that they should take their flight into the northernmost part of the land and there build up unto themselves a kingdom until they be join by dissenter for he flatter them that there would be many dissenter and they become sufficiently strong to contend with the tribe of the people and they do so . nephi and so speedy be their march that it could not be impede until they have go forth out of the reach of the people . and thus end the thirtieth year and thus be the affair of the people of nephi . nephi and it come to pass in the thirty and first year that they be divide into tribes every man accord to his family kindred and friend nevertheless they have come to an agreement that they would not go to war one with another but they be not unite a to their law and their manner of government for they be establish accord to the mind of those who be their chief and their leader . but they do establish very strict law that one tribe should not trespass against another insomuch that in some degree they have peace in the land nevertheless their heart be turn from the lord their god and they do stone the prophet and do cast them out from among them . nephi and it come to pass that nephi have be visit by angel and also the voice of the lord therefore have see angel and be eye witness and have have power give unto him that he might know concern the ministry of christ and also be eye witness to their quick return from righteousness unto their wickedness and abomination nephi therefore be grieve for the hardness of their heart and the blindness of their mind go forth among them in that same year and begin to testify boldly repentance and remission of sin through faith on the lord jesus christ . nephi and he do minister many thing unto them and all of them can not be write and a part of them would not suffice therefore they be not write in this book . and nephi do minister with power and with great authority . nephi and it come to pass that they be angry with him even because he have great power than they for it be not possible that they could disbelieve his word for so great be his faith on the lord jesus christ that angel do minister unto him daily . nephi and in the name of jesus do he cast out devil and unclean spirit and even his brother do he raise from the dead after he have be stone and suffer death by the people . nephi and the people saw it and do witness of it and be angry with him because of his power and he do also do many more miracle in the sight of the people in the name of jesus . nephi and it come to pass that the thirty and first year do pass away and there be but few who be convert unto the lord but as many a be convert do truly signify unto the people that they have be visit by the power and spirit of god which be in jesus christ in whom they believe . nephi and as many a have devil cast out from them and be heal of their sickness and their infirmity do truly manifest unto the people that they have be work upon by the spirit of god and have be heal and they do show forth sign also and do do some miracle among the people . nephi thus pass away the thirty and second year also . and nephi do cry unto the people in the commencement of the thirty and third year and he do preach unto them repentance and remission of sin . nephi now i would have you to remember also that there be none who be bring unto repentance who be not baptize with water . nephi therefore there be ordain of nephi men unto this ministry that all such a should come unto them should be baptize with water and this a a witness and a testimony before god and unto the people that they have repent and receive a remission of their sin . nephi and there be many in the commencement of this year that be baptize unto repentance and thus the more part of the year do pass away . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that accord to our record and we know our record to be true for behold it be a just man who do keep the record for he truly do many miracle in the name of jesus and there be not any man who could do a miracle in the name of jesus save he be cleanse every whit from his iniquity nephi and now it come to pass if there be no mistake make by this man in the reckoning of our time the thirty and third year have pass away nephi and the people begin to look with great earnestness for the sign which have be give by the prophet samuel the lamanite yea for the time that there should be darkness for the space of three day over the face of the land . nephi and there begin to be great doubtings and disputation among the people notwithstanding so many sign have be give . nephi and it come to pass in the thirty and fourth year in the first month on the fourth day of the month there arise a great storm such an one a never have be know in all the land . nephi and there be also a great and terrible tempest and there be terrible thunder insomuch that it do shake the whole earth a if it be about to divide asunder . nephi and there be exceedingly sharp lightning such a never have be know in all the land . nephi and the city of zarahemla do take fire . nephi and the city of moroni do sink into the depth of the sea and the inhabitant thereof be drown . nephi and the earth be carry up upon the city of moronihah that in the place of the city there become a great mountain . nephi and there be a great and terrible destruction in the land southward . nephi but behold there be a more great and terrible destruction in the land northward for behold the whole face of the land be change because of the tempest and the whirlwind and the thunderings and the lightning and the exceedingly great quaking of the whole earth nephi and the highway be break up and the level road be spoil and many smooth place become rough . nephi and many great and notable city be sunk and many be burn and many be shake till the building thereof have fall to the earth and the inhabitant thereof be slay and the place be leave desolate . nephi and there be some city which remain but the damage thereof be exceedingly great and there be many of them who be slain . nephi and there be some who be carry away in the whirlwind and whither they go no man knoweth save they know that they be carry away . nephi and thus the face of the whole earth become deformed because of the tempest and the thunderings and the lightning and the quaking of the earth . nephi and behold the rock be rent in twain they be break up upon the face of the whole earth insomuch that they be find in broken fragment and in seam and in crack upon all the face of the land . nephi and it come to pass that when the thunderings and the lightning and the storm and the tempest and the quakings of the earth do cease for behold they do last for about the space of three hour and it be say by some that the time be great nevertheless all these great and terrible thing be do in about the space of three hour and then behold there be darkness upon the face of the land . nephi and it come to pass that there be thick darkness upon all the face of the land insomuch that the inhabitant thereof who have not fall could feel the vapor of darkness nephi and there could be no light because of the darkness neither candle neither torch neither could there be fire kindle with their fine and exceedingly dry wood so that there could not be any light at all nephi and there be not any light see neither fire nor glimmer neither the sun nor the moon nor the star for so great be the mist of darkness which be upon the face of the land . nephi and it come to pass that it do last for the space of three day that there be no light see and there be great mourning and howling and weeping among all the people continually yea great be the groanings of the people because of the darkness and the great destruction which have come upon them . nephi and in one place they be hear to cry say o that we have repent before this great and terrible day and then would our brother have be spar and they would not have be burn in that great city zarahemla . nephi and in another place they be hear to cry and mourn say o that we have repent before this great and terrible day and have not kill and stone the prophet and cast them out then would our mother and our fair daughter and our child have be spar and not have be bury up in that great city moronihah . and thus be the howling of the people great and terrible . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that there be a voice heard among all the inhabitant of the earth upon all the face of this land cry nephi wo wo wo unto this people wo unto the inhabitant of the whole earth except they shall repent for the devil laugheth and his angel rejoice because of the slain of the fair son and daughter of my people and it be because of their iniquity and abomination that they be fall ! nephi behold that great city zarahemla have i burn with fire and the inhabitant thereof . nephi and behold that great city moroni have i cause to be sink in the depth of the sea and the inhabitant thereof to be drown . nephi and behold that great city moronihah have i cover with earth and the inhabitant thereof to hide their iniquity and their abomination from before my face that the blood of the prophet and the saint shall not come any more unto me against them . nephi and behold the city of gilgal have i cause to be sink and the inhabitant thereof to be bury up in the depth of the earth nephi yea and the city of onihah and the inhabitant thereof and the city of mocum and the inhabitant thereof and the city of jerusalem and the inhabitant thereof and water have i cause to come up in the stead thereof to hide their wickedness and abomination from before my face that the blood of the prophet and the saint shall not come up any more unto me against them . nephi and behold the city of gadiandi and the city of gadiomnah and the city of jacob and the city of gimgimno all these have i cause to be sink and make hill and valley in the place thereof and the inhabitant thereof have i bury up in the depth of the earth to hide their wickedness and abomination from before my face that the blood of the prophet and the saint should not come up any more unto me against them . nephi and behold that great city jacobugath which be inhabit by the people of king jacob have i cause to be burn with fire because of their sin and their wickedness which be above all the wickedness of the whole earth because of their secret murder and combination for it be they that do destroy the peace of my people and the government of the land therefore i do cause them to be burn to destroy them from before my face that the blood of the prophet and the saint should not come up unto me any more against them . nephi and behold the city of laman and the city of josh and the city of gad and the city of kishkumen have i cause to be burn with fire and the inhabitant thereof because of their wickedness in cast out the prophet and stone those whom i do send to declare unto them concern their wickedness and their abomination . nephi and because they do cast them all out that there be none righteous among them i do send down fire and destroy them that their wickedness and abomination might be hide from before my face that the blood of the prophet and the saint whom i send among them might not cry unto me from the ground against them . nephi and many great destruction have i cause to come upon this land and upon this people because of their wickedness and their abomination . nephi o all ye that be spar because ye be more righteous than they will ye not now return unto me and repent of your sin and be convert that i may heal you ? nephi yea verily i say unto you if ye will come unto me ye shall have eternal life . behold mine arm of mercy be extend towards you and whosoever will come him will i receive and bless be those who come unto me . nephi behold i be jesus christ the son of god . i create the heaven and the earth and all thing that in them be . i be with the father from the beginning . i be in the father and the father in me and in me hath the father glorify his name . nephi i come unto my own and my own receive me not . and the scripture concern my come be fulfil . nephi and as many a have receive me to them have i give to become the son of god and even so will i to as many a shall believe on my name for behold by me redemption cometh and in me be the law of moses fulfil . nephi i be the light and the life of the world . i be alpha and omega the beginning and the end . nephi and ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood yea your sacrifice and your burnt offering shall be do away for i will accept none of your sacrifice and your burnt offering . nephi and ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit . and whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit him will i baptize with fire and with the holy ghost even a the lamanites because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion be baptize with fire and with the holy ghost and they know it not . nephi behold i have come unto the world to bring redemption unto the world to save the world from sin . nephi therefore whoso repenteth and cometh unto me a a little child him will i receive for of such be the kingdom of god . behold for such i have lay down my life and have take it up again therefore repent and come unto me ye end of the earth and be save . nephi chapter nephi and now behold it come to pass that all the people of the land do hear these saying and do witness of it . and after these saying there be silence in the land for the space of many hour nephi for so great be the astonishment of the people that they do cease lamenting and howling for the loss of their kindred which have be slay therefore there be silence in all the land for the space of many hour . nephi and it come to pass that there come a voice again unto the people and all the people do hear and do witness of it say nephi o ye people of these great city which have fall who be descendant of jacob yea who be of the house of israel how oft have i gather you a a hen gathereth her chicken under her wing and have nourish you . nephi and again how oft would i have gather you a a hen gathereth her chicken under her wing yea o ye people of the house of israel who have fall yea o ye people of the house of israel ye that dwell at jerusalem a ye that have fall yea how oft would i have gather you a a hen gathereth her chicken and ye would not . nephi o ye house of israel whom i have spar how oft will i gather you a a hen gathereth her chicken under her wing if ye will repent and return unto me with full purpose of heart . nephi but if not o house of israel the place of your dwelling shall become desolate until the time of the fulfilling of the covenant to your father . nephi and now it come to pass that after the people have hear these word behold they begin to weep and howl again because of the loss of their kindred and friend . nephi and it come to pass that thus do the three day pass away . and it be in the morning and the darkness disperse from off the face of the land and the earth do cease to tremble and the rock do cease to rend and the dreadful groanings do cease and all the tumultuous noise do pass away . nephi and the earth do cleave together again that it stand and the mourning and the weeping and the wailing of the people who be spar alive do cease and their mourning be turn into joy and their lamentation into the praise and thanksgiving unto the lord jesus christ their redeemer . nephi and thus far be the scripture fulfil which have be speak by the prophet . nephi and it be the more righteous part of the people who be save and it be they who receive the prophet and stone them not and it be they who have not shed the blood of the saint who be spar nephi and they be spar and be not sunk and bury up in the earth and they be not drown in the depth of the sea and they be not burn by fire neither be they fall upon and crush to death and they be not carry away in the whirlwind neither be they overpower by the vapor of smoke and of darkness . nephi and now whoso readeth let him understand he that hath the scripture let him search them and see and behold if all these death and destruction by fire and by smoke and by tempest and by whirlwind and by the opening of the earth to receive them and all these thing be not unto the fulfilling of the prophecy of many of the holy prophet . nephi behold i say unto you yea many have testify of these thing at the come of christ and be slay because they testify of these thing . nephi yea the prophet zeno do testify of these thing and also zenock spake concern these thing because they testify particularly concern u who be the remnant of their seed . nephi behold our father jacob also testify concern a remnant of the seed of joseph . and behold be not we a remnant of the seed of joseph ? and these thing which testify of u be they not write upon the plate of brass which our father lehi bring out of jerusalem ? nephi and it come to pass that in the end of the thirty and fourth year behold i will show unto you that the people of nephi who be spar and also those who have be call lamanites who have be spar do have great favor show unto them and great blessing pour out upon their head insomuch that soon after the ascension of christ into heaven he do truly manifest himself unto them nephi show his body unto them and minister unto them and an account of his ministry shall be give hereafter . therefore for this time i make an end of my saying . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that there be a great multitude gather together of the people of nephi round about the temple which be in the land bountiful and they be marvel and wonder one with another and be show one to another the great and marvelous change which have take place . nephi and they be also converse about this jesus christ of whom the sign have be give concern his death . nephi and it come to pass that while they be thus converse one with another they hear a voice a if it come out of heaven and they cast their eye round about for they understand not the voice which they hear and it be not a harsh voice neither be it a loud voice nevertheless and notwithstanding it be a small voice it do pierce them that do hear to the center insomuch that there be no part of their frame that it do not cause to quake yea it do pierce them to the very soul and do cause their heart to burn . nephi and it come to pass that again they hear the voice and they understand it not . nephi and again the third time they do hear the voice and do open their ear to hear it and their eye be towards the sound thereof and they do look steadfastly towards heaven from whence the sound come . nephi and behold the third time they do understand the voice which they hear and it say unto them nephi behold my beloved son in whom i be well pleased in whom i have glorify my name hear ye him . nephi and it come to pass a they understand they cast their eye up again towards heaven and behold they saw a man descend out of heaven and he be clothe in a white robe and he come down and stand in the midst of them and the eye of the whole multitude be turn upon him and they durst not open their mouth even one to another and wist not what it mean for they think it be an angel that have appear unto them . nephi and it come to pass that he stretch forth his hand and spake unto the people say nephi behold i be jesus christ whom the prophet testify shall come into the world . nephi and behold i be the light and the life of the world and i have drink out of that bitter cup which the father hath give me and have glorify the father in take upon me the sin of the world in the which i have suffer the will of the father in all thing from the beginning . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word the whole multitude fell to the earth for they remember that it have be prophesy among them that christ should show himself unto them after his ascension into heaven . nephi and it come to pass that the lord spake unto them say nephi arise and come forth unto me that ye may thrust your hand into my side and also that ye may feel the print of the nail in my hand and in my foot that ye may know that i be the god of israel and the god of the whole earth and have be slay for the sin of the world . nephi and it come to pass that the multitude go forth and thrust their hand into his side and do feel the print of the nail in his hand and in his foot and this they do do go forth one by one until they have all go forth and do see with their eye and do feel with their hand and do know of a surety and do bear record that it be he of whom it be write by the prophet that should come . nephi and when they have all go forth and have witness for themselves they do cry out with one accord say nephi hosanna ! bless be the name of the most high god ! and they do fall down at the foot of jesus and do worship him . nephi and it come to pass that he spake unto nephi for nephi be among the multitude and he command him that he should come forth . nephi and nephi arose and go forth and bow himself before the lord and do kiss his foot . nephi and the lord command him that he should arise . and he arise and stand before him . nephi and the lord say unto him i give unto you power that ye shall baptize this people when i be again ascend into heaven . nephi and again the lord call others and say unto them likewise and he give unto them power to baptize . and he say unto them on this wise shall ye baptize and there shall be no disputation among you . nephi verily i say unto you that whoso repenteth of his sin through your word and desireth to be baptize in my name on this wise shall ye baptize them behold ye shall go down and stand in the water and in my name shall ye baptize them . nephi and now behold these be the word which ye shall say call them by name say nephi have authority give me of jesus christ i baptize you in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost . amen . nephi and then shall ye immerse them in the water and come forth again out of the water . nephi and after this manner shall ye baptize in my name for behold verily i say unto you that the father and the son and the holy ghost be one and i be in the father and the father in me and the father and i be one . nephi and accord a i have command you thus shall ye baptize . and there shall be no disputation among you a there have hitherto be neither shall there be disputation among you concern the point of my doctrine a there have hitherto be . nephi for verily verily i say unto you he that hath the spirit of contention be not of me but be of the devil who be the father of contention and he stirreth up the heart of men to contend with anger one with another . nephi behold this be not my doctrine to stir up the heart of men with anger one against another but this be my doctrine that such thing should be do away . nephi behold verily verily i say unto you i will declare unto you my doctrine . nephi and this be my doctrine and it be the doctrine which the father hath give unto me and i bear record of the father and the father beareth record of me and the holy ghost beareth record of the father and me and i bear record that the father commandeth all men everywhere to repent and believe in me . nephi and whoso believeth in me and be baptize the same shall be save and they be they who shall inherit the kingdom of god . nephi and whoso believeth not in me and be not baptize shall be damn . nephi verily verily i say unto you that this be my doctrine and i bear record of it from the father and whoso believeth in me believeth in the father also and unto him will the father bear record of me for he will visit him with fire and with the holy ghost . nephi and thus will the father bear record of me and the holy ghost will bear record unto him of the father and me for the father and i and the holy ghost be one . nephi and again i say unto you ye must repent and become a a little child and be baptize in my name or ye can in nowise receive these thing . nephi and again i say unto you ye must repent and be baptize in my name and become a a little child or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of god . nephi verily verily i say unto you that this be my doctrine and whoso buildeth upon this buildeth upon my rock and the gate of hell shall not prevail against them . nephi and whoso shall declare more or less than this and establish it for my doctrine the same cometh of evil and be not build upon my rock but he buildeth upon a sandy foundation and the gate of hell stand open to receive such when the flood come and the wind beat upon them . nephi therefore go forth unto this people and declare the word which i have speak unto the end of the earth . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word unto nephi and to those who have be call now the number of them who have be call and receive power and authority to baptize be twelve and behold he stretch forth his hand unto the multitude and cry unto them say bless be ye if ye shall give heed unto the word of these twelve whom i have choose from among you to minister unto you and to be your servant and unto them i have give power that they may baptize you with water and after that ye be baptize with water behold i will baptize you with fire and with the holy ghost therefore bless be ye if ye shall believe in me and be baptize after that ye have see me and know that i be . nephi and again more bless be they who shall believe in your word because that ye shall testify that ye have see me and that ye know that i be . yea bless be they who shall believe in your word and come down into the depth of humility and be baptize for they shall be visit with fire and with the holy ghost and shall receive a remission of their sin . nephi yea bless be the poor in spirit who come unto me for theirs be the kingdom of heaven . nephi and again bless be all they that mourn for they shall be comfort . nephi and bless be the meek for they shall inherit the earth . nephi and bless be all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be fill with the holy ghost . nephi and bless be the merciful for they shall obtain mercy . nephi and bless be all the pure in heart for they shall see god . nephi and bless be all the peacemaker for they shall be call the child of god . nephi and bless be all they who be persecute for my name 's sake for theirs be the kingdom of heaven . nephi and bless be ye when men shall revile you and persecute and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake nephi for ye shall have great joy and be exceedingly glad for great shall be your reward in heaven for so persecuted they the prophet who be before you . nephi verily verily i say unto you i give unto you to be the salt of the earth but if the salt shall lose it savor wherewith shall the earth be salt ? the salt shall be thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men . nephi verily verily i say unto you i give unto you to be the light of this people . a city that be set on a hill can not be hide . nephi behold do men light a candle and put it under a bushel ? nay but on a candlestick and it giveth light to all that be in the house nephi therefore let your light so shine before this people that they may see your good work and glorify your father who be in heaven . nephi think not that i be come to destroy the law or the prophet . i be not come to destroy but to fulfil nephi for verily i say unto you one jot nor tittle hath not pass away from the law but in me it hath all be fulfil . nephi and behold i have give you the law and the commandment of my father that ye shall believe in me and that ye shall repent of your sin and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit . behold ye have the commandment before you and the law be fulfil . nephi therefore come unto me and be ye save for verily i say unto you that except ye shall keep my commandment which i have command you at this time ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven . nephi ye have hear that it hath be say by them of old time and it be also write before you that thou shalt not kill and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of god nephi but i say unto you that whosoever be angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment . and whosoever shall say to his brother raca shall be in danger of the council and whosoever shall say thou fool shall be in danger of hell fire . nephi therefore if ye shall come unto me or shall desire to come unto me and rememberest that thy brother hast aught against thee nephi go thy way unto thy brother and first be reconcile to thy brother and then come unto me with full purpose of heart and i will receive you . nephi agree with thine adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him lest at any time he shall get thee and thou shalt be cast into prison . nephi verily verily i say unto thee thou shalt by no mean come out thence until thou hast pay the uttermost senine . and while ye be in prison can ye pay even one senine ? verily verily i say unto you nay . nephi behold it be write by them of old time that thou shalt not commit adultery nephi but i say unto you that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery already in his heart . nephi behold i give unto you a commandment that ye suffer none of these thing to enter into your heart nephi for it be well that ye should deny yourselves of these thing wherein ye will take up your cross than that ye should be cast into hell . nephi it hath be write that whosoever shall put away his wife let him give her a writing of divorcement . nephi verily verily i say unto you that whosoever shall put away his wife save for the cause of fornication causeth her to commit adultery and whoso shall marry her who be divorce committeth adultery . nephi and again it be write thou shalt not forswear thyself but shalt perform unto the lord thine oaths nephi but verily verily i say unto you swear not at all neither by heaven for it be god 's throne nephi nor by the earth for it be his footstool nephi neither shalt thou swear by thy head because thou canst not make one hair black or white nephi but let your communication be yea yea nay nay for whatsoever cometh of more than these be evil . nephi and behold it be write an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth nephi but i say unto you that ye shall not resist evil but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek turn to him the other also nephi and if any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat let him have thy cloak also nephi and whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile go with him twain . nephi give to him that asketh thee and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away . nephi and behold it be write also that thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy nephi but i say unto you love your enemy bless them that curse you do good to them that hate you and pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you nephi that ye may be the child of your father who be in heaven for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good . nephi therefore those thing which be of old time which be under the law in me be all fulfil . nephi old thing be do away and all thing have become new . nephi therefore i would that ye should be perfect even a i or your father who be in heaven be perfect . nephi chapter nephi verily verily i say that i would that ye should do alms unto the poor but take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be see of them otherwise ye have no reward of your father who be in heaven . nephi therefore when ye shall do your alms do not sound a trumpet before you a will hypocrite do in the synagogue and in the street that they may have glory of men . verily i say unto you they have their reward . nephi but when thou doest alms let not thy leave hand know what thy right hand doeth nephi that thine alms may be in secret and thy father who seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly . nephi and when thou prayest thou shalt not do a the hypocrite for they love to pray stand in the synagogue and in the corner of the street that they may be see of men . verily i say unto you they have their reward . nephi but thou when thou prayest enter into thy closet and when thou hast shut thy door pray to thy father who be in secret and thy father who seeth in secret shall reward thee openly . nephi but when ye pray use not vain repetition a the heathen for they think that they shall be hear for their much speaking . nephi be not ye therefore like unto them for your father knoweth what thing ye have need of before ye ask him . nephi after this manner therefore pray ye our father who art in heaven hallow be thy name . nephi thy will be do on earth a it be in heaven . nephi and forgive u our debt a we forgive our debtor . nephi and lead u not into temptation but deliver u from evil . nephi for thine be the kingdom and the power and the glory forever . amen . nephi for if ye forgive men their trespass your heavenly father will also forgive you nephi but if ye forgive not men their trespass neither will your father forgive your trespass . nephi moreover when ye fast be not a the hypocrite of a sad countenance for they disfigure their face that they may appear unto men to fast . verily i say unto you they have their reward . nephi but thou when thou fast anoint thy head and wash thy face nephi that thou appear not unto men to fast but unto thy father who be in secret and thy father who seeth in secret shall reward thee openly . nephi lay not up for yourselves treasure upon earth where moth and rust doth corrupt and thief break through and steal nephi but lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thief do not break through nor steal . nephi for where your treasure be there will your heart be also . nephi the light of the body be the eye if therefore thine eye be single thy whole body shall be full of light . nephi but if thine eye be evil thy whole body shall be full of darkness . if therefore the light that be in thee be darkness how great be that darkness ! nephi no man can serve two master for either he will hate the one and love the other or else he will hold to the one and despise the other . ye can not serve god and mammon . nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he look upon the twelve whom he have choose and say unto them remember the word which i have speak . for behold ye be they whom i have choose to minister unto this people . therefore i say unto you take no thought for your life what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink nor yet for your body what ye shall put on . be not the life more than meat and the body than raiment ? nephi behold the fowl of the air for they sow not neither do they reap nor gather into barn yet your heavenly father feedeth them . be ye not much good than they ? nephi which of you by take thought can add one cubit unto his stature ? nephi and why take ye thought for raiment ? consider the lily of the field how they grow they toil not neither do they spin nephi and yet i say unto you that even solomon in all his glory be not array like one of these . nephi wherefore if god so clothe the grass of the field which today be and tomorrow be cast into the oven even so will he clothe you if ye be not of little faith . nephi therefore take no thought say what shall we eat ? or what shall we drink ? or wherewithal shall we be clothe ? nephi for your heavenly father knoweth that ye have need of all these thing . nephi but seek ye first the kingdom of god and his righteousness and all these thing shall be add unto you . nephi take therefore no thought for the morrow for the morrow shall take thought for the thing of itself . sufficient be the day unto the evil thereof . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he turn again to the multitude and do open his mouth unto them again say verily verily i say unto you judge not that ye be not judge . nephi for with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judge and with what measure ye mete it shall be measure to you again . nephi and why beholdest thou the mote that be in thy brother 's eye but considerest not the beam that be in thine own eye ? nephi or how wilt thou say to thy brother let me pull the mote out of thine eye and behold a beam be in thine own eye ? nephi thou hypocrite first cast the beam out of thine own eye and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brother 's eye . nephi give not that which be holy unto the dog neither cast ye your pearl before swine l they trample them under their foot and turn again and rend you . nephi ask and it shall be give unto you seek and ye shall find knock and it shall be open unto you . nephi for every one that asketh receiveth and he that seeketh findeth and to him that knocketh it shall be open . nephi or what man be there of you who if his son ask bread will give him a stone ? nephi or if he ask a fish will he give him a serpent ? nephi if ye then be evil know how to give good gift unto your child how much more shall your father who be in heaven give good thing to them that ask him ? nephi therefore all thing whatsoever ye would that men should do to you do ye even so to them for this be the law and the prophet . nephi enter ye in at the strait gate for wide be the gate and broad be the way which leadeth to destruction and many there be who go in thereat nephi because strait be the gate and narrow be the way which leadeth unto life and few there be that find it . nephi beware of false prophet who come to you in sheep 's clothing but inwardly they be raven wolf . nephi ye shall know them by their fruit . do men gather grape of thorn or fig of thistle ? nephi even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit . nephi a good tree can not bring forth evil fruit neither a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit . nephi every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit be hew down and cast into the fire . nephi wherefore by their fruit ye shall know them . nephi not every one that saith unto me lord lord shall enter into the kingdom of heaven but he that doeth the will of my father who be in heaven . nephi many will say to me in that day lord lord have we not prophesy in thy name and in thy name have cast out devil and in thy name do many wonderful work ? nephi and then will i profess unto them i never know you depart from me ye that work iniquity . nephi therefore whoso heareth these saying of mine and doeth them i will liken him unto a wise man who build his house upon a rock nephi and the rain descend and the flood come and the wind blow and beat upon that house and it fell not for it be found upon a rock . nephi and every one that heareth these saying of mine and doeth them not shall be liken unto a foolish man who build his house upon the sand nephi and the rain descend and the flood come and the wind blow and beat upon that house and it fell and great be the fall of it . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have end these saying he cast his eye round about on the multitude and say unto them behold ye have hear the thing which i teach before i ascend to my father therefore whoso remembereth these saying of mine and doeth them him will i raise up at the last day . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have say these word he perceive that there be some among them who marvel and wonder what he would concern the law of moses for they understand not the say that old thing have pass away and that all thing have become new . nephi and he say unto them marvel not that i say unto you that old thing have pass away and that all thing have become new . nephi behold i say unto you that the law be fulfil that be give unto moses . nephi behold i be he that give the law and i be he who covenant with my people israel therefore the law in me be fulfil for i have come to fulfil the law therefore it hath an end . nephi behold i do not destroy the prophet for as many a have not be fulfil in me verily i say unto you shall all be fulfil . nephi and because i say unto you that old thing have pass away i do not destroy that which hath be speak concern thing which be to come . nephi for behold the covenant which i have make with my people be not all fulfil but the law which be give unto moses hath an end in me . nephi behold i be the law and the light . look unto me and endure to the end and ye shall live for unto him that endureth to the end will i give eternal life . nephi behold i have give unto you the commandment therefore keep my commandment . and this be the law and the prophet for they truly testified of me . nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he say unto those twelve whom he have choose nephi ye be my disciple and ye be a light unto this people who be a remnant of the house of joseph . nephi and behold this be the land of your inheritance and the father hath give it unto you . nephi and not at any time hath the father give me commandment that i should tell it unto your brother at jerusalem . nephi neither at any time hath the father give me commandment that i should tell unto them concern the other tribe of the house of israel whom the father hath lead away out of the land . nephi this much do the father command me that i should tell unto them nephi that other sheep i have which be not of this fold them also i must bring and they shall hear my voice and there shall be one fold and one shepherd . nephi and now because of stiffneckedness and unbelief they understand not my word therefore i be command to say no more of the father concern this thing unto them . nephi but verily i say unto you that the father hath command me and i tell it unto you that ye be separate from among them because of their iniquity therefore it be because of their iniquity that they know not of you . nephi and verily i say unto you again that the other tribes hath the father separate from them and it be because of their iniquity that they know not of them . nephi and verily i say unto you that ye be they of whom i say other sheep i have which be not of this fold them also i must bring and they shall hear my voice and there shall be one fold and one shepherd . nephi and they understand me not for they suppose it have be the gentile for they understand not that the gentile should be convert through their preaching . nephi and they understand me not that i say they shall hear my voice and they understand me not that the gentile should not at any time hear my voice that i should not manifest myself unto them save it be by the holy ghost . nephi but behold ye have both hear my voice and see me and ye be my sheep and ye be number among those whom the father hath give me . nephi chapter nephi and verily verily i say unto you that i have other sheep which be not of this land neither of the land of jerusalem neither in any part of that land round about whither i have be to minister . nephi for they of whom i speak be they who have not a yet hear my voice neither have i at any time manifest myself unto them . nephi but i have receive a commandment of the father that i shall go unto them and that they shall hear my voice and shall be number among my sheep that there may be one fold and one shepherd therefore i go to show myself unto them . nephi and i command you that ye shall write these saying after i be go that if it so be that my people at jerusalem they who have see me and be with me in my ministry do not ask the father in my name that they may receive a knowledge of you by the holy ghost and also of the other tribe whom they know not of that these saying which ye shall write shall be keep and shall be manifest unto the gentile that through the fulness of the gentile the remnant of their seed who shall be scatter forth upon the face of the earth because of their unbelief may be bring in or may be bring to a knowledge of me their redeemer . nephi and then will i gather them in from the four quarter of the earth and then will i fulfill the covenant which the father hath make unto all the people of the house of israel . nephi and bless be the gentile because of their belief in me in and of the holy ghost which witness unto them of me and of the father . nephi behold because of their belief in me saith the father and because of the unbelief of you o house of israel in the latter day shall the truth come unto the gentile that the fulness of these thing shall be make know unto them . nephi but wo saith the father unto the unbelieving of the gentile for notwithstanding they have come forth upon the face of this land and have scatter my people who be of the house of israel and my people who be of the house of israel have be cast out from among them and have be tread under foot by them nephi and because of the mercy of the father unto the gentile and also the judgment of the father upon my people who be of the house of israel verily verily i say unto you that after all this and i have cause my people who be of the house of israel to be smite and to be afflict and to be slay and to be cast out from among them and to become hat by them and to become a hiss and a byword among them nephi and thus commandeth the father that i should say unto you at that day when the gentile shall sin against my gospel and shall reject the fulness of my gospel and shall be lift up in the pride of their heart above all nation and above all the people of the whole earth and shall be fill with all manner of lying and of deceit and of mischief and all manner of hypocrisy and murder and priestcraft and whoredom and of secret abomination and if they shall do all those thing and shall reject the fulness of my gospel behold saith the father i will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them . nephi and then will i remember my covenant which i have make unto my people o house of israel and i will bring my gospel unto them . nephi and i will show unto thee o house of israel that the gentile shall not have power over you but i will remember my covenant unto you o house of israel and ye shall come unto the knowledge of the fulness of my gospel . nephi but if the gentile will repent and return unto me saith the father behold they shall be number among my people o house of israel . nephi and i will not suffer my people who be of the house of israel to go through among them and tread them down saith the father . nephi but if they will not turn unto me and hearken unto my voice i will suffer them yea i will suffer my people o house of israel that they shall go through among them and shall tread them down and they shall be a salt that hath lose it savor which be thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of my people o house of israel . nephi verily verily i say unto you thus hath the father command me that i should give unto this people this land for their inheritance . nephi and then the word of the prophet isaiah shall be fulfil which say nephi thy watchman shall lift up the voice with the voice together shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye when the lord shall bring again zion . nephi break forth into joy sing together ye waste place of jerusalem for the lord hath comfort his people he hath redeem jerusalem . nephi the lord hath make bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nation and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of god . nephi chapter nephi behold now it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he look round about again on the multitude and he say unto them behold my time be at hand . nephi i perceive that ye be weak that ye can not understand all my word which i be command of the father to speak unto you at this time . nephi therefore go ye unto your home and ponder upon the thing which i have say and ask of the father in my name that ye may understand and prepare your mind for the morrow and i come unto you again . nephi but now i go unto the father and also to show myself unto the lost tribe of israel for they be not lose unto the father for he knoweth whither he hath take them . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have thus speak he cast his eye round about again on the multitude and beheld they be in tear and do look steadfastly upon him a if they would ask him to tarry a little longer with them . nephi and he say unto them behold my bowel be fill with compassion towards you . nephi have ye any that be sick among you ? bring them hither . have ye any that be lame or blind or halt or maim or leprous or that be wither or that be deaf or that be afflict in any manner ? bring them hither and i will heal them for i have compassion upon you my bowel be fill with mercy . nephi for i perceive that ye desire that i should show unto you what i have do unto your brother at jerusalem for i see that your faith be sufficient that i should heal you . nephi and it come to pass that when he have thus speak all the multitude with one accord do go forth with their sick and their afflict and their lame and with their blind and with their dumb and with all them that be afflict in any manner and he do heal them every one a they be bring forth unto him . nephi and they do all both they who have be heal and they who be whole bow down at his foot and do worship him and as many a could come for the multitude do kiss his foot insomuch that they do bathe his foot with their tear . nephi and it come to pass that he command that their little child should be bring . nephi so they bring their little child and set them down upon the ground round about him and jesus stood in the midst and the multitude give way till they have all be bring unto him . nephi and it come to pass that when they have all be bring and jesus stood in the midst he command the multitude that they should kneel down upon the ground . nephi and it come to pass that when they have kneel upon the ground jesus groan within himself and say father i be trouble because of the wickedness of the people of the house of israel . nephi and when he have say these word he himself also kneel upon the earth and behold he pray unto the father and the thing which he pray can not be write and the multitude do bear record who hear him . nephi and after this manner do they bear record the eye hath never see neither hath the ear heard before so great and marvelous thing a we saw and hear jesus speak unto the father nephi and no tongue can speak neither can there be write by any man neither can the heart of men conceive so great and marvelous thing a we both saw and hear jesus speak and no one can conceive of the joy which fill our soul at the time we hear him pray for u unto the father . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have make an end of pray unto the father he arise but so great be the joy of the multitude that they be overcome . nephi and it come to pass that jesus spake unto them and bid them arise . nephi and they arise from the earth and he say unto them bless be ye because of your faith . and now behold my joy be full . nephi and when he have say these word he weep and the multitude bare record of it and he take their little child one by one and bless them and pray unto the father for them . nephi and when he have do this he weep again nephi and he spake unto the multitude and say unto them behold your little one . nephi and a they look to behold they cast their eye towards heaven and they saw the heaven open and they saw angel descend out of heaven a it be in the midst of fire and they come down and encircle those little one about and they be encircle about with fire and the angel do minister unto them . nephi and the multitude do see and hear and bear record and they know that their record be true for they all of them do see and hear every man for himself and they be in number about two thousand and five hundred soul and they do consist of men woman and child . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that jesus command his disciple that they should bring forth some bread and wine unto him . nephi and while they be go for bread and wine he command the multitude that they should sit themselves down upon the earth . nephi and when the disciple have come with bread and wine he take of the bread and brake and bless it and he give unto the disciple and command that they should eat . nephi and when they have eat and be fill he command that they should give unto the multitude . nephi and when the multitude have eat and be fill he say unto the disciple behold there shall one be ordain among you and to him will i give power that he shall break bread and bless it and give it unto the people of my church unto all those who shall believe and be baptize in my name . nephi and this shall ye always observe to do even a i have do even a i have break bread and bless it and give it unto you . nephi and this shall ye do in remembrance of my body which i have show unto you . and it shall be a testimony unto the father that ye do always remember me . and if ye do always remember me ye shall have my spirit to be with you . nephi and it come to pass that when he say these word he command his disciple that they should take of the wine of the cup and drink of it and that they should also give unto the multitude that they might drink of it . nephi and it come to pass that they do so and do drink of it and be fill and they give unto the multitude and they do drink and they be fill . nephi and when the disciple have do this jesus say unto them bless be ye for this thing which ye have do for this be fulfil my commandment and this doth witness unto the father that ye be willing to do that which i have command you . nephi and this shall ye always do to those who repent and be baptize in my name and ye shall do it in remembrance of my blood which i have shed for you that ye may witness unto the father that ye do always remember me . and if ye do always remember me ye shall have my spirit to be with you . nephi and i give unto you a commandment that ye shall do these thing . and if ye shall always do these thing bless be ye for ye be build upon my rock . nephi but whoso among you shall do more or less than these be not build upon my rock but be build upon a sandy foundation and when the rain descends and the flood come and the wind blow and beat upon them they shall fall and the gate of hell be ready open to receive them . nephi therefore bless be ye if ye shall keep my commandment which the father hath command me that i should give unto you . nephi verily verily i say unto you ye must watch and pray always l ye be tempt by the devil and ye be lead away captive by him . nephi and a i have pray among you even so shall ye pray in my church among my people who do repent and be baptize in my name . behold i be the light i have set an example for you . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word unto his disciple he turn again unto the multitude and say unto them nephi behold verily verily i say unto you ye must watch and pray always l ye enter into temptation for satan desireth to have you that he may sift you a wheat . nephi therefore ye must always pray unto the father in my name nephi and whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name which be right believe that ye shall receive behold it shall be give unto you . nephi pray in your family unto the father always in my name that your wife and your child may be bless . nephi and behold ye shall meet together oft and ye shall not forbid any man from come unto you when ye shall meet together but suffer them that they may come unto you and forbid them not nephi but ye shall pray for them and shall not cast them out and if it so be that they come unto you oft ye shall pray for them unto the father in my name . nephi therefore hold up your light that it may shine unto the world . behold i be the light which ye shall hold up that which ye have see me do . behold ye see that i have pray unto the father and ye all have witness . nephi and ye see that i have command that none of you should go away but rather have command that ye should come unto me that ye might feel and see even so shall ye do unto the world and whosoever breaketh this commandment suffereth himself to be lead into temptation . nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he turn his eye again upon the disciple whom he have choose and say unto them nephi behold verily verily i say unto you i give unto you another commandment and then i must go unto my father that i may fulfil other commandment which he hath give me . nephi and now behold this be the commandment which i give unto you that ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily when ye shall minister it nephi for whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood unworthily eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul therefore if ye know that a man be unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood ye shall forbid him . nephi nevertheless ye shall not cast him out from among you but ye shall minister unto him and shall pray for him unto the father in my name and if it so be that he repenteth and be baptize in my name then shall ye receive him and shall minister unto him of my flesh and blood . nephi but if he repent not he shall not be number among my people that he may not destroy my people for behold i know my sheep and they be number . nephi nevertheless ye shall not cast him out of your synagogue or your place of worship for unto such shall ye continue to minister for ye know not but what they will return and repent and come unto me with full purpose of heart and i shall heal them and ye shall be the mean of bring salvation unto them . nephi therefore keep these saying which i have command you that ye come not under condemnation for wo unto him whom the father condemneth . nephi and i give you these commandment because of the disputation which have be among you . and bless be ye if ye have no disputation among you . nephi and now i go unto the father because it be expedient that i should go unto the father for your sake . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have make an end of these saying he touch with his hand the disciple whom he have choose one by one even until he have touch them all and spake unto them a he touch them . nephi and the multitude heard not the word which he spake therefore they do not bear record but the disciple bare record that he give them power to give the holy ghost . and i will show unto you hereafter that this record be true . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have touch them all there come a cloud and overshadow the multitude that they could not see jesus . nephi and while they be overshadow he depart from them and ascend into heaven . and the disciple saw and do bear record that he ascend again into heaven . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have ascend into heaven the multitude do disperse and every man do take his wife and his child and do return to his own home . nephi and it be noise abroad among the people immediately before it be yet dark that the multitude have see jesus and that he have minister unto them and that he would also show himself on the morrow unto the multitude . nephi yea and even all the night it be noise abroad concern jesus and insomuch do they send forth unto the people that there be many yea an exceedingly great number do labor exceedingly all that night that they might be on the morrow in the place where jesus should show himself unto the multitude . nephi and it come to pass that on the morrow when the multitude be gather together behold nephi and his brother whom he have raise from the dead whose name be timothy and also his son whose name be jonas and also mathoni and mathonihah his brother and kumen and kumenonhi and jeremiah and shemnon and jonas and zedekiah and isaiah now these be the name of the disciple whom jesus have choose and it come to pass that they go forth and stood in the midst of the multitude . nephi and behold the multitude be so great that they do cause that they should be separate into twelve body . nephi and the twelve do teach the multitude and behold they do cause that the multitude should kneel down upon the face of the earth and should pray unto the father in the name of jesus . nephi and the disciple do pray unto the father also in the name of jesus . and it come to pass that they arise and minister unto the people . nephi and when they have minister those same word which jesus have speak nothing vary from the word which jesus have speak behold they kneel again and pray to the father in the name of jesus . nephi and they do pray for that which they most desire and they desire that the holy ghost should be give unto them . nephi and when they have thus pray they go down unto the water 's edge and the multitude follow them . nephi and it come to pass that nephi go down into the water and be baptize . nephi and he come up out of the water and begin to baptize . and he baptize all those whom jesus have choose . nephi and it come to pass when they be all baptize and have come up out of the water the holy ghost do fall upon them and they be fill with the holy ghost and with fire . nephi and behold they be encircle about a if it be by fire and it come down from heaven and the multitude do witness it and do bear record and angel do come down out of heaven and do minister unto them . nephi and it come to pass that while the angel be minister unto the disciple behold jesus come and stand in the midst and minister unto them . nephi and it come to pass that he spake unto the multitude and command them that they should kneel down again upon the earth and also that his disciple should kneel down upon the earth . nephi and it come to pass that when they have all kneel down upon the earth he command his disciple that they should pray . nephi and behold they begin to pray and they do pray unto jesus call him their lord and their god . nephi and it come to pass that jesus depart out of the midst of them and go a little way off from them and bow himself to the earth and he say nephi father i thank thee that thou hast give the holy ghost unto these whom i have choose and it be because of their belief in me that i have choose them out of the world . nephi father i pray thee that thou wilt give the holy ghost unto all them that shall believe in their word . nephi father thou hast give them the holy ghost because they believe in me and thou seest that they believe in me because thou hearest them and they pray unto me and they pray unto me because i be with them . nephi and now father i pray unto thee for them and also for all those who shall believe on their word that they may believe in me that i may be in them a thou father art in me that we may be one . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have thus pray unto the father he come unto his disciple and behold they do still continue without cease to pray unto him and they do not multiply many word for it be give unto them what they should pray and they be fill with desire . nephi and it come to pass that jesus bless them a they do pray unto him and his countenance do smile upon them and the light of his countenance do shine upon them and behold they be as white a the countenance and also the garment of jesus and behold the whiteness thereof do exceed all the whiteness yea even there could be nothing upon earth so white a the whiteness thereof . nephi and jesus say unto them pray on nevertheless they do not cease to pray . nephi and he turn from them again and go a little way off and bow himself to the earth and he pray again unto the father say nephi father i thank thee that thou hast purify those whom i have choose because of their faith and i pray for them and also for them who shall believe on their word that they may be purify in me through faith on their word even a they be purify in me . nephi father i pray not for the world but for those whom thou hast give me out of the world because of their faith that they may be purify in me that i may be in them a thou father art in me that we may be one that i may be glorify in them . nephi and when jesus have speak these word he come again unto his disciple and behold they do pray steadfastly without cease unto him and he do smile upon them again and behold they be white even a jesus . nephi and it come to pass that he go again a little way off and pray unto the father nephi and tongue can not speak the word which he pray neither can be write by man the word which he pray . nephi and the multitude do hear and do bear record and their heart be open and they do understand in their heart the word which he pray . nephi nevertheless so great and marvelous be the word which he pray that they can not be write neither can they be utter by man . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have make an end of pray he come again to the disciple and say unto them so great faith have i never see among all the jew wherefore i could not show unto them so great miracle because of their unbelief . nephi verily i say unto you there be none of them that have see so great thing a ye have see neither have they hear so great thing a ye have hear . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that he command the multitude that they should cease to pray and also his disciple . and he command them that they should not cease to pray in their heart . nephi and he command them that they should arise and stand up upon their foot . and they arise up and stand upon their foot . nephi and it come to pass that he brake bread again and bless it and give to the disciple to eat . nephi and when they have eat he command them that they should break bread and give unto the multitude . nephi and when they have give unto the multitude he also give them wine to drink and command them that they should give unto the multitude . nephi now there have be no bread neither wine bring by the disciple neither by the multitude nephi but he truly give unto them bread to eat and also wine to drink . nephi and he say unto them he that eateth this bread eateth of my body to his soul and he that drinketh of this wine drinketh of my blood to his soul and his soul shall never hunger nor thirst but shall be fill . nephi now when the multitude have all eaten and drunk behold they be fill with the spirit and they do cry out with one voice and give glory to jesus whom they both saw and heard . nephi and it come to pass that when they have all give glory unto jesus he say unto them behold now i finish the commandment which the father hath command me concern this people who be a remnant of the house of israel . nephi ye remember that i spake unto you and say that when the word of isaiah should be fulfil behold they be write ye have them before you therefore search them nephi and verily verily i say unto you that when they shall be fulfil then be the fulfilling of the covenant which the father hath make unto his people o house of israel . nephi and then shall the remnant which shall be scatter abroad upon the face of the earth be gather in from the east and from the west and from the south and from the north and they shall be bring to the knowledge of the lord their god who hath redeem them . nephi and the father hath command me that i should give unto you this land for your inheritance . nephi and i say unto you that if the gentile do not repent after the blessing which they shall receive after they have scatter my people nephi then shall ye who be a remnant of the house of jacob go forth among them and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many and ye shall be among them a a lion among the beast of the forest and a a young lion among the flock of sheep who if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in piece and none can deliver . nephi thy hand shall be lift up upon thine adversary and all thine enemy shall be cut off . nephi and i will gather my people together a a man gathereth his sheaf into the floor . nephi for i will make my people with whom the father hath covenant yea i will make thy horn iron and i will make thy hoof brass . and thou shalt beat in piece many people and i will consecrate their gain unto the lord and their substance unto the lord of the whole earth . and behold i be he who doeth it . nephi and it shall come to pass saith the father that the sword of my justice shall hang over them at that day and except they repent it shall fall upon them saith the father yea even upon all the nation of the gentile . nephi and it shall come to pass that i will establish my people o house of israel . nephi and behold this people will i establish in this land unto the fulfilling of the covenant which i make with your father jacob and it shall be a new jerusalem . and the power of heaven shall be in the midst of this people yea even i will be in the midst of you . nephi behold i be he of whom moses spake say a prophet shall the lord your god raise up unto you of your brother like unto me him shall ye hear in all thing whatsoever he shall say unto you . and it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear that prophet shall be cut off from among the people . nephi verily i say unto you yea and all the prophet from samuel and those that follow after as many a have speak have testify of me . nephi and behold ye be the child of the prophet and ye be of the house of israel and ye be of the covenant which the father make with your father say unto abraham and in thy seed shall all the kindred of the earth be bless . nephi the father have raise me up unto you first and send me to bless you in turn away every one of you from his iniquity and this because ye be the child of the covenant nephi and after that ye be bless then fulfilleth the father the covenant which he make with abraham say in thy seed shall all the kindred of the earth be bless unto the pour out of the holy ghost through me upon the gentile which bless upon the gentile shall make them mighty above all unto the scattering of my people o house of israel . nephi and they shall be a scourge unto the people of this land . nevertheless when they shall have receive the fulness of my gospel then if they shall harden their heart against me i will return their iniquity upon their own head saith the father . nephi and i will remember the covenant which i have make with my people and i have covenant with them that i would gather them together in mine own due time that i would give unto them again the land of their father for their inheritance which be the land of jerusalem which be the promised land unto them forever saith the father . nephi and it shall come to pass that the time cometh when the fulness of my gospel shall be preach unto them nephi and they shall believe in me that i be jesus christ the son of god and shall pray unto the father in my name . nephi then shall their watchman lift up their voice and with the voice together shall they sing for they shall see eye to eye . nephi then will the father gather them together again and give unto them jerusalem for the land of their inheritance . nephi then shall they break forth into joy sing together ye waste place of jerusalem for the father hath comfort his people he hath redeem jerusalem . nephi the father hath make bare his holy arm in the eye of all the nation and all the end of the earth shall see the salvation of the father and the father and i be one . nephi and then shall be bring to pass that which be write awake awake again and put on thy strength o zion put on thy beautiful garment o jerusalem the holy city for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean . nephi shake thyself from the dust arise sit down o jerusalem loose thyself from the band of thy neck o captive daughter of zion . nephi for thus saith the lord ye have sell yourselves for naught and ye shall be redeem without money . nephi verily verily i say unto you that my people shall know my name yea in that day they shall know that i be he that doth speak . nephi and then shall they say how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of him that bringeth good tidings unto them that publisheth peace that bringeth good tidings unto them of good that publisheth salvation that saith unto zion thy god reigneth ! nephi and then shall a cry go forth depart ye depart ye go ye out from thence touch not that which be unclean go ye out of the midst of her be ye clean that bear the vessel of the lord . nephi for ye shall not go out with haste nor go by flight for the lord will go before you and the god of israel shall be your rearward . nephi behold my servant shall deal prudently he shall be exalt and extol and be very high . nephi a many be astonish at thee his visage be so mar more than any man and his form more than the son of men nephi so shall he sprinkle many nation the king shall shut their mouth at him for that which have not be tell them shall they see and that which they have not hear shall they consider . nephi verily verily i say unto you all these thing shall surely come even a the father hath command me . then shall this covenant which the father hath covenant with his people be fulfil and then shall jerusalem be inhabit again with my people and it shall be the land of their inheritance . nephi chapter nephi and verily i say unto you i give unto you a sign that ye may know the time when these thing shall be about to take place that i shall gather in from their long dispersion my people o house of israel and shall establish again among them my zion nephi and behold this be the thing which i will give unto you for a sign for verily i say unto you that when these thing which i declare unto you and which i shall declare unto you hereafter of myself and by the power of the holy ghost which shall be give unto you of the father shall be make know unto the gentile that they may know concern this people who be a remnant of the house of jacob and concern this my people who shall be scatter by them nephi verily verily i say unto you when these thing shall be make know unto them of the father and shall come forth of the father from them unto you nephi for it be wisdom in the father that they should be establish in this land and be set up a a free people by the power of the father that these thing might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed that the covenant of the father may be fulfil which he hath covenant with his people o house of israel nephi therefore when these work and the work which shall be work among you hereafter shall come forth from the gentile unto your seed which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity nephi for thus it behooveth the father that it should come forth from the gentile that he may show forth his power unto the gentile for this cause that the gentile if they will not harden their heart that they may repent and come unto me and be baptize in my name and know of the true point of my doctrine that they may be number among my people o house of israel nephi and when these thing come to pass that thy seed shall begin to know these thing it shall be a sign unto them that they may know that the work of the father hath already commence unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath make unto the people who be of the house of israel . nephi and when that day shall come it shall come to pass that king shall shut their mouth for that which have not be tell them shall they see and that which they have not hear shall they consider . nephi for in that day for my sake shall the father work a work which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them and there shall be among them those who will not believe it although a man shall declare it unto them . nephi but behold the life of my servant shall be in my hand therefore they shall not hurt him although he shall be mar because of them . yet i will heal him for i will show unto them that my wisdom be great than the cunning of the devil . nephi therefore it shall come to pass that whosoever will not believe in my word who be jesus christ which the father shall cause him to bring forth unto the gentile and shall give unto him power that he shall bring them forth unto the gentile it shall be do even a moses say they shall be cut off from among my people who be of the covenant . nephi and my people who be a remnant of jacob shall be among the gentile yea in the midst of them a a lion among the beast of the forest a a young lion among the flock of sheep who if he go through both treadeth down and teareth in piece and none can deliver . nephi their hand shall be lift up upon their adversary and all their enemy shall be cut off . nephi yea wo be unto the gentile except they repent for it shall come to pass in that day saith the father that i will cut off thy horse out of the midst of thee and i will destroy thy chariot nephi and i will cut off the city of thy land and throw down all thy stronghold nephi and i will cut off witchcraft out of thy land and thou shalt have no more soothsayer nephi thy graven image i will also cut off and thy standing image out of the midst of thee and thou shalt no more worship the work of thy hand nephi and i will pluck up thy grove out of the midst of thee so will i destroy thy city . nephi and it shall come to pass that all lying and deceivings and envyings and strife and priestcraft and whoredom shall be do away . nephi for it shall come to pass saith the father that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my beloved son them will i cut off from among my people o house of israel nephi and i will execute vengeance and fury upon them even a upon the heathen such a they have not hear . nephi but if they will repent and hearken unto my word and harden not their heart i will establish my church among them and they shall come in unto the covenant and be number among this the remnant of jacob unto whom i have give this land for their inheritance nephi and they shall assist my people the remnant of jacob and also a many of the house of israel a shall come that they may build a city which shall be call the new jerusalem . nephi and then shall they assist my people that they may be gather in who be scatter upon all the face of the land in unto the new jerusalem . nephi and then shall the power of heaven come down among them and i also will be in the midst . nephi and then shall the work of the father commence at that day even when this gospel shall be preach among the remnant of this people . verily i say unto you at that day shall the work of the father commence among all the disperse of my people yea even the tribe which have be lose which the father hath lead away out of jerusalem . nephi yea the work shall commence among all the disperse of my people with the father to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me that they may call on the father in my name . nephi yea and then shall the work commence with the father among all nation in prepare the way whereby his people may be gather home to the land of their inheritance . nephi and they shall go out from all nation and they shall not go out in haste nor go by flight for i will go before them saith the father and i will be their rearward . nephi chapter nephi and then shall that which be write come to pass sing o barren thou that didst not bear break forth into singing and cry aloud thou that didst not travail with child for more be the child of the desolate than the child of the married wife saith the lord . nephi enlarge the place of thy tent and let them stretch forth the curtain of thy habitation spare not lengthen thy cord and strengthen thy stake nephi for thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left and thy seed shall inherit the gentile and make the desolate city to be inhabit . nephi fear not for thou shalt not be ashamed neither be thou confound for thou shalt not be put to shame for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth and shalt not remember the reproach of thy youth and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more . nephi for thy maker thy husband the lord of host be his name and thy redeemer the holy one of israel the god of the whole earth shall he be call . nephi for the lord hath call thee a a woman forsaken and grieve in spirit and a wife of youth when thou wast refuse saith thy god . nephi for a small moment have i forsake thee but with great mercy will i gather thee . nephi in a little wrath i hide my face from thee for a moment but with everlasting kindness will i have mercy on thee saith the lord thy redeemer . nephi for this the water of noah unto me for a i have swear that the water of noah should no more go over the earth so have i swear that i would not be wroth with thee . nephi for the mountain shall depart and the hill be remove but my kindness shall not depart from thee neither shall the covenant of my peace be remove saith the lord that hath mercy on thee . nephi o thou afflict tossed with tempest and not comfort ! behold i will lay thy stone with fair color and lay thy foundation with sapphire . nephi and i will make thy window of agate and thy gate of carbuncle and all thy border of pleasant stone . nephi and all thy child shall be teach of the lord and great shall be the peace of thy child . nephi in righteousness shalt thou be establish thou shalt be far from oppression for thou shalt not fear and from terror for it shall not come near thee . nephi behold they shall surely gather together against thee not by me whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake . nephi behold i have create the smith that bloweth the coal in the fire and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work and i have create the waster to destroy . nephi no weapon that be form against thee shall prosper and every tongue that shall revile against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn . this be the heritage of the servant of the lord and their righteousness be of me saith the lord . nephi chapter nephi and now behold i say unto you that ye ought to search these thing . yea a commandment i give unto you that ye search these thing diligently for great be the word of isaiah . nephi for surely he spake a touch all thing concern my people which be of the house of israel therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the gentile . nephi and all thing that he spake have be and shall be even accord to the word which he spake . nephi therefore give heed to my word write the thing which i have tell you and accord to the time and the will of the father they shall go forth unto the gentile . nephi and whosoever will hearken unto my word and repenteth and be baptize the same shall be save . search the prophet for many there be that testify of these thing . nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have say these word he say unto them again after he have expound all the scripture unto them which they have receive he say unto them behold other scripture i would that ye should write that ye have not . nephi and it come to pass that he say unto nephi bring forth the record which ye have keep . nephi and when nephi have bring forth the record and lay them before him he cast his eye upon them and say nephi verily i say unto you i command my servant samuel the lamanite that he should testify unto this people that at the day that the father should glorify his name in me that there be many saint who should arise from the dead and should appear unto many and should minister unto them . and he say unto them be it not so ? nephi and his disciple answer him and say yea lord samuel do prophesy accord to thy word and they be all fulfil . nephi and jesus say unto them how be it that ye have not write this thing that many saint do arise and appear unto many and do minister unto them ? nephi and it come to pass that nephi remember that this thing have not be write . nephi and it come to pass that jesus command that it should be write therefore it be write accord a he command . nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have expound all the scripture in one which they have write he command them that they should teach the thing which he have expound unto them . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that he command them that they should write the word which the father have give unto malachi which he should tell unto them . and it come to pass that after they be write he expound them . and these be the word which he do tell unto them say thus say the father unto malachi behold i will send my messenger and he shall prepare the way before me and the lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple even the messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in behold he shall come saith the lord of host . nephi but who may abide the day of his come and who shall stand when he appeareth ? for he be like a refiner 's fire and like fuller 's soap . nephi and he shall sit a a refiner and purifier of silver and he shall purify the son of levi and purge them a gold and silver that they may offer unto the lord an offering in righteousness . nephi then shall the offering of judah and jerusalem be pleasant unto the lord a in the day of old and a in former year . nephi and i will come near to you to judgment and i will be a swift witness against the sorcerer and against the adulterer and against false swearer and against those that oppress the hireling in his wage the widow and the fatherless and that turn aside the stranger and fear not me saith the lord of host . nephi for i be the lord i change not therefore ye son of jacob be not consume . nephi even from the day of your father ye be go away from mine ordinance and have not keep them . return unto me and i will return unto you saith the lord of host . but ye say wherein shall we return ? nephi will a man rob god ? yet ye have rob me . but ye say wherein have we rob thee ? in tithe and offering . nephi ye be curse with a curse for ye have rob me even this whole nation . nephi bring ye all the tithe into the storehouse that there may be meat in my house and prove me now herewith saith the lord of host if i will not open you the window of heaven and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it . nephi and i will rebuke the devourer for your sake and he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field saith the lord of host . nephi and all nation shall call you bless for ye shall be a delightsome land saith the lord of host . nephi your word have be stout against me saith the lord . yet ye say what have we speak against thee ? nephi ye have say it be vain to serve god and what doth it profit that we have keep his ordinance and that we have walk mournfully before the lord of host ? nephi and now we call the proud happy yea they that work wickedness be set up yea they that tempt god be even deliver . nephi then they that fear the lord spake often one to another and the lord hearken and heard and a book of remembrance be write before him for them that fear the lord and that think upon his name . nephi and they shall be mine saith the lord of host in that day when i make up my jewel and i will spare them a a man spareth his own son that serveth him . nephi then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked between him that serveth god and him that serveth him not . nephi chapter nephi for behold the day cometh that shall burn a an oven and all the proud yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubble and the day that cometh shall burn them up saith the lord of host that it shall leave them neither root nor branch . nephi but unto you that fear my name shall the son of righteousness arise with heal in his wing and ye shall go forth and grow up a calf in the stall . nephi and ye shall tread down the wicked for they shall be ash under the sol of your foot in the day that i shall do this saith the lord of host . nephi remember ye the law of moses my servant which i command unto him in horeb for all israel with the statute and judgment . nephi behold i will send you elijah the prophet before the come of the great and dreadful day of the lord nephi and he shall turn the heart of the father to the child and the heart of the child to their father lest i come and smite the earth with a curse . nephi chapter nephi and now it come to pass that when jesus have tell these thing he expound them unto the multitude and he do expound all thing unto them both great and small . nephi and he saith these scripture which ye have not with you the father command that i should give unto you for it be wisdom in him that they should be give unto future generation . nephi and he do expound all thing even from the beginning until the time that he should come in his glory yea even all thing which should come upon the face of the earth even until the element should melt with fervent heat and the earth should be wrapt together a a scroll and the heaven and the earth should pass away nephi and even unto the great and last day when all people and all kindred and all nation and tongue shall stand before god to be judge of their work whether they be good or whether they be evil nephi if they be good to the resurrection of everlasting life and if they be evil to the resurrection of damnation be on a parallel the one on the one hand and the other on the other hand accord to the mercy and the justice and the holiness which be in christ who be before the world begin . nephi and now there can not be write in this book even a hundredth part of the thing which jesus do truly teach unto the people nephi but behold the plate of nephi do contain the more part of the thing which he teach the people . nephi and these thing have i write which be a less part of the thing which he teach the people and i have write them to the intent that they may be bring again unto this people from the gentile accord to the word which jesus hath spoken . nephi and when they shall have receive this which be expedient that they should have first to try their faith and if it shall so be that they shall believe these thing then shall the great thing be make manifest unto them . nephi and if it so be that they will not believe these thing then shall the great thing be withhold from them unto their condemnation . nephi behold i be about to write them all which be engraven upon the plate of nephi but the lord forbid it say i will try the faith of my people . nephi therefore i mormon do write the thing which have be command me of the lord . and now i mormon make an end of my saying and proceed to write the thing which have be command me . nephi therefore i would that ye should behold that the lord truly do teach the people for the space of three day and after that he do show himself unto them oft and do break bread oft and bless it and give it unto them . nephi and it come to pass that he do teach and minister unto the child of the multitude of whom hath be speak and he do loose their tongue and they do speak unto their father great and marvelous thing even great than he have reveal unto the people and he loose their tongue that they could utter . nephi and it come to pass that after he have ascend into heaven the second time that he show himself unto them and have go unto the father after have heal all their sick and their lame and open the eye of their blind and unstopped the ear of the deaf and even have do all manner of cure among them and raise a man from the dead and have show forth his power unto them and have ascend unto the father nephi behold it come to pass on the morrow that the multitude gather themselves together and they both saw and hear these child yea even babes do open their mouth and utter marvelous thing and the thing which they do utter be forbidden that there should not any man write them . nephi and it come to pass that the disciple whom jesus have choose begin from that time forth to baptize and to teach as many a do come unto them and as many a be baptize in the name of jesus be fill with the holy ghost . nephi and many of them saw and hear unspeakable thing which be not lawful to be write . nephi and they teach and do minister one to another and they have all thing common among them every man deal justly one with another . nephi and it come to pass that they do do all thing even a jesus have command them . nephi and they who be baptize in the name of jesus be call the church of christ . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass that a the disciple of jesus be journey and be preach the thing which they have both heard and see and be baptize in the name of jesus it come to pass that the disciple be gather together and be unite in mighty prayer and fasting . nephi and jesus again show himself unto them for they be pray unto the father in his name and jesus come and stand in the midst of them and say unto them what will ye that i shall give unto you ? nephi and they say unto him lord we will that thou wouldst tell u the name whereby we shall call this church for there be disputation among the people concern this matter . nephi and the lord say unto them verily verily i say unto you why be it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing ? nephi have they not read the scripture which say ye must take upon you the name of christ which be my name ? for by this name shall ye be call at the last day nephi and whoso taketh upon him my name and endureth to the end the same shall be save at the last day . nephi therefore whatsoever ye shall do ye shall do it in my name therefore ye shall call the church in my name and ye shall call upon the father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake . nephi and how be it my church save it be call in my name ? for if a church be call in moses ' name then it be moses ' church or if it be call in the name of a man then it be the church of a man but if it be call in my name then it be my church if it so be that they be build upon my gospel . nephi verily i say unto you that ye be build upon my gospel therefore ye shall call whatsoever thing ye do call in my name therefore if ye call upon the father for the church if it be in my name the father will hear you nephi and if it so be that the church be build upon my gospel then will the father show forth his own work in it . nephi but if it be not build upon my gospel and be build upon the work of men or upon the work of the devil verily i say unto you they have joy in their work for a season and by and by the end cometh and they be hew down and cast into the fire from whence there be no return . nephi for their work do follow them for it be because of their work that they be hew down therefore remember the thing that i have tell you . nephi behold i have give unto you my gospel and this be the gospel which i have give unto you that i come into the world to do the will of my father because my father send me . nephi and my father send me that i might be lift up upon the cross and after that i have be lift up upon the cross that i might draw all men unto me that a i have be lift up by men even so should men be lift up by the father to stand before me to be judge of their work whether they be good or whether they be evil nephi and for this cause have i be lift up therefore accord to the power of the father i will draw all men unto me that they may be judge accord to their work . nephi and it shall come to pass that whoso repenteth and be baptize in my name shall be fill and if he endureth to the end behold him will i hold guiltless before my father at that day when i shall stand to judge the world . nephi and he that endureth not unto the end the same be he that be also hewn down and cast into the fire from whence they can no more return because of the justice of the father . nephi and this be the word which he hath give unto the child of men . and for this cause he fulfilleth the word which he hath give and he lieth not but fulfilleth all his word . nephi and no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have wash their garment in my blood because of their faith and the repentance of all their sin and their faithfulness unto the end . nephi now this be the commandment repent all ye end of the earth and come unto me and be baptize in my name that ye may be sanctify by the reception of the holy ghost that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day . nephi verily verily i say unto you this be my gospel and ye know the thing that ye must do in my church for the work which ye have see me do that shall ye also do for that which ye have see me do even that shall ye do nephi therefore if ye do these thing bless be ye for ye shall be lift up at the last day . nephi write the thing which ye have see and hear save it be those which be forbidden . nephi write the work of this people which shall be even a hath be write of that which hath be . nephi for behold out of the book which have be write and which shall be write shall this people be judge for by them shall their work be know unto men . nephi and behold all thing be write by the father therefore out of the book which shall be write shall the world be judge . nephi and know ye that ye shall be judge of this people accord to the judgment which i shall give unto you which shall be just . therefore what manner of men ought ye to be ? verily i say unto you even a i be . nephi and now i go unto the father . and verily i say unto you whatsoever thing ye shall ask the father in my name shall be give unto you . nephi therefore ask and ye shall receive knock and it shall be open unto you for he that asketh receiveth and unto him that knocketh it shall be open . nephi and now behold my joy be great even unto fulness because of you and also this generation yea and even the father rejoiceth and also all the holy angel because of you and this generation for none of them be lose . nephi behold i would that ye should understand for i mean them who be now alive of this generation and none of them be lose and in them i have fulness of joy . nephi but behold it sorroweth me because of the fourth generation from this generation for they be lead away captive by him even a be the son of perdition for they will sell me for silver and for gold and for that which moth doth corrupt and which thief can break through and steal . and in that day will i visit them even in turn their work upon their own head . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have end these saying he say unto his disciple enter ye in at the strait gate for strait be the gate and narrow be the way that lead to life and few there be that find it but wide be the gate and broad the way which lead to death and many there be that travel therein until the night cometh wherein no man can work . nephi chapter nephi and it come to pass when jesus have say these word he spake unto his disciple one by one say unto them what be it that ye desire of me after that i be go to the father ? nephi and they all spake save it be three say we desire that after we have live unto the age of man that our ministry wherein thou hast call u may have an end that we may speedily come unto thee in thy kingdom . nephi and he say unto them bless be ye because ye desire this thing of me therefore after that ye be seventy and two year old ye shall come unto me in my kingdom and with me ye shall find rest . nephi and when he have speak unto them he turn himself unto the three and say unto them what will ye that i should do unto you when i be go unto the father ? nephi and they sorrow in their heart for they durst not speak unto him the thing which they desire . nephi and he say unto them behold i know your thought and ye have desire the thing which john my beloved who be with me in my ministry before that i be lift up by the jew desire of me . nephi therefore more bless be ye for ye shall never taste of death but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the father unto the child of men even until all thing shall be fulfil accord to the will of the father when i shall come in my glory with the power of heaven . nephi and ye shall never endure the pain of death but when i shall come in my glory ye shall be change in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality and then shall ye be bless in the kingdom of my father . nephi and again ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh neither sorrow save it be for the sin of the world and all this will i do because of the thing which ye have desire of me for ye have desire that ye might bring the soul of men unto me while the world shall stand . nephi and for this cause ye shall have fulness of joy and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my father yea your joy shall be full even a the father hath give me fulness of joy and ye shall be even a i be and i be even a the father and the father and i be one nephi and the holy ghost beareth record of the father and me and the father giveth the holy ghost unto the child of men because of me . nephi and it come to pass that when jesus have speak these word he touch every one of them with his finger save it be the three who be to tarry and then he depart . nephi and behold the heaven be open and they be catch up into heaven and saw and heard unspeakable thing . nephi and it be forbid them that they should utter neither be it give unto them power that they could utter the thing which they saw and hear nephi and whether they be in the body or out of the body they could not tell for it do seem unto them like a transfiguration of them that they be change from this body of flesh into an immortal state that they could behold the thing of god . nephi but it come to pass that they do again minister upon the face of the earth nevertheless they do not minister of the thing which they have hear and see because of the commandment which be give them in heaven . nephi and now whether they be mortal or immortal from the day of their transfiguration i know not nephi but this much i know accord to the record which hath be give they do go forth upon the face of the land and do minister unto all the people unite as many to the church a would believe in their preaching baptize them and as many a be baptize do receive the holy ghost . nephi and they be cast into prison by them who do not belong to the church . and the prison could not hold them for they be rent in twain . nephi and they be cast down into the earth but they do smite the earth with the word of god insomuch that by his power they be deliver out of the depth of the earth and therefore they could not dig pit sufficient to hold them . nephi and thrice they be cast into a furnace and receive no harm . nephi and twice be they cast into a den of wild beast and behold they do play with the beast a a child with a suckle lamb and receive no harm . nephi and it come to pass that thus they do go forth among all the people of nephi and do preach the gospel of christ unto all people upon the face of the land and they be convert unto the lord and be unite unto the church of christ and thus the people of that generation be bless accord to the word of jesus . nephi and now i mormon make an end of speak concern these thing for a time . nephi behold i be about to write the name of those who be never to taste of death but the lord forbid therefore i write them not for they be hide from the world . nephi but behold i have see them and they have minister unto me . nephi and behold they will be among the gentile and the gentile shall know them not . nephi they will also be among the jew and the jew shall know them not . nephi and it shall come to pass when the lord seeth fit in his wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribe of israel and unto all nation kindred tongue and people and shall bring out of them unto jesus many soul that their desire may be fulfil and also because of the convince power of god which be in them . nephi and they be a the angel of god and if they shall pray unto the father in the name of jesus they can show themselves unto whatsoever man it seemeth them good . nephi therefore great and marvelous work shall be work by them before the great and coming day when all people must surely stand before the judgment seat of christ nephi yea even among the gentile shall there be a great and marvelous work wrought by them before that judgment day . nephi and if ye have all the scripture which give an account of all the marvelous work of christ ye would accord to the word of christ know that these thing must surely come . nephi and wo be unto him that will not hearken unto the word of jesus and also to them whom he hath chosen and sent among them for whoso receiveth not the word of jesus and the word of those whom he hath send receiveth not him and therefore he will not receive them at the last day nephi and it would be good for them if they have not be bear . for do ye suppose that ye can get rid of the justice of an offended god who hath be trample under foot of men that thereby salvation might come ? nephi and now behold a i spake concern those whom the lord hath choose yea even three who be catch up into the heaven that i know not whether they be cleanse from mortality to immortality nephi but behold since i write i have inquire of the lord and he hath make it manifest unto me that there must need be a change wrought upon their body or else it need be that they must taste of death nephi therefore that they might not taste of death there be a change wrought upon their body that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow save it be for the sin of the world . nephi now this change be not equal to that which shall take place at the last day but there be a change wrought upon them insomuch that satan could have no power over them that he could not tempt them and they be sanctify in the flesh that they be holy and that the power of the earth could not hold them . nephi and in this state they be to remain until the judgment day of christ and at that day they be to receive a great change and to be receive into the kingdom of the father to go no more out but to dwell eternally in the heaven . nephi chapter nephi and now behold i say unto you that when the lord shall see fit in his wisdom that these saying shall come unto the gentile accord to his word then ye may know that the covenant which the father hath make with the child of israel concern their restoration to the land of their inheritance be already begin to be fulfil . nephi and ye may know that the word of the lord which have be speak by the holy prophet shall all be fulfil and ye need not say that the lord delay his come unto the child of israel . nephi and ye need not imagine in your heart that the word which have be speak be vain for behold the lord will remember his covenant which he hath make unto his people of the house of israel . nephi and when ye shall see these saying come forth among you then ye need not any longer spurn at the doings of the lord for the sword of his justice be in his right hand and behold at that day if ye shall spurn at his doings he will cause that it shall soon overtake you . nephi wo unto him that spurneth at the doings of the lord yea wo unto him that shall deny the christ and his work ! nephi yea wo unto him that shall deny the revelation of the lord and that shall say the lord no longer worketh by revelation or by prophecy or by gift or by tongue or by healing or by the power of the holy ghost ! nephi yea and wo unto him that shall say at that day to get gain that there can be no miracle work by jesus christ for he that doeth this shall become like unto the son of perdition for whom there be no mercy accord to the word of christ ! nephi yea and ye need not any long hiss nor spurn nor make game of the jew nor any of the remnant of the house of israel for behold the lord remembereth his covenant unto them and he will do unto them accord to that which he hath swear . nephi therefore ye need not suppose that ye can turn the right hand of the lord unto the left that he may not execute judgment unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he hath make unto the house of israel . nephi chapter nephi hearken o ye gentile and hear the word of jesus christ the son of the living god which he hath command me that i should speak concern you for behold he commandeth me that i should write say nephi turn all ye gentile from your wicked way and repent of your evil doings of your lying and deceivings and of your whoredom and of your secret abomination and your idolatry and of your murder and your priestcraft and your envyings and your strife and from all your wickedness and abomination and come unto me and be baptize in my name that ye may receive a remission of your sin and be fill with the holy ghost that ye may be number with my people who be of the house of israel . fourth nephi who be the son of nephi one of the disciple of jesus christ an account of the people of nephi accord to his record . nephi and it come to pass that the thirty and fourth year pass away and also the thirty and fifth and behold the disciple of jesus have form a church of christ in all the land round about . and as many a do come unto them and do truly repent of their sin be baptize in the name of jesus and they do also receive the holy ghost . nephi and it come to pass in the thirty and sixth year the people be all convert unto the lord upon all the face of the land both nephites and lamanites and there be no contention and disputation among them and every man do deal justly one with another . nephi and they have all thing common among them therefore there be not rich and poor bond and free but they be all make free and partaker of the heavenly gift . nephi and it come to pass that the thirty and seventh year pass away also and there still continue to be peace in the land . nephi and there be great and marvelous work work by the disciple of jesus insomuch that they do heal the sick and raise the dead and cause the lame to walk and the blind to receive their sight and the deaf to hear and all manner of miracle do they work among the child of men and in nothing do they work miracle save it be in the name of jesus . nephi and thus do the thirty and eighth year pas away and also the thirty and ninth and forty and first and the forty and second yea even until forty and nine year have pass away and also the fifty and first and the fifty and second yea and even until fifty and nine year have pass away . nephi and the lord do prosper them exceedingly in the land yea insomuch that they do build city again where there have be city burn . nephi yea even that great city zarahemla do they cause to be build again . nephi but there be many city which have be sink and water come up in the stead thereof therefore these city could not be renew . nephi and now behold it come to pass that the people of nephi do wax strong and do multiply exceedingly fast and become an exceedingly fair and delightsome people . nephi and they be marry and give in marriage and be bless accord to the multitude of the promise which the lord have make unto them . nephi and they do not walk any more after the performance and ordinance of the law of moses but they do walk after the commandment which they have receive from their lord and their god continue in fast and prayer and in meet together oft both to pray and to hear the word of the lord . nephi and it come to pass that there be no contention among all the people in all the land but there be mighty miracle wrought among the disciple of jesus . nephi and it come to pass that the seventy and first year pass away and also the seventy and second year yea and in fine till the seventy and ninth year have pass away yea even an hundred year have pass away and the disciple of jesus whom he have choose have all go to the paradise of god save it be the three who should tarry and there be other disciple ordain in their stead and also many of that generation have pass away . nephi and it come to pass that there be no contention in the land because of the love of god which do dwell in the heart of the people . nephi and there be no envyings nor strifes nor tumult nor whoredom nor lying nor murder nor any manner of lasciviousness and surely there could not be a happy people among all the people who have be create by the hand of god . nephi there be no robber nor murderer neither be there lamanites nor any manner of ites but they be in one the child of christ and heir to the kingdom of god . nephi and how bless be they ! for the lord do bless them in all their doings yea even they be bless and prosper until an hundred and ten year have pass away and the first generation from christ have pass away and there be no contention in all the land . nephi and it come to pass that nephi he that keep this last record and he keep it upon the plate of nephi die and his son amos keep it in his stead and he keep it upon the plate of nephi also . nephi and he keep it eighty and four year and there be still peace in the land save it be a small part of the people who have revolt from the church and take upon them the name of lamanites therefore there begin to be lamanites again in the land . nephi and it come to pass that amos die also and it be an hundred and ninety and four year from the come of christ and his son amos keep the record in his stead and he also keep it upon the plate of nephi and it be also write in the book of nephi which be this book . nephi and it come to pass that two hundred year have pass away and the second generation have all pass away save it be a few . nephi and now i mormon would that ye should know that the people have multiply insomuch that they be spread upon all the face of the land and that they have become exceedingly rich because of their prosperity in christ . nephi and now in this two hundred and first year there begin to be among them those who be lift up in pride such a the wearing of costly apparel and all manner of fine pearl and of the fine thing of the world . nephi and from that time forth they do have their good and their substance no more common among them . nephi and they begin to be divide into class and they begin to build up church unto themselves to get gain and begin to deny the true church of christ . nephi and it come to pass that when two hundred and ten year have pass away there be many church in the land yea there be many church which profess to know the christ and yet they do deny the more part of his gospel insomuch that they do receive all manner of wickedness and do administer that which be sacred unto him to whom it have be forbidden because of unworthiness . nephi and this church do multiply exceedingly because of iniquity and because of the power of satan who do get hold upon their heart . nephi and again there be another church which deny the christ and they do persecute the true church of christ because of their humility and their belief in christ and they do despise them because of the many miracle which be work among them . nephi therefore they do exercise power and authority over the disciple of jesus who do tarry with them and they do cast them into prison but by the power of the word of god which be in them the prison be rent in twain and they go forth do mighty miracle among them . nephi nevertheless and notwithstanding all these miracles the people do harden their heart and do seek to kill them even a the jew at jerusalem seek to kill jesus accord to his word . nephi and they do cast them into furnace of fire and they come forth receive no harm . nephi and they also cast them into den of wild beast and they do play with the wild beast even a a child with a lamb and they do come forth from among them receive no harm . nephi nevertheless the people do harden their heart for they be lead by many priest and false prophet to build up many church and to do all manner of iniquity . and they do smite upon the people of jesus but the people of jesus do not smite again . and thus they do dwindle in unbelief and wickedness from year to year even until two hundred and thirty year have pass away . nephi and now it come to pass in this year yea in the two hundred and thirty and first year there be a great division among the people . nephi and it come to pass that in this year there arise a people who be call the nephites and they be true believer in christ and among them there be those who be call by the lamanites jacobite and josephites and zoramites nephi therefore the true believer in christ and the true worshiper of christ among whom be the three disciple of jesus who should tarry be call nephites and jacobite and josephites and zoramites . nephi and it come to pass that they who reject the gospel be call lamanites and lemuelites and ishmaelites and they do not dwindle in unbelief but they do wilfully rebel against the gospel of christ and they do teach their child that they should not believe even a their father from the beginning do dwindle . nephi and it be because of the wickedness and abomination of their father even a it be in the beginning . and they be teach to hate the child of god even a the lamanites be teach to hate the child of nephi from the beginning . nephi and it come to pass that two hundred and forty and four year have pass away and thus be the affair of the people . and the more wicked part of the people do wax strong and become exceedingly more numerous than be the people of god . nephi and they do still continue to build up church unto themselves and adorn them with all manner of precious thing . and thus do two hundred and fifty year pass away and also two hundred and sixty year . nephi and it come to pass that the wicked part of the people begin again to build up the secret oath and combination of gadianton . nephi and also the people who be call the people of nephi begin to be proud in their heart because of their exceeding rich and become vain like unto their brother the lamanites . nephi and from this time the disciple begin to sorrow for the sin of the world . nephi and it come to pass that when three hundred year have pass away both the people of nephi and the lamanites have become exceedingly wicked one like unto another . nephi and it come to pass that the robber of gadianton do spread over all the face of the land and there be none that be righteous save it be the disciple of jesus . and gold and silver do they lay up in store in abundance and do traffic in all manner of traffic . nephi and it come to pass that after three hundred and five year have pass away and the people do still remain in wickedness amos die and his brother ammaron do keep the record in his stead . nephi and it come to pass that when three hundred and twenty year have pass away ammaron be constrain by the holy ghost do hide up the record which be sacred yea even all the sacred record which have be hand down from generation to generation which be sacred even until the three hundred and twentieth year from the come of christ . nephi and he do hide them up unto the lord that they might come again unto the remnant of the house of jacob accord to the prophecy and the promise of the lord . and thus be the end of the record of ammaron . the book of mormon mormon chapter mormon and now i mormon make a record of the thing which i have both see and hear and call it the book of mormon . mormon and about the time that ammaron hide up the record unto the lord he come unto me i be about ten year of age and i begin to be learn somewhat after the manner of the learning of my people and ammaron say unto me i perceive that thou art a sober child and art quick to observe mormon therefore when ye be about twenty and four year old i would that ye should remember the thing that ye have observe concern this people and when ye be of that age go to the land antum unto a hill which shall be call shim and there have i deposit unto the lord all the sacred engraving concern this people . mormon and behold ye shall take the plate of nephi unto yourself and the remainder shall ye leave in the place where they be and ye shall engrave on the plate of nephi all the thing that ye have observe concern this people . mormon and i mormon be a descendant of nephi and my father 's name be mormon i remember the thing which ammaron command me . mormon and it come to pass that i be eleven year old be carry by my father into the land southward even to the land of zarahemla . mormon the whole face of the land have become cover with building and the people be a numerous almost a it be the sand of the sea . mormon and it come to pass in this year there begin to be a war between the nephites who consist of the nephites and the jacobite and the josephites and the zoramites and this war be between the nephites and the lamanites and the lemuelites and the ishmaelites . mormon now the lamanites and the lemuelites and the ishmaelites be call lamanites and the two party be nephites and lamanites . mormon and it come to pass that the war begin to be among them in the border of zarahemla by the water of sidon . mormon and it come to pass that the nephites have gather together a great number of men even to exceed the number of thirty thousand . and it come to pass that they do have in this same year a number of battle in which the nephites do beat the lamanites and do slay many of them . mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites withdraw their design and there be peace settle in the land and peace do remain for the space of about four year that there be no bloodshed . mormon but wickedness do prevail upon the face of the whole land insomuch that the lord do take away his beloved disciple and the work of miracle and of heal do cease because of the iniquity of the people . mormon and there be no gift from the lord and the holy ghost do not come upon any because of their wickedness and unbelief . mormon and i be fifteen year of age and be somewhat of a sober mind therefore i be visit of the lord and taste and knew of the goodness of jesus . mormon and i do endeavor to preach unto this people but my mouth be shut and i be forbidden that i should preach unto them for behold they have wilfully rebel against their god and the beloved disciple be take away out of the land because of their iniquity . mormon but i do remain among them but i be forbid to preach unto them because of the hardness of their heart and because of the hardness of their heart the land be curse for their sake . mormon and these gadianton robber who be among the lamanites do infest the land insomuch that the inhabitant thereof begin to hide up their treasure in the earth and they become slippery because the lord have curse the land that they could not hold them nor retain them again . mormon and it come to pass that there be sorcery and witchcraft and magic and the power of the evil one be work upon all the face of the land even unto the fulfilling of all the word of abinadi and also samuel the lamanite . mormon chapter mormon and it come to pass in that same year there begin to be a war again between the nephites and the lamanites . and notwithstanding i be young be large in stature therefore the people of nephi appoint me that i should be their leader or the leader of their army . mormon therefore it come to pass that in my sixteenth year i do go forth at the head of an army of the nephites against the lamanites therefore three hundred and twenty and six year have pass away . mormon and it come to pass that in the three hundred and twenty and seventh year the lamanites do come upon u with exceedingly great power insomuch that they do frighten my army therefore they would not fight and they begin to retreat towards the north country . mormon and it come to pass that we do come to the city of angola and we do take possession of the city and make preparation to defend ourselves against the lamanites . and it come to pass that we do fortify the city with our might but notwithstanding all our fortification the lamanites do come upon u and do drive u out of the city . mormon and they do also drive u forth out of the land of david . mormon and we march forth and come to the land of joshua which be in the border west by the seashore . mormon and it come to pass that we do gather in our people as fast a it be possible that we might get them together in one body . mormon but behold the land be fill with robber and with lamanites and notwithstanding the great destruction which hung over my people they do not repent of their evil doings therefore there be blood and carnage spread throughout all the face of the land both on the part of the nephites and also on the part of the lamanites and it be one complete revolution throughout all the face of the land . mormon and now the lamanites have a king and his name be aaron and he come against u with an army of forty and four thousand . and behold i withstand him with forty and two thousand . and it come to pass that i beat him with my army that he flee before me . and behold all this be do and three hundred and thirty year have pass away . mormon and it come to pass that the nephites begin to repent of their iniquity and begin to cry even a have be prophesy by samuel the prophet for behold no man could keep that which be his own for the thief and the robber and the murderer and the magic art and the witchcraft which be in the land . mormon thus there begin to be a mourning and a lamentation in all the land because of these thing and more especially among the people of nephi . mormon and it come to pass that when i mormon saw their lamentation and their mourning and their sorrow before the lord my heart do begin to rejoice within me know the mercy and the long suffering of the lord therefore suppose that he would be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous people . mormon but behold this my joy be vain for their sorrowing be not unto repentance because of the goodness of god but it be rather the sorrowing of the damn because the lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin . mormon and they do not come unto jesus with broken heart and contrite spirit but they do curse god and wish to die . nevertheless they would struggle with the sword for their life . mormon and it come to pass that my sorrow do return unto me again and i saw that the day of grace be pass with them both temporally and spiritually for i saw thousand of them hew down in open rebellion against their god and heap up a dung upon the face of the land . and thus three hundred and forty and four year have pass away . mormon and it come to pass that in the three hundred and forty and fifth year the nephites do begin to flee before the lamanites and they be pursue until they come even to the land of jashon before it be possible to stop them in their retreat . mormon and now the city of jashon be near the land where ammaron have deposit the record unto the lord that they might not be destroy . and behold i have go accord to the word of ammaron and take the plate of nephi and do make a record accord to the word of ammaron . mormon and upon the plate of nephi i do make a full account of all the wickedness and abomination but upon these plate i do forbear to make a full account of their wickedness and abomination for behold a continual scene of wickedness and abomination have be before mine eye ever since i have be sufficient to behold the way of man . mormon and wo be me because of their wickedness for my heart have be fill with sorrow because of their wickedness all my day nevertheless i know that i shall be lift up at the last day . mormon and it come to pass that in this year the people of nephi again be hunt and drive . and it come to pass that we be drive forth until we have come northward to the land which be call shem . mormon and it come to pass that we do fortify the city of shem and we do gather in our people as much a it be possible that perhaps we might save them from destruction . mormon and it come to pass in the three hundred and forty and sixth year they begin to come upon u again . mormon and it come to pass that i do speak unto my people and do urge them with great energy that they would stand boldly before the lamanites and fight for their wife and their child and their house and their home . mormon and my word do arouse them somewhat to vigor insomuch that they do not flee from before the lamanites but do stand with boldness against them . mormon and it come to pass that we do contend with an army of thirty thousand against an army of fifty thousand . and it come to pass that we do stand before them with such firmness that they do flee from before u . mormon and it come to pass that when they have flee we do pursue them with our army and do meet them again and do beat them nevertheless the strength of the lord be not with u yea we be leave to ourselves that the spirit of the lord do not abide in u therefore we have become weak like unto our brother . mormon and my heart do sorrow because of this the great calamity of my people because of their wickedness and their abomination . but behold we do go forth against the lamanites and the robber of gadianton until we have again take possession of the land of our inheritance . mormon and the three hundred and forty and ninth year have pass away . and in the three hundred and fiftieth year we make a treaty with the lamanites and the robber of gadianton in which we do get the land of our inheritance divide . mormon and the lamanites do give unto u the land northward yea even to the narrow passage which lead into the land southward . and we do give unto the lamanites all the land southward . mormon chapter mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites do not come to battle again until ten year more have pass away . and behold i have employ my people the nephites in prepare their land and their arm against the time of battle . mormon and it come to pass that the lord do say unto me cry unto this people repent ye and come unto me and be ye baptized and build up again my church and ye shall be spar . mormon and i do cry unto this people but it be in vain and they do not realize that it be the lord that have spar them and grant unto them a chance for repentance . and behold they do harden their heart against the lord their god . mormon and it come to pass that after this tenth year have pass away make in the whole three hundred and sixty year from the come of christ the king of the lamanites send an epistle unto me which give unto me to know that they be prepare to come again to battle against u . mormon and it come to pass that i do cause my people that they should gather themselves together at the land desolation to a city which be in the border by the narrow pas which lead into the land southward . mormon and there we do place our army that we might stop the army of the lamanites that they might not get possession of any of our land therefore we do fortify against them with all our force . mormon and it come to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and first year the lamanites do come down to the city of desolation to battle against u and it come to pass that in that year we do beat them insomuch that they do return to their own land again . mormon and in the three hundred and sixty and second year they do come down again to battle . and we do beat them again and do slay a great number of them and their dead be cast into the sea . mormon and now because of this great thing which my people the nephites have do they begin to boast in their own strength and begin to swear before the heaven that they would avenge themselves of the blood of their brother who have be slay by their enemy . mormon and they do swear by the heaven and also by the throne of god that they would go up to battle against their enemy and would cut them off from the face of the land . mormon and it come to pass that i mormon do utterly refuse from this time forth to be a commander and a leader of this people because of their wickedness and abomination . mormon behold i have lead them notwithstanding their wickedness i have lead them many time to battle and have love them accord to the love of god which be in me with all my heart and my soul have be pour out in prayer unto my god all the day long for them nevertheless it be without faith because of the hardness of their heart . mormon and thrice have i deliver them out of the hand of their enemy and they have repent not of their sin . mormon and when they have swear by all that have be forbid them by our lord and savior jesus christ that they would go up unto their enemy to battle and avenge themselves of the blood of their brother behold the voice of the lord come unto me say mormon vengeance be mine and i will repay and because this people repent not after i have deliver them behold they shall be cut off from the face of the earth . mormon and it come to pass that i utterly refuse to go up against mine enemy and i do even a the lord have command me and i do stand a an idle witness to manifest unto the world the thing which i saw and heard accord to the manifestation of the spirit which have testify of thing to come . mormon therefore i write unto you gentile and also unto you house of israel when the work shall commence that ye shall be about to prepare to return to the land of your inheritance mormon yea behold i write unto all the end of the earth yea unto you twelve tribe of israel who shall be judge accord to your work by the twelve whom jesus choose to be his disciple in the land of jerusalem . mormon and i write also unto the remnant of this people who shall also be judge by the twelve whom jesus chose in this land and they shall be judge by the other twelve whom jesus chose in the land of jerusalem . mormon and these thing doth the spirit manifest unto me therefore i write unto you all . and for this cause i write unto you that ye may know that ye must all stand before the judgment seat of christ yea every soul who belong to the whole human family of adam and ye must stand to be judge of your work whether they be good or evil mormon and also that ye may believe the gospel of jesus christ which ye shall have among you and also that the jew the covenant people of the lord shall have other witness besides him whom they saw and hear that jesus whom they slew be the very christ and the very god . mormon and i would that i could persuade all ye end of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment seat of christ . mormon chapter mormon and now it come to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and third year the nephites do go up with their army to battle against the lamanites out of the land desolation . mormon and it come to pass that the army of the nephites be drive back again to the land of desolation . and while they be yet weary a fresh army of the lamanites do come upon them and they have a sore battle insomuch that the lamanites do take possession of the city desolation and do slay many of the nephites and do take many prisoner . mormon and the remainder do flee and join the inhabitant of the city teancum . now the city teancum lay in the border by the seashore and it be also near the city desolation . mormon and it be because the army of the nephites go up unto the lamanites that they begin to be smite for be it not for that the lamanites could have have no power over them . mormon but behold the judgment of god will overtake the wicked and it be by the wicked that the wicked be punish for it be the wicked that stir up the heart of the child of men unto bloodshed . mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites do make preparation to come against the city teancum . mormon and it come to pass in the three hundred and sixty and fourth year the lamanites do come against the city teancum that they might take possession of the city teancum also . mormon and it come to pass that they be repulse and drive back by the nephites . and when the nephites saw that they have drive the lamanites they do again boast of their own strength and they go forth in their own might and take possession again of the city desolation . mormon and now all these thing have be do and there have be thousand slay on both side both the nephites and the lamanites . mormon and it come to pass that the three hundred and sixty and sixth year have pass away and the lamanites come again upon the nephites to battle and yet the nephites repent not of the evil they have do but persist in their wickedness continually . mormon and it be impossible for the tongue to describe or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which be among the people both of the nephites and of the lamanites and every heart be harden so that they delight in the shedding of blood continually . mormon and there never have be so great wickedness among all the child of lehi nor even among all the house of israel accord to the word of the lord a be among this people . mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites do take possession of the city desolation and this because their number do exceed the number of the nephites . mormon and they do also march forward against the city teancum and do drive the inhabitant forth out of her and do take many prisoner both woman and child and do offer them up a sacrifice unto their idol god . mormon and it come to pass that in the three hundred and sixty and seventh year the nephites be angry because the lamanites have sacrifice their woman and their child that they do go against the lamanites with exceedingly great anger insomuch that they do beat again the lamanites and drive them out of their land . mormon and the lamanites do not come again against the nephites until the three hundred and seventy and fifth year . mormon and in this year they do come down against the nephites with all their power and they be not number because of the greatness of their number . mormon and from this time forth do the nephites gain no power over the lamanites but begin to be sweep off by them even a a dew before the sun . mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites do come down against the city desolation and there be an exceedingly sore battle fought in the land desolation in the which they do beat the nephites . mormon and they flee again from before them and they come to the city boaz and there they do stand against the lamanites with exceed boldness insomuch that the lamanites do not beat them until they have come again the second time . mormon and when they have come the second time the nephites be drive and slaughter with an exceedingly great slaughter their woman and their child be again sacrifice unto idol . mormon and it come to pass that the nephites do again flee from before them take all the inhabitant with them both in town and village . mormon and now i mormon see that the lamanites be about to overthrow the land therefore i do go to the hill shim and do take up all the record which ammaron have hide up unto the lord . mormon chapter mormon and it come to pass that i do go forth among the nephites and do repent of the oath which i have make that i would no more assist them and they give me command again of their army for they look upon me a though i could deliver them from their affliction . mormon but behold i be without hope for i know the judgment of the lord which should come upon them for they repent not of their iniquity but do struggle for their life without call upon that be who create them . mormon and it come to pass that the lamanites do come against u a we have flee to the city of jordan but behold they be drive back that they do not take the city at that time . mormon and it come to pass that they come against u again and we do maintain the city . and there be also other city which be maintain by nephites which strongholds do cut them off that they could not get into the country which lay before u to destroy the inhabitant of our land . mormon and it come to pass that whatsoever land we have pass by and the inhabitant thereof be not gather in be destroy by the lamanites and their town and village and city be burn with fire and thus three hundred and seventy and nine year pass away . mormon and it come to pass that in the three hundred and eightieth year the lamanites do come again against u to battle and we do stand against them boldly but it be all in vain for so great be their number that they do tread the people of the nephites under their foot . mormon and it come to pass that we do again take to flight and those whose flight be swift than the lamanites ' do escape and those whose flight do not exceed the lamanites ' be sweep down and destroyed . mormon and now behold i mormon do not desire to harrow up the soul of men in cast before them such an awful scene of blood and carnage a be lay before mine eye but i knowing that these thing must surely be make know and that all thing which be hid must be reveal upon the house top mormon and also that a knowledge of these thing must come unto the remnant of these people and also unto the gentile who the lord hath say should scatter this people and this people should be count a naught among them therefore i write a small abridgment dare not to give a full account of the thing which i have see because of the commandment which i have receive and also that ye might not have too great sorrow because of the wickedness of this people . mormon and now behold this i speak unto their seed and also to the gentile who have care for the house of israel that realize and know from whence their blessing come . mormon for i know that such will sorrow for the calamity of the house of israel yea they will sorrow for the destruction of this people they will sorrow that this people have not repent that they might have be clasp in the arm of jesus . mormon now these thing be write unto the remnant of the house of jacob and they be write after this manner because it be know of god that wickedness will not bring them forth unto them and they be to be hide up unto the lord that they may come forth in his own due time . mormon and this be the commandment which i have receive and behold they shall come forth accord to the commandment of the lord when he shall see fit in his wisdom . mormon and behold they shall go unto the unbelieving of the jew and for this intent shall they go that they may be persuade that jesus be the christ the son of the living god that the father may bring about through his most beloved his great and eternal purpose in restore the jew or all the house of israel to the land of their inheritance which the lord their god hath give them unto the fulfilling of his covenant mormon and also that the seed of this people may more fully believe his gospel which shall go forth unto them from the gentile for this people shall be scatter and shall become a dark a filthy and a loathsome people beyond the description of that which ever hath be amongst u yea even that which hath be among the lamanites and this because of their unbelief and idolatry . mormon for behold the spirit of the lord hath already cease to strive with their father and they be without christ and god in the world and they be drive about a chaff before the wind . mormon they be once a delightsome people and they have christ for their shepherd yea they be lead even by god the father . mormon but now behold they be lead about by satan even a chaff be drive before the wind or a a vessel be toss about upon the wave without sail or anchor or without anything wherewith to steer her and even a she be so be they . mormon and behold the lord hath reserve their blessing which they might have receive in the land for the gentile who shall possess the land . mormon but behold it shall come to pass that they shall be drive and scatter by the gentile and after they have be drive and scatter by the gentile behold then will the lord remember the covenant which he make unto abraham and unto all the house of israel . mormon and also the lord will remember the prayer of the righteous which have be put up unto him for them . mormon and then o ye gentile how can ye stand before the power of god except ye shall repent and turn from your evil way ? mormon know ye not that ye be in the hand of god ? know ye not that he hath all power and at his great command the earth shall be roll together a a scroll ? mormon therefore repent ye and humble yourselves before him l he shall come out in justice against you lest a remnant of the seed of jacob shall go forth among you a a lion and tear you in piece and there be none to deliver . mormon chapter mormon and now i finish my record concern the destruction of my people the nephites . and it come to pass that we do march forth before the lamanites . mormon and i mormon write an epistle unto the king of the lamanites and desire of him that he would grant unto u that we might gather together our people unto the land of cumorah by a hill which be call cumorah and there we could give them battle . mormon and it come to pass that the king of the lamanites do grant unto me the thing which i desire . mormon and it come to pass that we do march forth to the land of cumorah and we do pitch our tent around about the hill cumorah and it be in a land of many water river and fountain and here we have hope to gain advantage over the lamanites . mormon and when three hundred and eighty and four year have pass away we have gather in all the remainder of our people unto the land of cumorah . mormon and it come to pass that when we have gather in all our people in one to the land of cumorah behold i mormon begin to be old and know it to be the last struggle of my people and have be command of the lord that i should not suffer the record which have be hand down by our father which be sacred to fall into the hand of the lamanites for the lamanites would destroy them therefore i make this record out of the plate of nephi and hide up in the hill cumorah all the record which have be entrust to me by the hand of the lord save it be these few plate which i give unto my son moroni . mormon and it come to pass that my people with their wife and their child do now behold the army of the lamanites march towards them and with that awful fear of death which fill the breast of all the wicked do they await to receive them . mormon and it come to pass that they come to battle against u and every soul be fill with terror because of the greatness of their number . mormon and it come to pass that they do fall upon my people with the sword and with the bow and with the arrow and with the ax and with all manner of weapon of war . mormon and it come to pass that my men be hew down yea even my ten thousand who be with me and i fell wound in the midst and they pass by me that they do not put an end to my life . mormon and when they have go through and hew down all my people save it be twenty and four of u among whom be my son moroni and we have survive the dead of our people do behold on the morrow when the lamanites have return unto their camp from the top of the hill cumorah the ten thousand of my people who be hewn down be lead in the front by me . mormon and we also behold the ten thousand of my people who be lead by my son moroni . mormon and behold the ten thousand of gidgiddonah have fall and he also in the midst . mormon and lamah have fall with his ten thousand and gilgal have fall with his ten thousand and limhah have fall with his ten thousand and jeneum have fall with his ten thousand and cumenihah and moronihah and antionum and shiblom and shem and josh have fall with their ten thousand each . mormon and it come to pass that there be ten more who do fall by the sword with their ten thousand each yea even all my people save it be those twenty and four who be with me and also a few who have escape into the south country and a few who have desert over unto the lamanites have fall and their flesh and bone and blood lay upon the face of the earth be leave by the hand of those who slew them to molder upon the land and to crumble and to return to their mother earth . mormon and my soul be rent with anguish because of the slain of my people and i cried mormon o ye fair one how could ye have depart from the way of the lord ! o ye fair one how could ye have reject that jesus who stand with open arm to receive you ! mormon behold if ye have not do this ye would not have fall . but behold ye be fall and i mourn your loss . mormon o ye fair son and daughter ye father and mother ye husband and wife ye fair one how be it that ye could have fall ! mormon but behold ye be go and my sorrow can not bring your return . mormon and the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality and these body which be now molder in corruption must soon become incorruptible body and then ye must stand before the judgment seat of christ to be judge accord to your work and if it so be that ye be righteous then be ye bless with your father who have go before you . mormon o that ye have repent before this great destruction have come upon you . but behold ye be go and the father yea the eternal father of heaven knoweth your state and he doeth with you accord to his justice and mercy . mormon chapter mormon and now behold i would speak somewhat unto the remnant of this people who be spar if it so be that god may give unto them my word that they may know of the thing of their father yea i speak unto you ye remnant of the house of israel and these be the word which i speak mormon know ye that ye be of the house of israel . mormon know ye that ye must come unto repentance or ye can not be save . mormon know ye that ye must lay down your weapon of war and delight no more in the shedding of blood and take them not again save it be that god shall command you . mormon know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your father and repent of all your sin and iniquity and believe in jesus christ that he be the son of god and that he be slay by the jew and by the power of the father he hath risen again whereby he hath gain the victory over the grave and also in him be the sting of death swallow up . mormon and he bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead whereby man must be raise to stand before his judgment seat . mormon and he hath bring to pass the redemption of the world whereby he that be find guiltless before him at the judgment day hath it give unto him to dwell in the presence of god in his kingdom to sing ceaseless praise with the choir above unto the father and unto the son and unto the holy ghost which be one god in a state of happiness which hath no end . mormon therefore repent and be baptize in the name of jesus and lay hold upon the gospel of christ which shall be set before you not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the gentile from the jew which record shall come from the gentile unto you . mormon for behold this be write for the intent that ye may believe that and if ye believe that ye will believe this also and if ye believe this ye will know concern your father and also the marvelous work which be work by the power of god among them . mormon and ye will also know that ye be a remnant of the seed of jacob therefore ye be number among the people of the first covenant and if it so be that ye believe in christ and be baptize first with water then with fire and with the holy ghost follow the example of our savior accord to that which he hath command u it shall be well with you in the day of judgment . amen . mormon chapter mormon behold i moroni do finish the record of my father mormon . behold i have but few thing to write which thing i have be command by my father . mormon and now it come to pass that after the great and tremendous battle at cumorah behold the nephites who have escape into the country southward be hunt by the lamanites until they be all destroy . mormon and my father also be kill by them and i even remain alone to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people . but behold they be go and i fulfil the commandment of my father . and whether they will slay me i know not . mormon therefore i will write and hide up the record in the earth and whither i go it mattereth not . mormon behold my father hath make this record and he hath write the intent thereof . and behold i would write it also if i have room upon the plate but i have not and ore i have none for i be alone . my father hath be slay in battle and all my kinsfolk and i have not friend nor whither to go and how long the lord will suffer that i may live i know not . mormon behold four hundred year have pass away since the come of our lord and savior . mormon and behold the lamanites have hunt my people the nephites down from city to city and from place to place even until they be no more and great have be their fall yea great and marvelous be the destruction of my people the nephites . mormon and behold it be the hand of the lord which hath do it . and behold also the lamanites be at war one with another and the whole face of this land be one continual round of murder and bloodshed and no one knoweth the end of the war . mormon and now behold i say no more concern them for there be none save it be the lamanites and robber that do exist upon the face of the land . mormon and there be none that do know the true god save it be the disciple of jesus who do tarry in the land until the wickedness of the people be so great that the lord would not suffer them to remain with the people and whether they be upon the face of the land no man knoweth . mormon but behold my father and i have see them and they have minister unto u . mormon and whoso receiveth this record and shall not condemn it because of the imperfection which be in it the same shall know of great thing than these . behold i be moroni and be it possible i would make all thing know unto you . mormon behold i make an end of speak concern this people . i be the son of mormon and my father be a descendant of nephi . mormon and i be the same who hideth up this record unto the lord the plate thereof be of no worth because of the commandment of the lord . for he truly saith that no one shall have them to get gain but the record thereof be of great worth and whoso shall bring it to light him will the lord bless . mormon for none can have power to bring it to light save it be give him of god for god will that it shall be do with an eye single to his glory or the welfare of the ancient and long dispersed covenant people of the lord . mormon and bless be he that shall bring this thing to light for it shall be bring out of darkness unto light accord to the word of god yea it shall be bring out of the earth and it shall shine forth out of darkness and come unto the knowledge of the people and it shall be do by the power of god . mormon and if there be fault they be the fault of a man . but behold we know no fault nevertheless god knoweth all thing therefore he that condemneth let him be aware lest he shall be in danger of hell fire . mormon and he that saith show unto me or ye shall be smite let him beware l he commandeth that which be forbidden of the lord . mormon for behold the same that judgeth rashly shall be judge rashly again for accord to his work shall his wage be therefore he that smiteth shall be smite again of the lord . mormon behold what the scripture say man shall not smite neither shall he judge for judgment be mine saith the lord and vengeance be mine also and i will repay . mormon and he that shall breathe out wrath and strife against the work of the lord and against the covenant people of the lord who be the house of israel and shall say we will destroy the work of the lord and the lord will not remember his covenant which he hath make unto the house of israel the same be in danger to be hew down and cast into the fire mormon for the eternal purpose of the lord shall roll on until all his promise shall be fulfil . mormon search the prophecy of isaiah . behold i can not write them . yea behold i say unto you that those saint who have go before me who have possess this land shall cry yea even from the dust will they cry unto the lord and a the lord liveth he will remember the covenant which he hath make with them . mormon and he knoweth their prayer that they be in behalf of their brother . and he knoweth their faith for in his name could they remove mountain and in his name could they cause the earth to shake and by the power of his word do they cause prison to tumble to the earth yea even the fiery furnace could not harm them neither wild beast nor poisonous serpent because of the power of his word . mormon and behold their prayer be also in behalf of him that the lord should suffer to bring these thing forth . mormon and no one need say they shall not come for they surely shall for the lord hath speak it for out of the earth shall they come by the hand of the lord and none can stay it and it shall come in a day when it shall be say that miracle be do away and it shall come even a if one should speak from the dead . mormon and it shall come in a day when the blood of saint shall cry unto the lord because of secret combination and the work of darkness . mormon yea it shall come in a day when the power of god shall be deny and church become defiled and be lift up in the pride of their heart yea even in a day when leader of church and teacher shall rise in the pride of their heart even to the envying of them who belong to their church . mormon yea it shall come in a day when there shall be hear of fire and tempest and vapor of smoke in foreign land mormon and there shall also be hear of war rumor of war and earthquake in diver place . mormon yea it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollution upon the face of the earth there shall be murder and rob and lie and deceivings and whoredom and all manner of abomination when there shall be many who will say do this or do that and it mattereth not for the lord will uphold such at the last day . but wo unto such for they be in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity . mormon yea it shall come in a day when there shall be church build up that shall say come unto me and for your money you shall be forgive of your sin . mormon o ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people why have ye build up church unto yourselves to get gain ? why have ye transfigure the holy word of god that ye might bring damnation upon your soul ? behold look ye unto the revelation of god for behold the time cometh at that day when all these thing must be fulfil . mormon behold the lord hath show unto me great and marvelous thing concern that which must shortly come at that day when these thing shall come forth among you . mormon behold i speak unto you a if ye be present and yet ye be not . but behold jesus christ hath show you unto me and i know your do . mormon and i know that ye do walk in the pride of your heart and there be none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their heart unto the wearing of very fine apparel unto envy and strife and malice and persecution and all manner of iniquity and your church yea even every one have become polluted because of the pride of your heart . mormon for behold ye do love money and your substance and your fine apparel and the adorning of your church more than ye love the poor and the needy the sick and the afflict . mormon o ye pollution ye hypocrite ye teacher who sell yourselves for that which will canker why have ye pollute the holy church of god ? why be ye ashamed to take upon you the name of christ ? why do ye not think that great be the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never die because of the praise of the world ? mormon why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life and yet suffer the hungry and the needy and the naked and the sick and the afflict to pass by you and notice them not ? mormon yea why do ye build up your secret abomination to get gain and cause that widow should mourn before the lord and also orphan to mourn before the lord and also the blood of their father and their husband to cry unto the lord from the ground for vengeance upon your head ? mormon behold the sword of vengeance hangeth over you and the time soon cometh that he avengeth the blood of the saint upon you for he will not suffer their cry any longer . mormon chapter mormon and now i speak also concern those who do not believe in christ . mormon behold will ye believe in the day of your visitation behold when the lord shall come yea even that great day when the earth shall be roll together a a scroll and the element shall melt with fervent heat yea in that great day when ye shall be bring to stand before the lamb of god then will ye say that there be no god ? mormon then will ye long deny the christ or can ye behold the lamb of god ? do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt ? do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy be when your soul be rack with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abuse his law ? mormon behold i say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just god under a consciousness of your filthiness before him than ye would to dwell with the damned soul in hell . mormon for behold when ye shall be bring to see your nakedness before god and also the glory of god and the holiness of jesus christ it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you . mormon o then ye unbelieving turn ye unto the lord cry mightily unto the father in the name of jesus that perhaps ye may be find spotless pure fair and white have be cleanse by the blood of the lamb at that great and last day . mormon and again i speak unto you who deny the revelation of god and say that they be do away that there be no revelation nor prophecy nor gift nor heal nor speak with tongue and the interpretation of tongue mormon behold i say unto you he that denieth these thing knoweth not the gospel of christ yea he have not read the scripture if so he do not understand them . mormon for do we not read that god be the same yesterday today and forever and in him there be no variableness neither shadow of change ? mormon and now if ye have imagine up unto yourselves a god who doth vary and in whom there be shadow of change then have ye imagine up unto yourselves a god who be not god of miracle . mormon but behold i will show unto you a god of miracle even the god of abraham and the god of isaac and the god of jacob and it be that same god who create the heaven and the earth and all thing that in them be . mormon behold he create adam and by adam come the fall of man . and because of the fall of man come jesus christ even the father and the son and because of jesus christ come the redemption of man . mormon and because of the redemption of man which come by jesus christ they be bring back into the presence of the lord yea this be wherein all men be redeem because the death of christ bringeth to pass the resurrection which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep from which sleep all men shall be awaken by the power of god when the trump shall sound and they shall come forth both small and great and all shall stand before his bar be redeem and loose from this eternal band of death which death be a temporal death . mormon and then cometh the judgment of the holy one upon them and then cometh the time that he that be filthy shall be filthy still and he that be righteous shall be righteous still he that be happy shall be happy still and he that be unhappy shall be unhappy still . mormon and now o all ye that have imagine up unto yourselves a god who can do no miracle i would ask of you have all these thing pass of which i have speak ? have the end come yet ? behold i say unto you nay and god have not cease to be a god of miracle . mormon behold be not the thing that god hath wrought marvelous in our eye ? yea and who can comprehend the marvelous work of god ? mormon who shall say that it be not a miracle that by his word the heaven and the earth should be and by the power of his word man be create of the dust of the earth and by the power of his word have miracle be work ? mormon and who shall say that jesus christ do not many mighty miracle ? and there be many mighty miracle work by the hand of the apostle . mormon and if there be miracle work then why have god cease to be a god of miracle and yet be an unchangeable be ? and behold i say unto you he changeth not if so he would cease to be god and he ceaseth not to be god and be a god of miracle . mormon and the reason why he ceaseth to do miracle among the child of men be because that they dwindle in unbelief and depart from the right way and know not the god in whom they should trust . mormon behold i say unto you that whoso believeth in christ doubt nothing whatsoever he shall ask the father in the name of christ it shall be grant him and this promise be unto all even unto the end of the earth . mormon for behold thus say jesus christ the son of god unto his disciple who should tarry yea and also to all his disciple in the hearing of the multitude go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature mormon and he that believeth and be baptize shall be save but he that believeth not shall be damn mormon and these sign shall follow them that believe in my name shall they cast out devil they shall speak with new tongue they shall take up serpent and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them they shall lay hand on the sick and they shall recover mormon and whosoever shall believe in my name doubt nothing unto him will i confirm all my word even unto the end of the earth . mormon and now behold who can stand against the work of the lord ? who can deny his saying ? who will rise up against the almighty power of the lord ? who will despise the work of the lord ? who will despise the child of christ ? behold all ye who be despisers of the work of the lord for ye shall wonder and perish . mormon o then despise not and wonder not but hearken unto the word of the lord and ask the father in the name of jesus for what thing soever ye shall stand in need . doubt not but be believing and begin as in time of old and come unto the lord with all your heart and work out your own salvation with fear and tremble before him . mormon be wise in the day of your probation strip yourselves of all uncleanness ask not that ye may consume it on your lust but ask with a firmness unshaken that ye will yield to no temptation but that ye will serve the true and living god . mormon see that ye be not baptize unworthily see that ye partake not of the sacrament of christ unworthily but see that ye do all thing in worthiness and do it in the name of jesus christ the son of the living god and if ye do this and endure to the end ye will in nowise be cast out . mormon behold i speak unto you a though i spake from the dead for i know that ye shall have my word . mormon condemn me not because of mine imperfection neither my father because of his imperfection neither them who have write before him but rather give thanks unto god that he hath make manifest unto you our imperfection that ye may learn to be more wise than we have be . mormon and now behold we have write this record accord to our knowledge in the character which be call among u the reformed egyptian be hand down and alter by u accord to our manner of speech . mormon and if our plate have be sufficiently large we should have write in hebrew but the hebrew hath be alter by u also and if we could have write in hebrew behold ye would have have no imperfection in our record . mormon but the lord knoweth the thing which we have write and also that none other people knoweth our language and because that none other people knoweth our language therefore he hath prepared mean for the interpretation thereof . mormon and these thing be write that we may rid our garment of the blood of our brother who have dwindle in unbelief . mormon and behold these thing which we have desire concern our brother yea even their restoration to the knowledge of christ be accord to the prayer of all the saint who have dwell in the land . mormon and may the lord jesus christ grant that their prayer may be answer accord to their faith and may god the father remember the covenant which he hath make with the house of israel and may he bless them forever through faith on the name of jesus christ . amen . the book of ether the record of the jaredites take from the twenty four plate find by the people of limhi in the day of king mosiah . ether chapter ether and now i moroni proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitant who be destroy by the hand of the lord upon the face of this north country . ether and i take mine account from the twenty and four plate which be find by the people of limhi which be call the book of ether . ether and a i suppose that the first part of this record which speak concern the creation of the world and also of adam and an account from that time even to the great tower and whatsoever thing transpire among the child of men until that time be have among the jew ether therefore i do not write those thing which transpire from the day of adam until that time but they be have upon the plate and whoso findeth them the same will have power that he may get the full account . ether but behold i give not the full account but a part of the account i give from the tower down until they be destroy . ether and on this wise do i give the account . he that write this record be ether and he be a descendant of coriantor . ether coriantor be the son of moron . ether and moron be the son of ethem . ether and ethem be the son of ahah . ether and ahah be the son of seth . ether and seth be the son of shiblon . ether and shiblon be the son of com . ether and com be the son of coriantum . ether and coriantum be the son of amnigaddah . ether and amnigaddah be the son of aaron . ether and aaron be a descendant of heth who be the son of hearthom . ether and hearthom be the son of lib . ether and lib be the son of kish . ether and kish be the son of corom . ether and corom be the son of levi . ether and levi be the son of kim . ether and kim be the son of morianton . ether and morianton be a descendant of riplakish . ether and riplakish be the son of shez . ether and shez be the son of heth . ether and heth be the son of com . ether and com be the son of coriantum . ether and coriantum be the son of emer . ether and emer be the son of omer . ether and omer be the son of shule . ether and shule be the son of kib . ether and kib be the son of orihah who be the son of jared ether which jar come forth with his brother and their family with some others and their family from the great tower at the time the lord confound the language of the people and swore in his wrath that they should be scatter upon all the face of the earth and accord to the word of the lord the people be scatter . ether and the brother of jared be a large and mighty man and a man highly favor of the lord jar his brother say unto him cry unto the lord that he will not confound u that we may not understand our word . ether and it come to pass that the brother of jared do cry unto the lord and the lord have compassion upon jar therefore he do not confound the language of jared and jared and his brother be not confound . ether then jar say unto his brother cry again unto the lord and it may be that he will turn away his anger from them who be our friend that he confound not their language . ether and it come to pass that the brother of jared do cry unto the lord and the lord have compassion upon their friend and their family also that they be not confound . ether and it come to pass that jar spake again unto his brother say go and inquire of the lord whether he will drive u out of the land and if he will drive u out of the land cry unto him whither we shall go . and who knoweth but the lord will carry u forth into a land which be choice above all the earth ? and if it so be let u be faithful unto the lord that we may receive it for our inheritance . ether and it come to pass that the brother of jared do cry unto the lord accord to that which have be speak by the mouth of jared . ether and it come to pass that the lord do hear the brother of jared and have compassion upon him and say unto him ether go to and gather together thy flock both male and female of every kind and also of the seed of the earth of every kind and thy family and also jar thy brother and his family and also thy friend and their family and the friend of jared and their family . ether and when thou hast do this thou shalt go at the head of them down into the valley which be northward . and there will i meet thee and i will go before thee into a land which be choice above all the land of the earth . ether and there will i bless thee and thy seed and raise up unto me of thy seed and of the seed of thy brother and they who shall go with thee a great nation . and there shall be none great than the nation which i will raise up unto me of thy seed upon all the face of the earth . and thus i will do unto thee because this long time ye have cry unto me . ether chapter ether and it come to pass that jared and his brother and their family and also the friend of jared and his brother and their family go down into the valley which be northward and the name of the valley be nimrod be call after the mighty hunter with their flock which they have gather together male and female of every kind . ether and they do also lay snare and catch fowl of the air and they do also prepare a vessel in which they do carry with them the fish of the water . ether and they do also carry with them deseret which by interpretation be a honey bee and thus they do carry with them swarm of bee and all manner of that which be upon the face of the land seed of every kind . ether and it come to pass that when they have come down into the valley of nimrod the lord come down and talk with the brother of jared and he be in a cloud and the brother of jared saw him not . ether and it come to pass that the lord command them that they should go forth into the wilderness yea into that quarter where there never have man be . and it come to pass that the lord do go before them and do talk with them a he stand in a cloud and give direction whither they should travel . ether and it come to pass that they do travel in the wilderness and do build barge in which they do cross many water be direct continually by the hand of the lord . ether and the lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise which be choice above all other land which the lord god have preserve for a righteous people . ether and he have swear in his wrath unto the brother of jared that whoso should possess this land of promise from that time henceforth and forever should serve him the true and only god or they should be sweep off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them . ether and now we can behold the decree of god concern this land that it be a land of promise and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve god or they shall be sweep off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them . and the fulness of his wrath cometh upon them when they be ripen in iniquity . ether for behold this be a land which be choice above all other land wherefore he that doth posse it shall serve god or shall be sweep off for it be the everlasting decree of god . and it be not until the fulness of iniquity among the child of the land that they be sweep off . ether and this cometh unto you o ye gentile that ye may know the decree of god that ye may repent and not continue in your iniquity until the fulness come that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of god upon you a the inhabitant of the land have hitherto do . ether behold this be a choice land and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage and from captivity and from all other nation under heaven if they will but serve the god of the land who be jesus christ who hath be manifest by the thing which we have write . ether and now i proceed with my record for behold it come to pass that the lord do bring jared and his brother forth even to that great sea which divideth the land . and a they come to the sea they pitch their tent and they call the name of the place moriancumer and they dwell in tent and dwelt in tent upon the seashore for the space of four year . ether and it come to pass at the end of four year that the lord come again unto the brother of jared and stand in a cloud and talk with him . and for the space of three hour do the lord talk with the brother of jared and chasten him because he remember not to call upon the name of the lord . ether and the brother of jared repent of the evil which he have do and do call upon the name of the lord for his brother who be with him . and the lord say unto him i will forgive thee and thy brother of their sin but thou shalt not sin any more for ye shall remember that my spirit will not always strive with man wherefore if ye will sin until ye be fully ripe ye shall be cut off from the presence of the lord . and these be my thought upon the land which i shall give you for your inheritance for it shall be a land choice above all other land . ether and the lord say go to work and build after the manner of barge which ye have hitherto build . and it come to pass that the brother of jared do go to work and also his brother and build barge after the manner which they have build accord to the instruction of the lord . and they be small and they be light upon the water even like unto the lightness of a fowl upon the water . ether and they be build after a manner that they be exceedingly tight even that they would hold water like unto a dish and the bottom thereof be tight like unto a dish and the side thereof be tight like unto a dish and the end thereof be peak and the top thereof be tight like unto a dish and the length thereof be the length of a tree and the door thereof when it be shut be tight like unto a dish . ether and it come to pass that the brother of jared cry unto the lord say o lord i have perform the work which thou hast command me and i have make the barge accord a thou hast direct me . ether and behold o lord in them there be no light whither shall we steer ? and also we shall perish for in them we can not breathe save it be the air which be in them therefore we shall perish . ether and the lord say unto the brother of jared behold thou shalt make a hole in the top and also in the bottom and when thou shalt suffer for air thou shalt unstop the hole and receive air . and if it be so that the water come in upon thee behold ye shall stop the hole that ye may not perish in the flood . ether and it come to pass that the brother of jared do so accord a the lord have command . ether and he cry again unto the lord say o lord behold i have do even a thou hast command me and i have prepare the vessel for my people and behold there be no light in them . behold o lord wilt thou suffer that we shall cross this great water in darkness ? ether and the lord say unto the brother of jar what will ye that i should do that ye may have light in your vessel ? for behold ye can not have window for they will be dash in piece neither shall ye take fire with you for ye shall not go by the light of fire . ether for behold ye shall be a a whale in the midst of the sea for the mountain wave shall dash upon you . nevertheless i will bring you up again out of the depth of the sea for the wind have go forth out of my mouth and also the rain and the flood have i sent forth . ether and behold i prepare you against these thing for ye can not cross this great deep save i prepare you against the wave of the sea and the wind which have go forth and the flood which shall come . therefore what will ye that i should prepare for you that ye may have light when ye be swallow up in the depth of the sea ? ether chapter ether and it come to pass that the brother of jar now the number of the vessel which have be prepare be eight go forth unto the mount which they call the mount shelem because of it exceed height and do melt out of a rock sixteen small stone and they be white and clear even a transparent glass and he do carry them in his hand upon the top of the mount and cry again unto the lord say ether o lord thou hast say that we must be encompass about by the flood . now behold o lord and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heaven and that we be unworthy before thee because of the fall our nature have become evil continually nevertheless o lord thou hast give u a commandment that we must call upon thee that from thee we may receive accord to our desire . ether behold o lord thou hast smite u because of our iniquity and hast drive u forth and for these many year we have be in the wilderness nevertheless thou hast be merciful unto u . o lord look upon me in pity and turn away thine anger from this thy people and suffer not that they shall go forth across this rag deep in darkness but behold these thing which i have melt out of the rock . ether and i know o lord that thou hast all power and can do whatsoever thou wilt for the benefit of man therefore touch these stone o lord with thy finger and prepare them that they may shine forth in darkness and they shall shine forth unto u in the vessel which we have prepare that we may have light while we shall cross the sea . ether behold o lord thou canst do this . we know that thou art able to show forth great power which look small unto the understanding of men . ether and it come to pass that when the brother of jared have say these word behold the lord stretch forth his hand and touch the stone one by one with his finger . and the veil be take from off the eye of the brother of jared and he saw the finger of the lord and it be a the finger of a man like unto flesh and blood and the brother of jared fell down before the lord for he be strike with fear . ether and the lord saw that the brother of jared have fall to the earth and the lord say unto him arise why hast thou fall ? ether and he saith unto the lord i saw the finger of the lord and i fear l he should smite me for i know not that the lord have flesh and blood . ether and the lord say unto him because of thy faith thou hast see that i shall take upon me flesh and blood and never have man come before me with such exceed faith a thou hast for be it not so ye could not have see my finger . sawest thou more than this ? ether and he answer nay lord show thyself unto me . ether and the lord say unto him believest thou the word which i shall speak ? ether and he answer yea lord i know that thou speakest the truth for thou art a god of truth and canst not lie . ether and when he have say these word behold the lord show himself unto him and say because thou knowest these thing ye be redeem from the fall therefore ye be bring back into my presence therefore i show myself unto you . ether behold i be he who be prepare from the foundation of the world to redeem my people . behold i be jesus christ . i be the father and the son . in me shall all mankind have life and that eternally even they who shall believe on my name and they shall become my son and my daughter . ether and never have i show myself unto man whom i have create for never have man believe in me a thou hast . seest thou that ye be create after mine own image ? yea even all men be create in the beginning after mine own image . ether behold this body which ye now behold be the body of my spirit and man have i create after the body of my spirit and even a i appear unto thee to be in the spirit will i appear unto my people in the flesh . ether and now a i moroni say i could not make a full account of these thing which be write therefore it sufficeth me to say that jesus show himself unto this man in the spirit even after the manner and in the likeness of the same body even a he show himself unto the nephites . ether and he minister unto him even a he minister unto the nephites and all this that this man might know that he be god because of the many great work which the lord have show unto him . ether and because of the knowledge of this man he could not be keep from behold within the veil and he saw the finger of jesus which when he saw he fell with fear for he know that it be the finger of the lord and he have faith no longer for he know nothing doubting . ether wherefore have this perfect knowledge of god he could not be keep from within the veil therefore he saw jesus and he do minister unto him . ether and it come to pass that the lord say unto the brother of jared behold thou shalt not suffer these thing which ye have see and hear to go forth unto the world until the time cometh that i shall glorify my name in the flesh wherefore ye shall treasure up the thing which ye have see and hear and show it to no man . ether and behold when ye shall come unto me ye shall write them and shall seal them up that no one can interpret them for ye shall write them in a language that they can not be read . ether and behold these two stone will i give unto thee and ye shall seal them up also with the thing which ye shall write . ether for behold the language which ye shall write i have confound wherefore i will cause in my own due time that these stone shall magnify to the eye of men these thing which ye shall write . ether and when the lord have say these word he show unto the brother of jar all the inhabitant of the earth which have be and also all that would be and he withhold them not from his sight even unto the end of the earth . ether for he have say unto him in time before that if he would believe in him that he could show unto him all thing it should be show unto him therefore the lord could not withhold anything from him for he know that the lord could show him all thing . ether and the lord say unto him write these thing and seal them up and i will show them in mine own due time unto the child of men . ether and it come to pass that the lord command him that he should seal up the two stone which he have receive and show them not until the lord should show them unto the child of men . ether chapter ether and the lord command the brother of jared to go down out of the mount from the presence of the lord and write the thing which he have see and they be forbid to come unto the child of men until after that he should be lift up upon the cross and for this cause do king mosiah keep them that they should not come unto the world until after christ should show himself unto his people . ether and after christ truly have show himself unto his people he command that they should be make manifest . ether and now after that they have all dwindle in unbelief and there be none save it be the lamanites and they have reject the gospel of christ therefore i be command that i should hide them up again in the earth . ether behold i have write upon these plat the very thing which the brother of jared saw and there never be great thing make manifest than those which be make manifest unto the brother of jared . ether wherefore the lord hath command me to write them and i have write them . and he command me that i should seal them up and he also hath command that i should seal up the interpretation thereof wherefore i have seal up the interpreter accord to the commandment of the lord . ether for the lord say unto me they shall not go forth unto the gentile until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity and become clean before the lord . ether and in that day that they shall exercise faith in me saith the lord even a the brother of jared do that they may become sanctify in me then will i manifest unto them the thing which the brother of jared saw even to the unfold unto them all my revelation saith jesus christ the son of god the father of the heaven and of the earth and all thing that in them be . ether and he that will contend against the word of the lord let him be accurse and he that shall deny these thing let him be accurse for unto them will i show no great thing saith jesus christ for i be he who speaketh . ether and at my command the heaven be open and be shut and at my word the earth shall shake and at my command the inhabitant thereof shall pass away even so a by fire . ether and he that believeth not my word believeth not my disciple and if it so be that i do not speak judge ye for ye shall know that it be i that speaketh at the last day . ether but he that believeth these thing which i have speak him will i visit with the manifestation of my spirit and he shall know and bear record . for because of my spirit he shall know that these thing be true for it persuadeth men to do good . ether and whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good be of me for good cometh of none save it be of me . i be the same that leadeth men to all good he that will not believe my word will not believe me that i be and he that will not believe me will not believe the father who send me . for behold i be the father i be the light and the life and the truth of the world . ether come unto me o ye gentile and i will show unto you the great thing the knowledge which be hide up because of unbelief . ether come unto me o ye house of israel and it shall be make manifest unto you how great thing the father hath lay up for you from the foundation of the world and it hath not come unto you because of unbelief . ether behold when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness and hardness of heart and blindness of mind then shall the great and marvelous thing which have be hide up from the foundation of the world from you yea when ye shall call upon the father in my name with a broken heart and a contrite spirit then shall ye know that the father hath remember the covenant which he make unto your father o house of israel . ether and then shall my revelation which i have cause to be write by my servant john be unfold in the eye of all the people . remember when ye see these thing ye shall know that the time be at hand that they shall be make manifest in very deed . ether therefore when ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the father have commence upon all the face of the land . ether therefore repent all ye end of the earth and come unto me and believe in my gospel and be baptize in my name for he that believeth and be baptize shall be save but he that believeth not shall be damn and sign shall follow them that believe in my name . ether and bless be he that be find faithful unto my name at the last day for he shall be lift up to dwell in the kingdom prepare for him from the foundation of the world . and behold it be i that hath speak it . amen . ether chapter ether and now i moroni have write the word which be command me accord to my memory and i have tell you the thing which i have seal up therefore touch them not in order that ye may translate for that thing be forbidden you except by and by it shall be wisdom in god . ether and behold ye may be privilege that ye may show the plate unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work ether and unto three shall they be show by the power of god wherefore they shall know of a surety that these thing be true . ether and in the mouth of three witness shall these thing be establish and the testimony of three and this work in the which shall be show forth the power of god and also his word of which the father and the son and the holy ghost bear record and all this shall stand a a testimony against the world at the last day . ether and if it so be that they repent and come unto the father in the name of jesus they shall be receive into the kingdom of god . ether and now if i have no authority for these thing judge ye for ye shall know that i have authority when ye shall see me and we shall stand before god at the last day . amen . ether chapter ether and now i moroni proceed to give the record of jared and his brother . ether for it come to pass after the lord have prepare the stone which the brother of jared have carry up into the mount the brother of jared come down out of the mount and he do put forth the stone into the vessel which be prepared one in each end thereof and behold they do give light unto the vessel . ether and thus the lord cause stone to shine in darkness to give light unto men woman and child that they might not cross the great water in darkness . ether and it come to pass that when they have prepare all manner of food that thereby they might subsist upon the water and also food for their flock and herd and whatsoever beast or animal or fowl that they should carry with them and it come to pass that when they have do all these thing they get aboard of their vessel or barge and set forth into the sea commend themselves unto the lord their god . ether and it come to pass that the lord god cause that there should be a furious wind blow upon the face of the water towards the promised land and thus they be toss upon the wave of the sea before the wind . ether and it come to pass that they be many time bury in the depth of the sea because of the mountain wave which break upon them and also the great and terrible tempest which be cause by the fierceness of the wind . ether and it come to pass that when they be bury in the deep there be no water that could hurt them their vessel be tight like unto a dish and also they be tight like unto the ark of noah therefore when they be encompass about by many water they do cry unto the lord and he do bring them forth again upon the top of the water . ether and it come to pass that the wind do never cease to blow towards the promise land while they be upon the water and thus they be drive forth before the wind . ether and they do sing praise unto the lord yea the brother of jared do sing praise unto the lord and he do thank and praise the lord all the day long and when the night come they do not cease to praise the lord . ether and thus they be drive forth and no monster of the sea could break them neither whale that could mar them and they do have light continually whether it be above the water or under the water . ether and thus they be drive forth three hundred and forty and four day upon the water . ether and they do land upon the shore of the promised land . and when they have set their foot upon the shore of the promise land they bow themselves down upon the face of the land and do humble themselves before the lord and do shed tear of joy before the lord because of the multitude of his tender mercy over them . ether and it come to pass that they go forth upon the face of the land and begin to till the earth . ether and jar have four son and they be call jacom and gilgah and mahah and orihah . ether and the brother of jared also begat son and daughter . ether and the friend of jared and his brother be in number about twenty and two soul and they also beget son and daughter before they come to the promise land and therefore they begin to be many . ether and they be teach to walk humbly before the lord and they be also teach from on high . ether and it come to pass that they begin to spread upon the face of the land and to multiply and to till the earth and they do wax strong in the land . ether and the brother of jared begin to be old and saw that he must soon go down to the grave wherefore he say unto jared let u gather together our people that we may number them that we may know of them what they will desire of u before we go down to our graf . ether and accordingly the people be gather together . now the number of the son and the daughter of the brother of jar be twenty and two soul and the number of son and daughter of jared be twelve he have four son . ether and it come to pass that they do number their people and after that they have number them they do desire of them the thing which they would that they should do before they go down to their graf . ether and it come to pass that the people desire of them that they should anoint one of their son to be a king over them . ether and now behold this be grievous unto them . and the brother of jar say unto them surely this thing leadeth into captivity . ether but jar say unto his brother suffer them that they may have a king . and therefore he say unto them choose ye out from among our son a king even whom ye will . ether and it come to pass that they choose even the firstborn of the brother of jared and his name be pagag . and it come to pass that he refuse and would not be their king . and the people would that his father should constrain him but his father would not and he command them that they should constrain no man to be their king . ether and it come to pass that they choose all the brother of pagag and they would not . ether and it come to pass that neither would the son of jared even all save it be one and orihah be anoint to be king over the people . ether and he begin to reign and the people begin to prosper and they become exceedingly rich . ether and it come to pass that jar die and his brother also . ether and it come to pass that orihah do walk humbly before the lord and do remember how great thing the lord have do for his father and also teach his people how great thing the lord have do for their father . ether chapter ether and it come to pass that orihah do execute judgment upon the land in righteousness all his day whose day be exceedingly many . ether and he beget son and daughter yea he beget thirty and one among whom be twenty and three son . ether and it come to pass that he also beget kib in his old age . and it come to pass that kib reign in his stead and kib begat corihor . ether and when corihor be thirty and two year old he rebel against his father and go over and dwell in the land of nehor and he beget son and daughter and they become exceedingly fair wherefore corihor draw away many people after him . ether and when he have gather together an army he come up unto the land of moron where the king dwelt and take him captive which bring to pass the saying of the brother of jar that they would be bring into captivity . ether now the land of moron where the king dwelt be near the land which be call desolation by the nephites . ether and it come to pass that kib dwelt in captivity and his people under corihor his son until he become exceedingly old nevertheless kib begat shule in his old age while he be yet in captivity . ether and it come to pass that shule be angry with his brother and shule wax strong and become mighty a to the strength of a man and he be also mighty in judgment . ether wherefore he come to the hill ephraim and he do melt out of the hill and make sword out of steel for those whom he have draw away with him and after he have arm them with sword he return to the city nehor and give battle unto his brother corihor by which mean he obtain the kingdom and restore it unto his father kib . ether and now because of the thing which shule have do his father bestow upon him the kingdom therefore he begin to reign in the stead of his father . ether and it come to pass that he do execute judgment in righteousness and he do spread his kingdom upon all the face of the land for the people have become exceedingly numerous . ether and it come to pass that shule also beget many son and daughter . ether and corihor repent of the many evil which he have do wherefore shule give him power in his kingdom . ether and it come to pass that corihor have many son and daughter . and among the son of corihor there be one whose name be noah . ether and it come to pass that noah rebel against shule the king and also his father corihor and draw away cohor his brother and also all his brother and many of the people . ether and he give battle unto shule the king in which he do obtain the land of their first inheritance and he become a king over that part of the land . ether and it come to pass that he give battle again unto shule the king and he take shule the king and carry him away captive into moron . ether and it come to pass a he be about to put him to death the son of shule crept into the house of noah by night and slew him and break down the door of the prison and bring out their father and place him upon his throne in his own kingdom . ether wherefore the son of noah do build up his kingdom in his stead nevertheless they do not gain power any more over shule the king and the people who be under the reign of shule the king do prosper exceedingly and wax great . ether and the country be divide and there be two kingdom the kingdom of shule and the kingdom of cohor the son of noah . ether and cohor the son of noah cause that his people should give battle unto shule in which shule do beat them and do slay cohor . ether and now cohor have a son who be call nimrod and nimrod give up the kingdom of cohor unto shule and he do gain favor in the eye of shule wherefore shule do bestow great favor upon him and he do do in the kingdom of shule accord to his desire . ether and also in the reign of shule there come prophet among the people who be send from the lord prophesying that the wickedness and idolatry of the people be bring a curse upon the land and they should be destroy if they do not repent . ether and it come to pass that the people do revile against the prophet and do mock them . and it come to pass that king shule do execute judgment against all those who do revile against the prophet . ether and he do execute a law throughout all the land which give power unto the prophet that they should go whithersoever they would and by this cause the people be bring unto repentance . ether and because the people do repent of their iniquity and idolatries the lord do spare them and they begin to prosper again in the land . and it come to pass that shule begat son and daughter in his old age . ether and there be no more war in the day of shule and he remember the great thing that the lord have do for his father in bring them across the great deep into the promised land wherefore he do execute judgment in righteousness all his day . ether chapter ether and it come to pass that he beget omer and omer reign in his stead . and omer begat jar and jar begat son and daughter . ether and jar rebel against his father and come and dwelt in the land of heth . and it come to pass that he do flatter many people because of his cunning word until he have gain the half of the kingdom . ether and when he have gain the half of the kingdom he give battle unto his father and he do carry away his father into captivity and do make him serve in captivity ether and now in the day of the reign of omer he be in captivity the half of his day . and it come to pass that he beget son and daughter among whom be esrom and coriantumr ether and they be exceedingly angry because of the doings of jar their brother insomuch that they do raise an army and give battle unto jar . and it come to pass that they do give battle unto him by night . ether and it come to pass that when they have slay the army of jared they be about to slay him also and he plead with them that they would not slay him and he would give up the kingdom unto his father . and it come to pass that they do grant unto him his life . ether and now jared become exceedingly sorrowful because of the loss of the kingdom for he have set his heart upon the kingdom and upon the glory of the world . ether now the daughter of jared be exceedingly expert and see the sorrow of her father thought to devise a plan whereby she could redeem the kingdom unto her father . ether now the daughter of jared be exceedingly fair . and it come to pass that she do talk with her father and say unto him whereby hath my father so much sorrow ? hath he not read the record which our father bring across the great deep ? behold be there not an account concern them of old that they by their secret plan do obtain kingdom and great glory ? ether and now therefore let my father send for akish the son of kimnor and behold i be fair and i will dance before him and i will please him that he will desire me to wife wherefore if he shall desire of thee that ye shall give unto him me to wife then shall ye say i will give her if ye will bring unto me the head of my father the king . ether and now omer be a friend to akish wherefore when jared have send for akish the daughter of jared dance before him that she please him insomuch that he desire her to wife . and it come to pass that he say unto jared give her unto me to wife . ether and jar say unto him i will give her unto you if ye will bring unto me the head of my father the king . ether and it come to pass that akish gather in unto the house of jar all his kinsfolk and say unto them will ye swear unto me that ye will be faithful unto me in the thing which i shall desire of you ? ether and it come to pass that they all sware unto him by the god of heaven and also by the heaven and also by the earth and by their head that whoso should vary from the assistance which akish desire should lose his head and whoso should divulge whatsoever thing akish make know unto them the same should lose his life . ether and it come to pass that thus they do agree with akish . and akish do administer unto them the oath which be give by them of old who also seek power which have be hand down even from cain who be a murderer from the beginning . ether and they be keep up by the power of the devil to administer these oath unto the people to keep them in darkness to help such a sought power to gain power and to murder and to plunder and to lie and to commit all manner of wickedness and whoredom . ether and it be the daughter of jared who put it into his heart to search up these thing of old and jar put it into the heart of akish wherefore akish administer it unto his kindred and friend lead them away by fair promise to do whatsoever thing he desire . ether and it come to pass that they form a secret combination even a they of old which combination be most abominable and wicked above all in the sight of god ether for the lord worketh not in secret combination neither doth he will that man should shed blood but in all thing hath forbidden it from the beginning of man . ether and now i moroni do not write the manner of their oath and combination for it hath be make know unto me that they be have among all people and they be have among the lamanites . ether and they have cause the destruction of this people of whom i be now speak and also the destruction of the people of nephi . ether and whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combination to get power and gain until they shall spread over the nation behold they shall be destroy for the lord will not suffer that the blood of his saint which shall be shed by them shall always cry unto him from the ground for vengeance upon them and yet he avenge them not . ether wherefore o ye gentile it be wisdom in god that these thing should be show unto you that thereby ye may repent of your sin and suffer not that these murderous combination shall get above you which be build up to get power and gain and the work yea even the work of destruction come upon you yea even the sword of the justice of the eternal god shall fall upon you to your overthrow and destruction if ye shall suffer these thing to be . ether wherefore the lord commandeth you when ye shall see these thing come among you that ye shall awake to a sense of your awful situation because of this secret combination which shall be among you or wo be unto it because of the blood of them who have be slay for they cry from the dust for vengeance upon it and also upon those who build it up . ether for it cometh to pass that whoso buildeth it up seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all land nation and country and it bringeth to pass the destruction of all people for it be build up by the devil who be the father of all lie even that same liar who beguile our first parent yea even that same liar who hath cause man to commit murder from the beginning who hath harden the heart of men that they have murder the prophet and stone them and cast them out from the beginning . ether wherefore i moroni be command to write these thing that evil may be do away and that the time may come that satan may have no power upon the heart of the child of men but that they may be persuade to do good continually that they may come unto the fountain of all righteousness and be save . ether chapter ether and now i moroni proceed with my record . therefore behold it come to pass that because of the secret combination of akish and his friend behold they do overthrow the kingdom of omer . ether nevertheless the lord be merciful unto omer and also to his son and to his daughter who do not seek his destruction . ether and the lord warn omer in a dream that he should depart out of the land wherefore omer depart out of the land with his family and travel many day and come over and pass by the hill of shim and come over by the place where the nephites be destroy and from thence eastward and come to a place which be call ablom by the seashore and there he pitch his tent and also his son and his daughter and all his household save it be jar and his family . ether and it come to pass that jared be anoint king over the people by the hand of wickedness and he give unto akish his daughter to wife . ether and it come to pass that akish seek the life of his father in law and he apply unto those whom he have swear by the oath of the ancient and they obtain the head of his father in law a he sit upon his throne give audience to his people . ether for so great have be the spreading of this wicked and secret society that it have corrupt the heart of all the people therefore jar be murder upon his throne and akish reign in his stead . ether and it come to pass that akish begin to be jealous of his son therefore he shut him up in prison and keep him upon little or no food until he have suffer death . ether and now the brother of him that suffer death and his name be nimrah be angry with his father because of that which his father have do unto his brother . ether and it come to pass that nimrah gather together a small number of men and flee out of the land and come over and dwell with omer . ether and it come to pass that akish begat other son and they win the heart of the people notwithstanding they have swear unto him to do all manner of iniquity accord to that which he desire . ether now the people of akish be desirous for gain even a akish be desirous for power wherefore the son of akish do offer them money by which mean they draw away the more part of the people after them . ether and there begin to be a war between the son of akish and akish which last for the space of many year yea unto the destruction of nearly all the people of the kingdom yea even all save it be thirty soul and they who flee with the house of omer . ether wherefore omer be restore again to the land of his inheritance . ether and it come to pass that omer begin to be old nevertheless in his old age he beget emer and he anoint emer to be king to reign in his stead . ether and after that he have anoint emer to be king he saw peace in the land for the space of two year and he die have see exceedingly many day which be full of sorrow . and it come to pass that emer do reign in his stead and do fill the step of his father . ether and the lord begin again to take the curse from off the land and the house of emer do prosper exceedingly under the reign of emer and in the space of sixty and two year they have become exceedingly strong insomuch that they become exceedingly rich ether have all manner of fruit and of grain and of silk and of fine linen and of gold and of silver and of precious thing ether and also all manner of cattle of ox and cow and of sheep and of swine and of goat and also many other kind of animal which be useful for the food of man . ether and they also have horse and ass and there be elephant and cureloms and cumoms all of which be useful unto man and more especially the elephant and cureloms and cumoms . ether and thus the lord do pour out his blessing upon this land which be choice above all other land and he command that whoso should possess the land should possess it unto the lord or they should be destroy when they be ripen in iniquity for upon such saith the lord i will pour out the fulness of my wrath . ether and emer do execute judgment in righteousness all his day and he beget many son and daughter and he beget coriantum and he anoint coriantum to reign in his stead . ether and after he have anoint coriantum to reign in his stead he live four year and he saw peace in the land yea and he even saw the son of righteousness and do rejoice and glory in his day and he die in peace . ether and it come to pass that coriantum do walk in the step of his father and do build many mighty city and do administer that which be good unto his people in all his day . and it come to pass that he have no child even until he be exceedingly old . ether and it come to pass that his wife die be an hundred and two year old . and it come to pass that coriantum take to wife in his old age a young maid and begat son and daughter wherefore he live until he be an hundred and forty and two year old . ether and it come to pass that he beget com and com reign in his stead and he reign forty and nine year and he beget heth and he also beget other son and daughter . ether and the people have spread again over all the face of the land and there begin again to be an exceedingly great wickedness upon the face of the land and heth begin to embrace the secret plan again of old to destroy his father . ether and it come to pass that he do dethrone his father for he slew him with his own sword and he do reign in his stead . ether and there come prophet in the land again cry repentance unto them that they must prepare the way of the lord or there should come a curse upon the face of the land yea even there should be a great famine in which they should be destroy if they do not repent . ether but the people believe not the word of the prophet but they cast them out and some of them they cast into pit and leave them to perish . and it come to pass that they do all these thing accord to the commandment of the king heth . ether and it come to pass that there begin to be a great dearth upon the land and the inhabitant begin to be destroy exceedingly fast because of the dearth for there be no rain upon the face of the earth . ether and there come forth poisonous serpent also upon the face of the land and do poison many people . and it come to pass that their flock begin to flee before the poisonous serpent towards the land southward which be call by the nephites zarahemla . ether and it come to pass that there be many of them which do perish by the way nevertheless there be some which flee into the land southward . ether and it come to pass that the lord do cause the serpent that they should pursue them no more but that they should hedge up the way that the people could not pass that whoso should attempt to pass might fall by the poisonous serpent . ether and it come to pass that the people do follow the course of the beast and do devour the carcass of them which fell by the way until they have devour them all . now when the people saw that they must perish they begin to repent of their iniquity and cry unto the lord . ether and it come to pass that when they have humble themselves sufficiently before the lord he do send rain upon the face of the earth and the people begin to revive again and there begin to be fruit in the north country and in all the country round about . and the lord do show forth his power unto them in preserve them from famine . ether chapter ether and it come to pass that shez who be a descendant of heth for heth have perish by the famine and all his household save it be shez wherefore shez begin to build up again a broken people . ether and it come to pass that shez do remember the destruction of his father and he do build up a righteous kingdom for he remember what the lord have do in bringing jared and his brother across the deep and he do walk in the way of the lord and he beget son and daughter . ether and his eldest son whose name be shez do rebel against him nevertheless shez be smite by the hand of a robber because of his exceed rich which bring peace again unto his father . ether and it come to pass that his father do build up many city upon the face of the land and the people begin again to spread over all the face of the land . and shez do live to an exceedingly old age and he beget riplakish . and he die and riplakish reign in his stead . ether and it come to pass that riplakish do not do that which be right in the sight of the lord for he do have many wife and concubine and do lay that upon men 's shoulder which be grievous to be borne yea he do tax them with heavy tax and with the tax he do build many spacious building . ether and he do erect him an exceedingly beautiful throne and he do build many prison and whoso would not be subject unto tax he do cast into prison and whoso be not able to pay tax he do cast into prison and he do cause that they should labor continually for their support and whoso refuse to labor he do cause to be put to death . ether wherefore he do obtain all his fine work yea even his fine gold he do cause to be refine in prison and all manner of fine workmanship he do cause to be work in prison . and it come to pass that he do afflict the people with his whoredom and abomination . ether and when he have reign for the space of forty and two year the people do rise up in rebellion against him and there begin to be war again in the land insomuch that riplakish be kill and his descendant be drive out of the land . ether and it come to pass after the space of many year morianton he be a descendant of riplakish gather together an army of outcast and go forth and give battle unto the people and he gain power over many city and the war become exceedingly sore and do last for the space of many year and he do gain power over all the land and do establish himself king over all the land . ether and after that he have establish himself king he do ease the burden of the people by which he do gain favor in the eye of the people and they do anoint him to be their king . ether and he do do justice unto the people but not unto himself because of his many whoredom wherefore he be cut off from the presence of the lord . ether and it come to pass that morianton build up many city and the people become exceedingly rich under his reign both in building and in gold and silver and in raise grain and in flock and herd and such thing which have be restore unto them . ether and morianton do live to an exceedingly great age and then he beget kim and kim do reign in the stead of his father and he do reign eight year and his father die . and it come to pass that kim do not reign in righteousness wherefore he be not favor of the lord . ether and his brother do rise up in rebellion against him by which he do bring him into captivity and he do remain in captivity all his day and he beget son and daughter in captivity and in his old age he beget levi and he die . ether and it come to pass that levi do serve in captivity after the death of his father for the space of forty and two year . and he do make war against the king of the land by which he do obtain unto himself the kingdom . ether and after he have obtain unto himself the kingdom he do that which be right in the sight of the lord and the people do prosper in the land and he do live to a good old age and begat son and daughter and he also beget corom whom he anoint king in his stead . ether and it come to pass that corom do that which be good in the sight of the lord all his day and he beget many son and daughter and after he have see many day he do pass away even like unto the rest of the earth and kish reign in his stead . ether and it come to pass that kish pass away also and lib reign in his stead . ether and it come to pass that lib also do that which be good in the sight of the lord . and in the day of lib the poisonous serpent be destroy . wherefore they do go into the land southward to hunt food for the people of the land for the land be cover with animal of the forest . and lib also himself become a great hunter . ether and they build a great city by the narrow neck of land by the place where the sea divide the land . ether and they do preserve the land southward for a wilderness to get game . and the whole face of the land northward be cover with inhabitant . ether and they be exceedingly industrious and they do buy and sell and traffic one with another that they might get gain . ether and they do work in all manner of ore and they do make gold and silver and iron and brass and all manner of metal and they do dig it out of the earth wherefore they do cast up mighty heap of earth to get ore of gold and of silver and of iron and of copper . and they do work all manner of fine work . ether and they do have silk and fine twin linen and they do work all manner of cloth that they might clothe themselves from their nakedness . ether and they do make all manner of tool to till the earth both to plow and to sow to reap and to hoe and also to thrash . ether and they do make all manner of tool with which they do work their beast . ether and they do make all manner of weapon of war . and they do work all manner of work of exceedingly curious workmanship . ether and never could be a people more blessed than be they and more prosper by the hand of the lord . and they be in a land that be choice above all land for the lord have speak it . ether and it come to pass that lib do live many year and begat son and daughter and he also beget hearthom . ether and it come to pass that hearthom reign in the stead of his father . and when hearthom have reign twenty and four year behold the kingdom be take away from him . and he serve many year in captivity yea even all the remainder of his day . ether and he beget heth and heth live in captivity all his day . and heth begat aaron and aaron dwelt in captivity all his day and he beget amnigaddah and amnigaddah also dwell in captivity all his day and he beget coriantum and coriantum dwelt in captivity all his day and he beget com . ether and it come to pass that com draw away the half of the kingdom . and he reign over the half of the kingdom forty and two year and he go to battle against the king amgid and they fight for the space of many year during which time com gain power over amgid and obtained power over the remainder of the kingdom . ether and in the day of com there begin to be robber in the land and they adopt the old plan and administer oath after the manner of the ancient and seek again to destroy the kingdom . ether now com do fight against them much nevertheless he do not prevail against them . ether chapter ether and there come also in the day of com many prophet and prophesy of the destruction of that great people except they should repent and turn unto the lord and forsake their murder and wickedness . ether and it come to pass that the prophet be reject by the people and they flee unto com for protection for the people seek to destroy them . ether and they prophesy unto com many thing and he be bless in all the remainder of his day . ether and he live to a good old age and begat shiblom and shiblom reign in his stead . and the brother of shiblom rebel against him and there begin to be an exceedingly great war in all the land . ether and it come to pass that the brother of shiblom cause that all the prophet who prophesy of the destruction of the people should be put to death ether and there be great calamity in all the land for they have testify that a great curse should come upon the land and also upon the people and that there should be a great destruction among them such an one a never have be upon the face of the earth and their bone should become a heap of earth upon the face of the land except they should repent of their wickedness . ether and they hearken not unto the voice of the lord because of their wicked combination wherefore there begin to be war and contention in all the land and also many famine and pestilence insomuch that there be a great destruction such an one a never have be know upon the face of the earth and all this come to pass in the day of shiblom . ether and the people begin to repent of their iniquity and inasmuch a they do the lord do have mercy on them . ether and it come to pass that shiblom be slay and seth be bring into captivity and do dwell in captivity all his day . ether and it come to pass that ahah his son do obtain the kingdom and he do reign over the people all his day . and he do do all manner of iniquity in his day by which he do cause the shedding of much blood and few be his day . ether and ethem be a descendant of ahah do obtain the kingdom and he also do do that which be wicked in his day . ether and it come to pass that in the day of ethem there come many prophet and prophesy again unto the people yea they do prophesy that the lord would utterly destroy them from off the face of the earth except they repent of their iniquity . ether and it come to pass that the people harden their heart and would not hearken unto their word and the prophet mourn and withdraw from among the people . ether and it come to pass that ethem do execute judgment in wickedness all his day and he beget moron . and it come to pass that moron do reign in his stead and moron do that which be wicked before the lord . ether and it come to pass that there arise a rebellion among the people because of that secret combination which be build up to get power and gain and there arise a mighty man among them in iniquity and give battle unto moron in which he do overthrow the half of the kingdom and he do maintain the half of the kingdom for many year . ether and it come to pass that moron do overthrow him and do obtain the kingdom again . ether and it come to pass that there arise another mighty man and he be a descendant of the brother of jared . ether and it come to pass that he do overthrow moron and obtain the kingdom wherefore moron dwelt in captivity all the remainder of his day and he beget coriantor . ether and it come to pass that coriantor dwell in captivity all his day . ether and in the day of coriantor there also come many prophet and prophesy of great and marvelous thing and cry repentance unto the people and except they should repent the lord god would execute judgment against them to their utter destruction ether and that the lord god would send or bring forth another people to possess the land by his power after the manner by which he bring their father . ether and they do reject all the word of the prophet because of their secret society and wicked abomination . ether and it come to pass that coriantor beget ether and he die have dwelt in captivity all his day . ether chapter ether and it come to pass that the day of ether be in the day of coriantumr and coriantumr be king over all the land . ether and ether be a prophet of the lord wherefore ether come forth in the day of coriantumr and begin to prophesy unto the people for he could not be restrain because of the spirit of the lord which be in him . ether for he do cry from the morning even until the go down of the sun exhort the people to believe in god unto repentance l they should be destroy say unto them that by faith all thing be fulfil ether wherefore whoso believeth in god might with surety hope for a good world yea even a place at the right hand of god which hope cometh of faith maketh an anchor to the soul of men which would make them sure and steadfast always abound in good work be lead to glorify god . ether and it come to pass that ether do prophesy great and marvelous thing unto the people which they do not believe because they saw them not . ether and now i moroni would speak somewhat concern these thing i would show unto the world that faith be thing which be hop for and not see wherefore dispute not because ye see not for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith . ether for it be by faith that christ show himself unto our father after he have rise from the dead and he show not himself unto them until after they have faith in him wherefore it must needs be that some have faith in him for he show himself not unto the world . ether but because of the faith of men he have show himself unto the world and glorify the name of the father and prepare a way that thereby others might be partaker of the heavenly gift that they might hope for those thing which they have not see . ether wherefore ye may also have hope and be partaker of the gift if ye will but have faith . ether behold it be by faith that they of old be call after the holy order of god . ether wherefore by faith be the law of moses give . but in the gift of his son hath god prepare a more excellent way and it be by faith that it hath be fulfil . ether for if there be no faith among the child of men god can do no miracle among them wherefore he show not himself until after their faith . ether behold it be the faith of alma and amulek that cause the prison to tumble to the earth . ether behold it be the faith of nephi and lehi that work the change upon the lamanites that they be baptize with fire and with the holy ghost . ether behold it be the faith of ammon and his brother which work so great a miracle among the lamanites . ether yea and even all they who work miracle work them by faith even those who be before christ and also those who be after . ether and it be by faith that the three disciple obtain a promise that they should not taste of death and they obtain not the promise until after their faith . ether and neither at any time hath any wrought miracle until after their faith wherefore they first believe in the son of god . ether and there be many whose faith be so exceedingly strong even before christ come who could not be keep from within the veil but truly saw with their eye the thing which they have behold with an eye of faith and they be glad . ether and behold we have see in this record that one of these be the brother of jared for so great be his faith in god that when god put forth his finger he could not hide it from the sight of the brother of jared because of his word which he have speak unto him which word he have obtain by faith . ether and after the brother of jared have behold the finger of the lord because of the promise which the brother of jared have obtain by faith the lord could not withhold anything from his sight wherefore he show him all thing for he could no longer be keep without the veil . ether and it be by faith that my father have obtain the promise that these thing should come unto their brother through the gentile therefore the lord hath command me yea even jesus christ . ether and i say unto him lord the gentile will mock at these thing because of our weakness in write for lord thou hast make u mighty in word by faith but thou hast not make u mighty in write for thou hast make all this people that they could speak much because of the holy ghost which thou hast give them ether and thou hast make u that we could write but little because of the awkwardness of our hand . behold thou hast not make u mighty in write like unto the brother of jared for thou mad him that the thing which he write be mighty even a thou art unto the overpowering of man to read them . ether thou hast also make our word powerful and great even that we can not write them wherefore when we write we behold our weakness and stumble because of the placing of our word and i fear l the gentile shall mock at our word . ether and when i have say this the lord spake unto me say fools mock but they shall mourn and my grace be sufficient for the meek that they shall take no advantage of your weakness ether and if men come unto me i will show unto them their weakness . i give unto men weakness that they may be humble and my grace be sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me for if they humble themselves before me and have faith in me then will i make weak thing become strong unto them . ether behold i will show unto the gentile their weakness and i will show unto them that faith hope and charity bringeth unto me the fountain of all righteousness . ether and i moroni have hear these word be comfort and say o lord thy righteous will be do for i know that thou workest unto the child of men accord to their faith ether for the brother of jar say unto the mountain zerin remove and it be remove . and if he have not have faith it would not have move wherefore thou workest after men have faith . ether for thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciple for after they have faith and do speak in thy name thou didst show thyself unto them in great power . ether and i also remember that thou hast say that thou hast prepare a house for man yea even among the mansion of thy father in which man might have a more excellent hope wherefore man must hope or he can not receive an inheritance in the place which thou hast prepared . ether and again i remember that thou hast say that thou hast love the world even unto the lay down of thy life for the world that thou mightest take it again to prepare a place for the child of men . ether and now i know that this love which thou hast have for the child of men be charity wherefore except men shall have charity they can not inherit that place which thou hast prepare in the mansion of thy father . ether wherefore i know by this thing which thou hast say that if the gentile have not charity because of our weakness that thou wilt prove them and take away their talent yea even that which they have receive and give unto them who shall have more abundantly . ether and it come to pass that i pray unto the lord that he would give unto the gentile grace that they might have charity . ether and it come to pass that the lord say unto me if they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee thou hast be faithful wherefore thy garment shall be make clean . and because thou hast see thy weakness thou shalt be make strong even unto the sit down in the place which i have prepare in the mansion of my father . ether and now i moroni bid farewell unto the gentile yea and also unto my brethren whom i love until we shall meet before the judgment seat of christ where all men shall know that my garment be not spot with your blood . ether and then shall ye know that i have see jesus and that he hath talk with me face to face and that he tell me in plain humility even a a man telleth another in mine own language concern these thing ether and only a few have i write because of my weakness in write . ether and now i would commend you to seek this jesus of whom the prophet and apostle have write that the grace of god the father and also the lord jesus christ and the holy ghost which beareth record of them may be and abide in you forever . amen . ether chapter ether and now i moroni proceed to finish my record concern the destruction of the people of whom i have be write . ether for behold they reject all the word of ether for he truly tell them of all thing from the beginning of man and that after the water have recede from off the face of this land it become a choice land above all other land a chosen land of the lord wherefore the lord would have that all men should serve him who dwell upon the face thereof ether and that it be the place of the new jerusalem which should come down out of heaven and the holy sanctuary of the lord . ether behold ether saw the day of christ and he spake concern a new jerusalem upon this land . ether and he spake also concern the house of israel and the jerusalem from whence lehi should come after it should be destroy it should be build up again a holy city unto the lord wherefore it could not be a new jerusalem for it have be in a time of old but it should be build up again and become a holy city of the lord and it should be build unto the house of israel . ether and that a new jerusalem should be build upon this land unto the remnant of the seed of joseph for which thing there have be a type . ether for a joseph bring his father down into the land of egypt even so he die there wherefore the lord bring a remnant of the seed of joseph out of the land of jerusalem that he might be merciful unto the seed of joseph that they should perish not even a he be merciful unto the father of joseph that he should perish not . ether wherefore the remnant of the house of joseph shall be build upon this land and it shall be a land of their inheritance and they shall build up a holy city unto the lord like unto the jerusalem of old and they shall no more be confound until the end come when the earth shall pass away . ether and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth and they shall be like unto the old save the old have pass away and all thing have become new . ether and then cometh the new jerusalem and bless be they who dwell therein for it be they whose garment be white through the blood of the lamb and they be they who be number among the remnant of the seed of joseph who be of the house of israel . ether and then also cometh the jerusalem of old and the inhabitant thereof bless be they for they have be wash in the blood of the lamb and they be they who be scatter and gather in from the four quarter of the earth and from the north country and be partaker of the fulfilling of the covenant which god make with their father abraham . ether and when these thing come bringeth to pass the scripture which saith there be they who be first who shall be last and there be they who be last who shall be first . ether and i be about to write more but i be forbidden but great and marvelous be the prophecy of ether but they esteem him a naught and cast him out and he hide himself in the cavity of a rock by day and by night he go forth view the thing which should come upon the people . ether and a he dwell in the cavity of a rock he make the remainder of his record view the destruction which come upon the people by night . ether and it come to pass that in that same year in which he be cast out from among the people there begin to be a great war among the people for there be many who rise up who be mighty men and seek to destroy coriantumr by their secret plan of wickedness of which hath be speak . ether and now coriantumr have study himself in all the art of war and all the cunning of the world wherefore he give battle unto them who seek to destroy him . ether but he repent not neither his fair son nor daughter neither the fair son and daughter of cohor neither the fair son and daughter of corihor and in fine there be none of the fair son and daughter upon the face of the whole earth who repent of their sin . ether wherefore it come to pass that in the first year that ether dwelt in the cavity of a rock there be many people who be slay by the sword of those secret combination fight against coriantumr that they might obtain the kingdom . ether and it come to pass that the son of coriantumr fight much and bleed much . ether and in the second year the word of the lord come to ether that he should go and prophesy unto coriantumr that if he would repent and all his household the lord would give unto him his kingdom and spare the people ether otherwise they should be destroy and all his household save it be himself . and he should only live to see the fulfilling of the prophecy which have be speak concern another people receive the land for their inheritance and coriantumr should receive a burial by them and every soul should be destroy save it be coriantumr . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr repent not neither his household neither the people and the war cease not and they seek to kill ether but he flee from before them and hide again in the cavity of the rock . ether and it come to pass that there arise up share and he also give battle unto coriantumr and he do beat him insomuch that in the third year he do bring him into captivity . ether and the son of coriantumr in the fourth year do beat share and do obtain the kingdom again unto their father . ether now there begin to be a war upon all the face of the land every man with his band fight for that which he desire . ether and there be robber and in fine all manner of wickedness upon all the face of the land . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr be exceedingly angry with share and he go against him with his army to battle and they do meet in great anger and they do meet in the valley of gilgal and the battle become exceedingly sore . ether and it come to pass that share fight against him for the space of three day . and it come to pass that coriantumr beat him and do pursue him until he come to the plain of heshlon . ether and it come to pass that share give him battle again upon the plain and behold he do beat coriantumr and drive him back again to the valley of gilgal . ether and coriantumr give share battle again in the valley of gilgal in which he beat share and slew him . ether and share wound coriantumr in his thigh that he do not go to battle again for the space of two year in which time all the people upon the face of the land be shed blood and there be none to restrain them . ether chapter ether and now there begin to be a great curse upon all the land because of the iniquity of the people in which if a man should lay his tool or his sword upon his shelf or upon the place whither he would keep it behold upon the morrow he could not find it so great be the curse upon the land . ether wherefore every man do cleave unto that which be his own with his hand and would not borrow neither would he lend and every man keep the hilt of his sword in his right hand in the defence of his property and his own life and of his wife and child . ether and now after the space of two year and after the death of share behold there arise the brother of share and he give battle unto coriantumr in which coriantumr do beat him and do pursue him to the wilderness of akish . ether and it come to pass that the brother of share do give battle unto him in the wilderness of akish and the battle become exceedingly sore and many thousand fell by the sword . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr do lay siege to the wilderness and the brother of share do march forth out of the wilderness by night and slew a part of the army of coriantumr a they be drunken . ether and he come forth to the land of moron and place himself upon the throne of coriantumr . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr dwelt with his army in the wilderness for the space of two year in which he do receive great strength to his army . ether now the brother of share whose name be gilead also receive great strength to his army because of secret combination . ether and it come to pass that his high priest murder him a he sit upon his throne . ether and it come to pass that one of the secret combination murder him in a secret pas and obtain unto himself the kingdom and his name be lib and lib be a man of great stature more than any other man among all the people . ether and it come to pass that in the first year of lib coriantumr come up unto the land of moron and give battle unto lib . ether and it come to pass that he fight with lib in which lib do smite upon his arm that he be wound nevertheless the army of coriantumr do press forward upon lib that he flee to the border upon the seashore . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr pursue him and lib give battle unto him upon the seashore . ether and it come to pass that lib do smite the army of coriantumr that they flee again to the wilderness of akish . ether and it come to pass that lib do pursue him until he come to the plain of agosh . and coriantumr have take all the people with him a he flee before lib in that quarter of the land whither he flee . ether and when he have come to the plain of agosh he give battle unto lib and he smite upon him until he die nevertheless the brother of lib do come against coriantumr in the stead thereof and the battle become exceedingly sore in the which coriantumr flee again before the army of the brother of lib . ether now the name of the brother of lib be call shiz . and it come to pass that shiz pursue after coriantumr and he do overthrow many city and he do slay both woman and child and he do burn the city . ether and there go a fear of shiz throughout all the land yea a cry go forth throughout the land who can stand before the army of shiz ? behold he sweepeth the earth before him ! ether and it come to pass that the people begin to flock together in army throughout all the face of the land . ether and they be divide and a part of them flee to the army of shiz and a part of them flee to the army of coriantumr . ether and so great and lasting have be the war and so long have be the scene of bloodshed and carnage that the whole face of the land be cover with the body of the dead . ether and so swift and speedy be the war that there be none leave to bury the dead but they do march forth from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood leave the body of both men woman and child strew upon the face of the land to become a prey to the worm of the flesh . ether and the scent thereof go forth upon the face of the land even upon all the face of the land wherefore the people become troubled by day and by night because of the scent thereof . ether nevertheless shiz do not cease to pursue coriantumr for he have swear to avenge himself upon coriantumr of the blood of his brother who have be slay and the word of the lord which come to ether that coriantumr should not fall by the sword . ether and thus we see that the lord do visit them in the fulness of his wrath and their wickedness and abomination have prepare a way for their everlasting destruction . ether and it come to pass that shiz do pursue coriantumr eastward even to the border by the seashore and there he give battle unto shiz for the space of three day . ether and so terrible be the destruction among the army of shiz that the people begin to be frighten and begin to flee before the army of coriantumr and they flee to the land of corihor and sweep off the inhabitant before them all them that would not join them . ether and they pitch their tent in the valley of corihor and coriantumr pitch his tent in the valley of shurr . now the valley of shurr be near the hill comnor wherefore coriantumr do gather his army together upon the hill comnor and do sound a trumpet unto the army of shiz to invite them forth to battle . ether and it come to pass that they come forth but be drive again and they come the second time and they be drive again the second time . and it come to pass that they come again the third time and the battle become exceedingly sore . ether and it come to pass that shiz smite upon coriantumr that he give him many deep wound and coriantumr have lose his blood faint and be carry away a though he be dead . ether now the loss of men woman and child on both side be so great that shiz command his people that they should not pursue the army of coriantumr wherefore they return to their camp . ether chapter ether and it come to pass when coriantumr have recover of his wound he begin to remember the word which ether have speak unto him . ether he saw that there have be slay by the sword already nearly two million of his people and he begin to sorrow in his heart yea there have be slay two million of mighty men and also their wife and their child . ether he begin to repent of the evil which he have do he begin to remember the word which have be speak by the mouth of all the prophet and he saw them that they be fulfil thus far every whit and his soul mourn and refuse to be comfort . ether and it come to pass that he write an epistle unto shiz desire him that he would spare the people and he would give up the kingdom for the sake of the life of the people . ether and it come to pass that when shiz have receive his epistle he write an epistle unto coriantumr that if he would give himself up that he might slay him with his own sword that he would spare the life of the people . ether and it come to pass that the people repent not of their iniquity and the people of coriantumr be stir up to anger against the people of shiz and the people of shiz be stir up to anger against the people of coriantumr wherefore the people of shiz do give battle unto the people of coriantumr . ether and when coriantumr saw that he be about to fall he flee again before the people of shiz . ether and it come to pass that he come to the water of ripliancum which by interpretation be large or to exceed all wherefore when they come to these water they pitch their tent and shiz also pitch his tent near unto them and therefore on the morrow they do come to battle . ether and it come to pass that they fight an exceedingly sore battle in which coriantumr be wound again and he faint with the loss of blood . ether and it come to pass that the army of coriantumr do press upon the army of shiz that they beat them that they cause them to flee before them and they do flee southward and do pitch their tent in a place which be call ogath . ether and it come to pass that the army of coriantumr do pitch their tent by the hill ramah and it be that same hill where my father mormon do hide up the record unto the lord which be sacred . ether and it come to pass that they do gather together all the people upon all the face of the land who have not be slay save it be ether . ether and it come to pass that ether do behold all the doings of the people and he behold that the people who be for coriantumr be gather together to the army of coriantumr and the people who be for shiz be gather together to the army of shiz . ether wherefore they be for the space of four year gather together the people that they might get all who be upon the face of the land and that they might receive all the strength which it be possible that they could receive . ether and it come to pass that when they be all gather together every one to the army which he would with their wife and their child both men woman and child be arm with weapon of war have shield and breastplate and head plate and be clothe after the manner of war they do march forth one against another to battle and they fight all that day and conquer not . ether and it come to pass that when it be night they be weary and retire to their camp and after they have retire to their camp they take up a howling and a lamentation for the loss of the slain of their people and so great be their cry their howling and lamentation that they do rend the air exceedingly . ether and it come to pass that on the morrow they do go again to battle and great and terrible be that day nevertheless they conquer not and when the night come again they do rend the air with their cry and their howling and their mourning for the loss of the slain of their people . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr write again an epistle unto shiz desiring that he would not come again to battle but that he would take the kingdom and spare the life of the people . ether and behold the spirit of the lord have cease strive with them and satan have full power over the heart of the people for they be give up unto the hardness of their heart and the blindness of their mind that they might be destroy wherefore they go again to battle . ether and it come to pass that they fight all that day and when the night come they sleep upon their sword . ether and on the morrow they fight even until the night come . ether and when the night come they be drunken with anger even a a man who be drunken with wine and they sleep again upon their sword . ether and on the morrow they fight again and when the night come they have all fall by the sword save it be fifty and two of the people of coriantumr and sixty and nine of the people of shiz . ether and it come to pass that they sleep upon their sword that night and on the morrow they fight again and they contend in their might with their sword and with their shield all that day . ether and when the night come there be thirty and two of the people of shiz and twenty and seven of the people of coriantumr . ether and it come to pass that they eat and slept and prepared for death on the morrow . and they be large and mighty men a to the strength of men . ether and it come to pass that they fight for the space of three hour and they faint with the loss of blood . ether and it come to pass that when the men of coriantumr have receive sufficient strength that they could walk they be about to flee for their life but behold shiz arose and also his men and he swore in his wrath that he would slay coriantumr or he would perish by the sword . ether wherefore he do pursue them and on the morrow he do overtake them and they fight again with the sword . and it come to pass that when they have all fall by the sword save it be coriantumr and shiz behold shiz have faint with the loss of blood . ether and it come to pass that when coriantumr have lean upon his sword that he rest a little he smite off the head of shiz . ether and it come to pass that after he have smite off the head of shiz that shiz raise upon his hand and fell and after that he have struggle for breath he die . ether and it come to pass that coriantumr fell to the earth and become a if he have no life . ether and the lord spake unto ether and say unto him go forth . and he go forth and beheld that the word of the lord have all be fulfil and he finish his record and the hundredth part i have not write and he hide them in a manner that the people of limhi do find them . ether now the last word which be write by ether be these whether the lord will that i be translate or that i suffer the will of the lord in the flesh it mattereth not if it so be that i be save in the kingdom of god . amen . the book of moroni moroni chapter moroni now i moroni after have make an end of abridge the account of the people of jared i have suppose not to have write more but i have not a yet perish and i make not myself know to the lamanites lest they should destroy me . moroni for behold their war be exceedingly fierce among themselves and because of their hatred they put to death every nephite that will not deny the christ . moroni and i moroni will not deny the christ wherefore i wander whithersoever i can for the safety of mine own life . moroni wherefore i write a few more thing contrary to that which i have suppose for i have suppose not to have write any more but i write a few more thing that perhaps they may be of worth unto my brother the lamanites in some future day accord to the will of the lord . moroni chapter moroni the word of christ which he spake unto his disciple the twelve whom he have choose a he lay his hand upon them moroni and he call them by name say ye shall call on the father in my name in mighty prayer and after ye have do this ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hand ye shall give the holy ghost and in my name shall ye give it for thus do mine apostle . moroni now christ spake these word unto them at the time of his first appearing and the multitude hear it not but the disciple hear it and on as many a they lay their hand fell the holy ghost . moroni chapter moroni the manner which the disciple who be call the elder of the church ordain priest and teacher moroni after they have pray unto the father in the name of christ they lay their hand upon them and say moroni in the name of jesus christ i ordain you to be a priest or if he be a teacher i ordain you to be a teacher to preach repentance and remission of sin through jesus christ by the endurance of faith on his name to the end . amen . moroni and after this manner do they ordain priest and teacher accord to the gift and calling of god unto men and they ordain them by the power of the holy ghost which be in them . moroni chapter moroni the manner of their elder and priest administer the flesh and blood of christ unto the church and they administer it accord to the commandment of christ wherefore we know the manner to be true and the elder or priest do minister it moroni and they do kneel down with the church and pray to the father in the name of christ say moroni o god the eternal father we ask thee in the name of thy son jesus christ to bless and sanctify this bread to the soul of all those who partake of it that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy son and witness unto thee o god the eternal father that they be willing to take upon them the name of thy son and always remember him and keep his commandment which he hath give them that they may always have his spirit to be with them . amen . moroni chapter moroni the manner of administer the wine behold they take the cup and say moroni o god the eternal father we ask thee in the name of thy son jesus christ to bless and sanctify this wine to the soul of all those who drink of it that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy son which be shed for them that they may witness unto thee o god the eternal father that they do always remember him that they may have his spirit to be with them . amen . moroni chapter moroni and now i speak concern baptism . behold elder priest and teacher be baptize and they be not baptize save they bring forth fruit meet that they be worthy of it . moroni neither do they receive any unto baptism save they come forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit and witness unto the church that they truly repent of all their sin . moroni and none be receive unto baptism save they take upon them the name of christ have a determination to serve him to the end . moroni and after they have be receive unto baptism and be work upon and cleanse by the power of the holy ghost they be number among the people of the church of christ and their name be take that they might be remember and nourish by the good word of god to keep them in the right way to keep them continually watchful unto prayer rely alone upon the merit of christ who be the author and the finisher of their faith . moroni and the church do meet together oft to fast and to pray and to speak one with another concern the welfare of their soul . moroni and they do meet together oft to partake of bread and wine in remembrance of the lord jesus . moroni and they be strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them and whoso be find to commit iniquity and three witness of the church do condemn them before the elder and if they repent not and confess not their name be blot out and they be not number among the people of christ . moroni but as oft a they repent and seek forgiveness with real intent they be forgive . moroni and their meeting be conduct by the church after the manner of the working of the spirit and by the power of the holy ghost for a the power of the holy ghost lead them whether to preach or to exhort or to pray or to supplicate or to sing even so it be do . moroni chapter moroni and now i moroni write a few of the word of my father mormon which he spake concern faith hope and charity for after this manner do he speak unto the people a he teach them in the synagogue which they have build for the place of worship . moroni and now i mormon speak unto you my beloved brother and it be by the grace of god the father and our lord jesus christ and his holy will because of the gift of his call unto me that i be permit to speak unto you at this time . moroni wherefore i would speak unto you that be of the church that be the peaceable follower of christ and that have obtain a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the lord from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven . moroni and now my brother i judge these thing of you because of your peaceable walk with the child of men . moroni for i remember the word of god which saith by their work ye shall know them for if their work be good then they be good also . moroni for behold god hath say a man be evil can not do that which be good for if he offereth a gift or prayeth unto god except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing . moroni for behold it be not count unto him for righteousness . moroni for behold if a man be evil giveth a gift he doeth it grudgingly wherefore it be count unto him the same a if he have retain the gift wherefore he be count evil before god . moroni and likewise also be it count evil unto a man if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart yea and it profiteth him nothing for god receiveth none such . moroni wherefore a man be evil can not do that which be good neither will he give a good gift . moroni for behold a bitter fountain can not bring forth good water neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water wherefore a man be a servant of the devil can not follow christ and if he follow christ he can not be a servant of the devil . moroni wherefore all thing which be good cometh of god and that which be evil cometh of the devil for the devil be an enemy unto god and fighteth against him continually and inviteth and enticeth to sin and to do that which be evil continually . moroni but behold that which be of god inviteth and enticeth to do good continually wherefore every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good and to love god and to serve him be inspire of god . moroni wherefore take heed my beloved brother that ye do not judge that which be evil to be of god or that which be good and of god to be of the devil . moroni for behold my brother it be give unto you to judge that ye may know good from evil and the way to judge be as plain that ye may know with a perfect knowledge a the daylight be from the dark night . moroni for behold the spirit of christ be give to every man that he may know good from evil wherefore i show unto you the way to judge for every thing which inviteth to do good and to persuade to believe in christ be send forth by the power and gift of christ wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it be of god . moroni but whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil and believe not in christ and deny him and serve not god then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it be of the devil for after this manner doth the devil work for he persuadeth no man to do good no not one neither do his angel neither do they who subject themselves unto him . moroni and now my brother see that ye know the light by which ye may judge which light be the light of christ see that ye do not judge wrongfully for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judge . moroni wherefore i beseech of you brethren that ye should search diligently in the light of christ that ye may know good from evil and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing and condemn it not ye certainly will be a child of christ . moroni and now my brother how be it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing ? moroni and now i come to that faith of which i say i would speak and i will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing . moroni for behold god know all thing be from everlasting to everlasting behold he send angel to minister unto the child of men to make manifest concern the come of christ and in christ there should come every good thing . moroni and god also declare unto prophet by his own mouth that christ should come . moroni and behold there be diver way that he do manifest thing unto the child of men which be good and all thing which be good cometh of christ otherwise men be fall and there could no good thing come unto them . moroni wherefore by the ministering of angel and by every word which proceed forth out of the mouth of god men begin to exercise faith in christ and thus by faith they do lay hold upon every good thing and thus it be until the come of christ . moroni and after that he come men also be save by faith in his name and by faith they become the son of god . and as sure a christ liveth he spake these word unto our father say whatsoever thing ye shall ask the father in my name which be good in faith believing that ye shall receive behold it shall be do unto you . moroni wherefore my beloved brother have miracle cease because christ hath ascend into heaven and hath sit down on the right hand of god to claim of the father his right of mercy which he hath upon the child of men ? moroni for he hath answer the end of the law and he claimeth all those who have faith in him and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing wherefore he advocateth the cause of the child of men and he dwelleth eternally in the heaven . moroni and because he hath do this my beloved brother have miracle cease ? behold i say unto you nay neither have angel cease to minister unto the child of men . moroni for behold they be subject unto him to minister accord to the word of his command show themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness . moroni and the office of their ministry be to call men unto repentance and to fulfill and to do the work of the covenant of the father which he hath make unto the child of men to prepare the way among the child of men by declare the word of christ unto the chosen vessel of the lord that they may bear testimony of him . moroni and by so do the lord god prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in christ that the holy ghost may have place in their heart accord to the power thereof and after this manner bringeth to pass the father the covenant which he hath make unto the child of men . moroni and christ hath say if ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing be expedient in me . moroni and he hath say repent all ye end of the earth and come unto me and be baptize in my name and have faith in me that ye may be save . moroni and now my beloved brother if this be the case that these thing be true which i have speak unto you and god will show unto you with power and great glory at the last day that they be true and if they be true have the day of miracle cease ? moroni or have angel cease to appear unto the child of men ? or have he withhold the power of the holy ghost from them ? or will he so long a time shall last or the earth shall stand or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be save ? moroni behold i say unto you nay for it be by faith that miracle be wrought and it be by faith that angels appear and minister unto men wherefore if these thing have cease wo be unto the child of men for it be because of unbelief and all be vain . moroni for no man can be save accord to the word of christ save they shall have faith in his name wherefore if these thing have cease then have faith cease also and awful be the state of man for they be a though there have be no redemption make . moroni but behold my beloved brother i judge good thing of you for i judge that ye have faith in christ because of your meekness for if ye have not faith in him then ye be not fit to be number among the people of his church . moroni and again my beloved brother i would speak unto you concern hope . how be it that ye can attain unto faith save ye shall have hope ? moroni and what be it that ye shall hope for ? behold i say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of christ and the power of his resurrection to be raise unto life eternal and this because of your faith in him accord to the promise . moroni wherefore if a man have faith he must need have hope for without faith there can not be any hope . moroni and again behold i say unto you that he can not have faith and hope save he shall be meek and lowly of heart . moroni if so his faith and hope be vain for none be acceptable before god save the meek and lowly in heart and if a man be meek and lowly in heart and confesses by the power of the holy ghost that jesus be the christ he must need have charity for if he have not charity he be nothing wherefore he must need have charity . moroni and charity suffereth long and be kind and envieth not and be not puff up seeketh not her own be not easily provoke thinketh no evil and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth beareth all thing believeth all thing hopeth all thing endureth all thing . moroni wherefore my beloved brother if ye have not charity ye be nothing for charity never faileth . wherefore cleave unto charity which be the great of all for all thing must fail moroni but charity be the pure love of christ and it endureth forever and whoso be find possessed of it at the last day it shall be well with him . moroni wherefore my beloved brother pray unto the father with all the energy of heart that ye may be fill with this love which he hath bestow upon all who be true follower of his son jesus christ that ye may become the son of god that when he shall appear we shall be like him for we shall see him a he be that we may have this hope that we may be purify even a he be pure . amen . moroni chapter moroni an epistle of my father mormon write to me moroni and it be write unto me soon after my call to the ministry . and on this wise do he write unto me say moroni my beloved son moroni i rejoice exceedingly that your lord jesus christ hath be mindful of you and hath call you to his ministry and to his holy work . moroni i be mindful of you always in my prayer continually pray unto god the father in the name of his holy child jesus that he through his infinite goodness and grace will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end . moroni and now my son i speak unto you concern that which grieveth me exceedingly for it grieveth me that there should disputation rise among you . moroni for if i have learn the truth there have be disputation among you concern the baptism of your little child . moroni and now my son i desire that ye should labor diligently that this gross error should be remove from among you for for this intent i have write this epistle . moroni for immediately after i have learn these thing of you i inquire of the lord concern the matter . and the word of the lord come to me by the power of the holy ghost say moroni listen to the word of christ your redeemer your lord and your god . behold i come into the world not to call the righteous but sinner to repentance the whole need no physician but they that be sick wherefore little child be whole for they be not capable of commit sin wherefore the curse of adam be take from them in me that it hath no power over them and the law of circumcision be do away in me . moroni and after this manner do the holy ghost manifest the word of god unto me wherefore my beloved son i know that it be solemn mockery before god that ye should baptize little child . moroni behold i say unto you that this thing shall ye teach repentance and baptism unto those who be accountable and capable of commit sin yea teach parent that they must repent and be baptize and humble themselves a their little child and they shall all be save with their little child . moroni and their little child need no repentance neither baptism . behold baptism be unto repentance to the fulfil the commandment unto the remission of sin . moroni but little child be alive in christ even from the foundation of the world if not so god be a partial god and also a changeable god and a respecter to person for how many little child have die without baptism ! moroni wherefore if little child could not be save without baptism these must have go to an endless hell . moroni behold i say unto you that he that supposeth that little child need baptism be in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity for he hath neither faith hope nor charity wherefore should he be cut off while in the thought he must go down to hell . moroni for awful be the wickedness to suppose that god saveth one child because of baptism and the other must perish because he hath no baptism . moroni wo be unto them that shall pervert the way of the lord after this manner for they shall perish except they repent . behold i speak with boldness have authority from god and i fear not what man can do for perfect love casteth out all fear . moroni and i be fill with charity which be everlasting love wherefore all child be alike unto me wherefore i love little child with a perfect love and they be all alike and partaker of salvation . moroni for i know that god be not a partial god neither a changeable be but he be unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity . moroni little child can not repent wherefore it be awful wickedness to deny the pure mercy of god unto them for they be all alive in him because of his mercy . moroni and he that saith that little child need baptism denieth the mercy of christ and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption . moroni wo unto such for they be in danger of death hell and an endless torment . i speak it boldly god hath command me . listen unto them and give heed or they stand against you at the judgment seat of christ . moroni for behold that all little child be alive in christ and also all they that be without the law . for the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law wherefore he that be not condemn or he that be under no condemnation can not repent and unto such baptism availeth nothing moroni but it be mockery before god deny the mercy of christ and the power of his holy spirit and put trust in dead work . moroni behold my son this thing ought not to be for repentance be unto them that be under condemnation and under the curse of a broken law . moroni and the first fruit of repentance be baptism and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfil the commandment and the fulfil the commandment bringeth remission of sin moroni and the remission of sin bringeth meekness and lowliness of heart and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the holy ghost which comforter filleth with hope and perfect love which love endureth by diligence unto prayer until the end shall come when all the saint shall dwell with god . moroni behold my son i will write unto you again if i go not out soon against the lamanites . behold the pride of this nation or the people of the nephites hath prove their destruction except they should repent . moroni pray for them my son that repentance may come unto them . but behold i fear l the spirit hath cease strive with them and in this part of the land they be also seek to put down all power and authority which cometh from god and they be deny the holy ghost . moroni and after reject so great a knowledge my son they must perish soon unto the fulfilling of the prophecy which be speak by the prophet as well a the word of our savior himself . moroni farewell my son until i shall write unto you or shall meet you again . amen . moroni chapter moroni my beloved son i write unto you again that ye may know that i be yet alive but i write somewhat of that which be grievous . moroni for behold i have have a sore battle with the lamanites in which we do not conquer and archeantus have fall by the sword and also luram and emron yea and we have lose a great number of our choice men . moroni and now behold my son i fear lest the lamanites shall destroy this people for they do not repent and satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another . moroni behold i be labor with them continually and when i speak the word of god with sharpness they tremble and anger against me and when i use no sharpness they harden their heart against it wherefore i fear l the spirit of the lord hath cease strive with them . moroni for so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death and they have lose their love one towards another and they thirst after blood and revenge continually . moroni and now my beloved son notwithstanding their hardness let u labor diligently for if we should cease to labor we should be bring under condemnation for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness and rest our soul in the kingdom of god . moroni and now i write somewhat concern the suffering of this people . for accord to the knowledge which i have receive from amoron behold the lamanites have many prisoner which they take from the tower of sherrizah and there be men woman and child . moroni and the husband and father of those woman and child they have slay and they fee the woman upon the flesh of their husband and the child upon the flesh of their father and no water save a little do they give unto them . moroni and notwithstanding this great abomination of the lamanites it doth not exceed that of our people in moriantum . for behold many of the daughter of the lamanites have they take prisoner and after deprive them of that which be most dear and precious above all thing which be chastity and virtue moroni and after they have do this thing they do murder them in a most cruel manner torture their body even unto death and after they have do this they devour their flesh like unto wild beast because of the hardness of their heart and they do it for a token of bravery . moroni o my beloved son how can a people like this that be without civilization moroni and only a few year have pass away and they be a civil and a delightsome people moroni but o my son how can a people like this whose delight be in so much abomination moroni how can we expect that god will stay his hand in judgment against u ? moroni behold my heart cry wo unto this people . come out in judgment o god and hide their sin and wickedness and abomination from before thy face ! moroni and again my son there be many widow and their daughter who remain in sherrizah and that part of the provision which the lamanites do not carry away behold the army of zenephi have carry away and leave them to wander whithersoever they can for food and many old woman do faint by the way and die . moroni and the army which be with me be weak and the army of the lamanites be betwixt sherrizah and me and as many a have flee to the army of aaron have fall victim to their awful brutality . moroni o the depravity of my people ! they be without order and without mercy . behold i be but a man and i have but the strength of a man and i can not any longer enforce my command . moroni and they have become strong in their perversion and they be alike brutal spar none neither old nor young and they delight in everything save that which be good and the suffering of our woman and our child upon all the face of this land doth exceed everything yea tongue can not tell neither can it be write . moroni and now my son i dwell no longer upon this horrible scene . behold thou knowest the wickedness of this people thou knowest that they be without principle and past feeling and their wickedness doth exceed that of the lamanites . moroni behold my son i can not recommend them unto god l he should smite me . moroni but behold my son i recommend thee unto god and i trust in christ that thou wilt be save and i pray unto god that he will spare thy life to witness the return of his people unto him or their utter destruction for i know that they must perish except they repent and return unto him . moroni and if they perish it will be like unto the jaredites because of the wilfulness of their heart seek for blood and revenge . moroni and if it so be that they perish we know that many of our brother have desert over unto the lamanites and many more will also desert over unto them wherefore write somewhat a few thing if thou art spar and i shall perish and not see thee but i trust that i may see thee soon for i have sacred record that i would deliver up unto thee . moroni my son be faithful in christ and may not the thing which i have write grieve thee to weigh thee down unto death but may christ lift thee up and may his suffering and death and the show his body unto our father and his mercy and long suffering and the hope of his glory and of eternal life rest in your mind forever . moroni and may the grace of god the father whose throne be high in the heaven and our lord jesus christ who sitteth on the right hand of his power until all thing shall become subject unto him be and abide with you forever . amen . moroni chapter moroni now i moroni write somewhat a seemeth me good and i write unto my brother the lamanites and i would that they should know that more than four hundred and twenty year have pass away since the sign be give of the come of christ . moroni and i seal up these record after i have speak a few word by way of exhortation unto you . moroni behold i would exhort you that when ye shall read these thing if it be wisdom in god that ye should read them that ye would remember how merciful the lord hath be unto the child of men from the creation of adam even down unto the time that ye shall receive these thing and ponder it in your heart . moroni and when ye shall receive these thing i would exhort you that ye would ask god the eternal father in the name of christ if these thing be not true and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart with real intent have faith in christ he will manifest the truth of it unto you by the power of the holy ghost . moroni and by the power of the holy ghost ye may know the truth of all thing . moroni and whatsoever thing be good be just and true wherefore nothing that be good denieth the christ but acknowledgeth that he be . moroni and ye may know that he be by the power of the holy ghost wherefore i would exhort you that ye deny not the power of god for he worketh by power accord to the faith of the child of men the same today and tomorrow and forever . moroni and again i exhort you my brother that ye deny not the gift of god for they be many and they come from the same god . and there be different way that these gift be administer but it be the same god who worketh all in all and they be give by the manifestation of the spirit of god unto men to profit them . moroni for behold to one be give by the spirit of god that he may teach the word of wisdom moroni and to another that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same spirit moroni and to another exceedingly great faith and to another the gift of healing by the same spirit moroni and again to another that he may work mighty miracle moroni and again to another that he may prophesy concern all thing moroni and again to another the beholding of angel and minister spirit moroni and again to another all kind of tongue moroni and again to another the interpretation of language and of diver kind of tongue . moroni and all these gift come by the spirit of christ and they come unto every man severally accord a he will . moroni and i would exhort you my beloved brother that ye remember that every good gift cometh of christ . moroni and i would exhort you my beloved brother that ye remember that he be the same yesterday today and forever and that all these gift of which i have speak which be spiritual never will be do away even as long a the world shall stand only accord to the unbelief of the child of men . moroni wherefore there must be faith and if there must be faith there must also be hope and if there must be hope there must also be charity . moroni and except ye have charity ye can in nowise be save in the kingdom of god neither can ye be save in the kingdom of god if ye have not faith neither can ye if ye have no hope . moroni and if ye have no hope ye must need be in despair and despair cometh because of iniquity . moroni and christ truly say unto our father if ye have faith ye can do all thing which be expedient unto me . moroni and now i speak unto all the end of the earth that if the day cometh that the power and gift of god shall be do away among you it shall be because of unbelief . moroni and wo be unto the child of men if this be the case for there shall be none that doeth good among you no not one . for if there be one among you that doeth good he shall work by the power and gift of god . moroni and wo unto them who shall do these thing away and die for they die in their sin and they can not be save in the kingdom of god and i speak it accord to the word of christ and i lie not . moroni and i exhort you to remember these thing for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that i lie not for ye shall see me at the bar of god and the lord god will say unto you do i not declare my word unto you which be write by this man like a one cry from the dead yea even a one speak out of the dust ? moroni i declare these thing unto the fulfilling of the prophecy . and behold they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting god and his word shall hiss forth from generation to generation . moroni and god shall show unto you that that which i have write be true . moroni and again i would exhort you that ye would come unto christ and lay hold upon every good gift and touch not the evil gift nor the unclean thing . moroni and awake and arise from the dust o jerusalem yea and put on thy beautiful garment o daughter of zion and strengthen thy stake and enlarge thy border forever that thou mayest no more be confound that the covenant of the eternal father which he hath make unto thee o house of israel may be fulfil . moroni yea come unto christ and be perfect in him and deny yourselves of all ungodliness and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness and love god with all your might mind and strength then be his grace sufficient for you that by his grace ye may be perfect in christ and if by the grace of god ye be perfect in christ ye can in nowise deny the power of god . moroni and again if ye by the grace of god be perfect in christ and deny not his power then be ye sanctify in christ by the grace of god through the shedding of the blood of christ which be in the covenant of the father unto the remission of your sin that ye become holy without spot . moroni and now i bid unto all farewell . i soon go to rest in the paradise of god until my spirit and body shall again reunite and i be brought forth triumphant through the air to meet you before the please bar of the great jehovah the eternal judge of both quick and dead . amen .